Code of Ordinances CITY OF GROVES, TEXAS 
____________ 
CHARTER 
AND 
GENERAL ORDINANCES 
OF THE CITY 
____________ 
ADOPTED: AUGUST 19, 1968 
EFFECTIVE: OCTOBER 1, 1968 
REPUBLISHED: MAY, 2004 
____________ 
PUBLISHED IN 2004 BY ORDER OF THE CITY COUNCIL 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF GROVES, TEXAS 
____________ 
J. B. HARGUS 
Mayor 
____________ 
JOHN T. ABSTON, III 
TOM CANADY 
LEROY MAHANEY 
SYLVESTER MOORE 
Councilmen 
____________ 
JAMES C. MORGAN 
City Manager 
____________ 
LARRY L. BROUSSARD 
City Clerk 
____________ 
EARL BLACK 
City Attorney 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF GROVES, TEXAS 
____________ 
Brad Bailey 
Mayor 
____________ 
Joseph Arisco 
Sidney Badon, Jr. 
Kyle Hollier 
Larry Perio 
Councilmembers 
____________ 
D.E. Sosa 
City Manager 
____________ 
Kimbra Butler 
City Clerk 
____________ 
James Black 
City Attorney 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted by the City Council and is the first such codification for the City of Groves. Included herein, for the convenience of the user, is the City's Charter which was adopted at an election held on December 30, 1953. 
    As expressed in the Adopting Ordinance, this Code supersedes all ordinances not included herein or expressly saved from repeal by the Adopting Ordinance. The Code contains only ordinances of a general and permanent nature prescribed for and affecting the public as a whole. Special ordinances or ordinances dealing with only a portion of the inhabitants of the City, rather than all of them, or relating to special purposes, such as ordinances levying special assessments, providing for bond issues, paving, vacating and opening specified streets, etc., are not included herein. For more specific enumeration of the type of ordinances which are not included herein, see Section 3 of the Adopting Ordinance. 
Organization of Code Provisions 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been appropriately catchlined to facilitate usage. Appropriate footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to correlative charter provisions and relevant state laws have been included. Also, the source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. 
    The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of two component parts, separated by a dash, the figure before the dash referring to the chapter number and the figure after the dash referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-1 and the fourteenth section of Chapter 20 is 20-14. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter number and, at the same time, new sections, or even whole chapters, can be inserted in their proper places, simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between Sections 4-4 and 4-5 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 4-4.1, 4-4.2, 4-4.3, respectively. New chapters may be included by the addition of a fraction after the chapter number, e.g., if the new material is to be included between Chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as Chapter 121/2. A chapter appearing between Chapters 12 and 121/2 would be designated as Chapter 121/4, and so on. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way, or in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Looseleaf Supplement Service 
    A special feature of this Code is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing for the Code. With this looseleaf system, the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to the holders of the Code with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. Each such amendment, when incorporated into the Code, may be cited as a part hereof, as provided in Section 5 of the Adopting Ordinance. 
    The successful maintenance of this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Preparation of the Index 
    The general index of the Code has been prepared with the greatest of care, together with the Charter Index. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by city officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Acknowledgments 
    The republication of this Code was under the direct supervision of Kyle Christopher, Editor of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's and city's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    This Code is presented for the use and benefit of the citizens of the City of Groves, Texas. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
May 2004 
ORDINANCE NO. 393 
    An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code of Ordinances of the City of Groves, Texas; Establishing the Same; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein, Except as Herein Expressly Provided; Providing for the Effective Date of Such Code and a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
    Be It Ordained by the City of Groves: 
Section 1.  That the Code of Ordinances, consisting of Chapters 1 to 31, each inclusive, is hereby adopted and enacted as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Groves, Texas," and shall be treated and considered as a new and original comprehensive ordinance which shall supersede all other general and permanent ordinances passed by the City Council on or before August 7, 1967 to the extent provided in Section 2 hereof. 
Section 2.  That all provisions of such Code shall be in full force and effect from and after the 1st day of October, 1968, except the following sections which are amended or deleted as follows, to-wit: 
(1)  Article XV (Recreation) of the Charter provisions, pages 42 to 48, of the Code which was amended at a duly called and held Charter election on the 7th day of November, 1967, to hereafter read as follows: 
"Section 1. Public Recreation Board. There shall be a Public Recreation Board in the City of Groves composed of five (5) members who shall be appointed by the City Council. No person shall be eligible to appointment who is not a citizen of the United States and a resident of the City. At least two (2) of the members of the Board shall be women. 
"Section 2. Term of Office of Members of Board-Compensation. The term of office of the members of said Board shall, subject to the provisions relative to their removal, be two (2) years. There shall be one (1) member chosen from each of the four (4) wards of the City and one (1) member chosen from the City at large. The first Board so appointed under this section shall be made within sixty (60) days of the adoption of this provision, and the term of the members from the even numbered wards and the member at large shall be for two (2) years while the term of members from the odd numbered wards shall be for one (1) year. Thereafter, all appointments shall be for two (2) years as the terms expire. Members of the Public Recreation Board shall serve without compensation. 
"Section 3. Removal from Board. Vacancies; how filled. The members of the Public Recreation Board shall be subject to removal from office by the City Council on any cause deemed by the Council sufficient for removal in the interest of the public service, but only after a public hearing before the City Council upon charges publicly made, if demanded by such member within ten (10) days. Any vacancy in the membership of said Board shall be filled by the City Council for the unexpired term of the member whose place has become vacant either by removal or otherwise. 
"Section 4. Powers and Duties of the Public Recreation Board. The Public Recreation Board shall have such powers and duties as shall be delegated to it by the City Council by Ordinance." 
(2)  Article XVIII, Section 12. Written Notice of Injury or Damage, of the Charter provisions, page 60, of the Code, which was amended at a duly called and held Charter election on the 7th day of November, 1967, to hereafter read as follows: 
"Section 12. Notice of Claims. Before the City of Groves shall be liable for damages for the death or personal injuries of any person or for damage to or destruction of property of any kind, the person injured, if living, or his representative, if deceased, or the owner, his agent, or attorney of the property damaged or destroyed, shall give the City Council notice in writing of such death, injury, damage or destruction, duly verified by affidavit within sixty (60) days after same has been sustained, stating specifically in such written notice when, where, and how the death, injury, damage or destruction occurred, and the apparent extent of any such injury, the amount of damages sustained, the actual residence of the claimant by street and number at the date the claim is presented, the actual residence of such claimant for six (6) months immediately preceding the occurrence of such death, injury, damage or destruction, and the names and addresses of all witnesses upon whom it is relied to establish the claim for damages; and, the failure to so notify the Council within the time and manner specified herein shall exonerate, excuse and exempt the City from any liability whatsoever. No act of any officers or employee of the City shall waive compliance, or estop the City from requiring compliance with the provisions of this section as to notice." 
(3)  That Chapter 4, Sec. 4-6. Areas where Sale of Beer Permitted for Consumption on Premises, page 208, of the Code is hereby amended by deleting Sub-sections (b), (h) and (i) thereof. 
(4)  That Chapter 5, Article II, Livestock and Domestic Fowl, Sec. 5-15. Keeping Livestock Restricted, page 240, of the Code is hereby amended so as to hereafter read as follows: 
"Sec. 5-15. Keeping Livestock Restricted. It shall be unlawful to keep, feed, breed, stable, pasture, herd or maintain any livestock or domestic fowl on or in any lot, pen, building, parcel of land, stable, or other enclosure in the city, any part of which enclosure is nearer than seventy-five (75) feet to a building which is occupied by any person any part of the day or night." 
(5)  That Chapter 5, Article IV-City Pound, Sec. 5-47, Impoundment Fees, page 243, of the Code is hereby amended so as to hereafter read as follows: 
"Sec. 5-47, Impoundment Fees. A pound fee of Twenty-five Dollars ($25.00) shall be charged against each animal or fowl which may be impounded under the provisions of Section 5-45, and an additional charge of Two Dollars ($2.00) shall be made against each such animal or fowl for each day or part of a day after the first day which such animal or fowl may be impounded." 
(6)  That Chapter 19, Sec. 19-2, Peddler Refusing to Leave, page 707, of the Code is hereby amended so as to hereafter read as follows: 
"Sec. 19-2, Peddler Refusing to Leave. Any peddler or hawker of goods or merchandise who enters upon premises owned or leased by another and wilfully refuses to leave said premises, after having been notified by the owner or possessor of said premises, or his agent, to leave the same, shall be fined not less than $50.00 nor more than $200.00." 
(7)  That Chapter 19, Sec. 19-4, Compliance with Provisions Prerequisite to Engaging in Business, page 708, of the Code is hereby amended so as to hereafter read as follows: 
"Sec. 19-4, Compliance with Provisions Prerequisite to Engaging in Business. All peddlers must comply with the provisions of this chapter at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to going in or upon any private residence within the city for the purpose of engaging in business as a peddler." 
(8)  That Chapter 19, Sec. 19-6, Application for License, page 708, of the Code is hereby amended by adding Sub-section (h) which shall provide as follows: 
"(h) Any applicant who has heretofore been issued a license to engage in business as a peddler within the City and who has violated the terms and provisions of the permit and/or the ordinances of the City or the laws of the State of Texas relating to the permit may be denied a license by the City." 
and all ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the City of Groves, enacted on final passage on or before August 7, 1967, and not included in such Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are hereby repealed from and after the 1st day of October, 1968, except as hereinafter provided. No resolution of the City, not specifically mentioned, is hereby repealed. 
Section 3.  That the repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not affect any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of such Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the City, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the City or any evidence of the City's indebtedness; 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the City; 
(4)  Any right or franchise granted by the City; 
(5)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the City; 
(6)  Any ordinance relating to municipal street maintenance agreements with the State of Texas; 
(7)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing grades for streets in the City; 
(8)  Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance providing for the levy of taxes or for an annual budget; 
(9)  Any ordinance relating to local improvements and assessments and assessments therefor; 
(10)  Any ordinance annexing territory to the City or discontinuing territory as a part of the City; 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the City; 
(12)  Ordinances or resolutions prescribing traffic regulations for specific streets, such as ordinances or resolutions designating one-way streets, no parking areas, truck routes, stop intersections, intersections where traffic is to be controlled by signals, etc.; 
(13)  Any ordinance relating to or amending the zoning map or zoning ordinances of the City; 
(14)  Any ordinance enacted after August 7, 1967. 
Section 4.  That whenever in such Code an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such Code the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of such Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00), as provided in Section 1-5 of such Code. 
Section 5.  That any and all additions and amendments to such Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City Council to make the same a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in such Code so that reference to the "Code of Ordinances, City of Groves, Texas," shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
Section 6.  In case of the amendment of any section of such Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in Section 4 of this ordinance and Section 1-5 of such Code shall apply to the section as amended; or, in case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
Section 7.  A copy of such Code shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk preserved in looseleaf form, or in such other form as the City Clerk may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the City Clerk, or someone authorized by him, to insert in their designated places all amendments or ordinances which indicate the intention of the City Council to make the same a part of such Code when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from such Code all provisions which may be from time to time repealed by the City Council. This copy of such Code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine the same. 
Section 8.  It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of Groves to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in Section 4 of this ordinance. 
Section 9.  All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed. 
Section 10.  This ordinance shall become effective on the 1st day of October, 1968. 
    PASSED, APPROVED and ADOPTED at a regular meeting of the City Council of the City of Groves, Texas, on the 19th day of August, A.D., 1968. 
/s/ J. B. HARGUS 
      Mayor       ATTEST: 
/s/ LARRY L. BROUSSARD 
      City Clerk       This ordinance, including all the provisions thereof is hereby approved as to form and legality. 
/s/ EARL BLACK 
      City Attorney   STATE OF TEXAS 
COUNTY OF JEFFERSON 
    This Code of Civil and Criminal Ordinances of the City of Groves, adopted and enacted on the 19th day of August, 1968, as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Groves," by ordinance of the City Council effective the 1st day of October, 1968, and after the adoption and publication of the adopting ordinance as required by law, is hereby duly authenticated and approved. 
    IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto subscribed my name as Mayor of the City of Groves, attested by the City Clerk, with the seal of the City affixed hereto, this 19th day of August, 1968. 
ATTEST: 
/s/ J. B. HARGUS 
      Mayor   /s/ LARRY L. BROUSSARD 
      City Clerk   (SEAL) 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omits." 
    By adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date
Adopted Include/
Omit Supp. No. 2010-02  3- 1-10 Omit 7 2010-03  3-15-10 Include 7 2010-08  8-16-10 Include 7 2010-10  9-27-10 Include 7 2010-13 10-25-10 Omit 7 2011-01  1-17-11 Include 8 2011-03  4-25-11 Include 8 2011-04  5- 9-11 Include 8 2011-07  7-18-11 Include 8 2011-08  7-18-11 Include 8 2011-11  9-12-11 Include 8 2011-12  9-12-11 Include 8 2011-13  9-12-11 Include 8 2011-14  9-26-11 Include 8 2011-20 12-19-11 Include 8 2012-04  6-18-12 Include 9 2012-05  6-18-12 Include 9 2012-06  6-18-12 Include 9 2012-09  9-24-12 Include 9 2013-02  1-14-13 Include 10 2013-03  3-11-13 Include 10 2013-04  2-25-13 Omit 10 2013-06  3-25-13 Include 10 2013-07  4-22-13 Include 10 2013-09  6-17-13 Include 10 2013-12  8-26-13 Include 10 2013-14  8-26-13 Omit 10 2013-17  9-23-13 Include 10 2014-07  9-22-14 Include 11 2014-08 10-20-14 Include 11 2015-03  1-26-15 Include 12 2015-12  9-21-15 Include 12 2015-16 11- 2-15 Omit 12 2016-04  4-18-16 Omit 13 2016-05  6-27-16 Include 13 2016-08  8-22-16 Include 13 2016-12  9-19-16 Include 13 2017-02  2- 6-17 Include 14 2017-12  9-18-17 Include 14 2018-02  4-30-18 Include 15 2018-11  9- 7-18 Include 15  
CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 00-02, § 1, adopted March 6, 2000, rearranged, renumbered and revised the Charter, articles I-XXIII as articles I-XVII. The editor has treated this ordinance as repealing and readopting the Charter. The former Charter derived from an election of Dec. 30, 1953; and from Ord. No. 162, §§ III(1)-(19), adopted May 12, 1959; Ord. No. 232, §§ III(1)-(6), adopted Nov. 8, 1961; Ord. No. 372, § 1, adopted Sept. 18, 1967; Ord. No. 442, §§ 3(1), (2), adopted Nov. 4, 1970; Ord. No. 493, §§ 3(1)-(8), adopted Nov. 8, 1972; Ord. No. 553, § 3, adopted Nov. 6, 1974; Ord. No. 617, §§ 3A-D, adopted April 4, 1977; and Ord. No. 00-01, adopted Jan. 20, 2001. 

ARTICLE I. - FORM OF GOVERNMENT 

Section 1. - Corporate name. 
    The inhabitants of the City of Groves, with the boundaries as now established or as hereafter established in the manner provided in this Charter, shall continue to be and are hereby constituted a body politic and corporate, and to be known by the name and style of "City of Groves." 
Section 2. - Type of government. 
    The municipal government provided by this Charter shall be known as the "Council-Manager Government." Pursuant to its provisions and subject only to its limitations imposed by the State Constitution and by this Charter, all powers of the City shall be vested in an elective Council composed of four (4) Councilmembers and a Mayor, hereafter referred to as the "Council" or "City Council," which shall enact local legislation, adopt budgets, determine policies, and appoint the City Manager, who in turn shall be held responsible to the City Council for the execution of the laws and the administration of the government of the City. 
    All powers of the City shall be exercised in the manner prescribed by this Charter, or if the manner be not prescribed, then in such a manner as may be prescribed by ordinance, so long as there is no conflict with the general laws of the State of Texas. 
Section 3. - Boundaries. 
    The boundaries and limits of the City of Groves shall be the same as have been heretofore established and now exist and as may be established and changed hereafter. 
    The City Council shall have the power by ordinance to fix boundary limits of the City of Groves and to provide for the alteration and extension of said boundary limits and the annexation of additional territory lying adjacent to the City, provided, however, that such ordinance must be passed by a four-fifths ( 4/5 ) majority of the entire membership of the City Council. 
    When any additional territory has been so annexed, same shall be a part of the City of Groves for municipal purposes, and the property situated therein shall bear its pro rata part of the taxes levied by the City, and the inhabitants thereof shall be entitled to all the rights and privileges of all the citizens, and shall be bound by the acts, ordinances, resolutions, and regulations of the City. 
    An official map of the City shall be maintained which shows the boundaries of the City and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. A copy to the map shall be kept in the office of the City Clerk. 
Section 4. - Creation of ward boundaries. 
    The City Council shall, by ordinance, divide the City into four (4) wards for the purpose of electing a bona fide resident from each as Councilmember. 
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL POWERS OF CITY 

Section 1. - General. 
    The City of Groves, as such body politic and corporate, shall have perpetual succession, may sue and be sued, and shall have all the powers granted to cities by the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, together with all the implied powers necessary to carry in execution all the powers granted. 
    The City may acquire property within or without its boundaries for any municipal purpose in fee simple or any lesser interest or estate, by purchase, gift, devise, lease, or condemnation and may sell, lease, hold, manage, and control any property now owned by it or which it hereafter may acquire, and may construct, own, lease, operate, and regulate public utilities; may assess, levy, and collect taxes for general and special purposes on all lawful subjects of taxation; may borrow money on the faith and credit of the City by the issuance and sale of bonds or notes of the City; may appropriate the money of the City for all lawful purposes; may regulate and control the use, for whatever purpose, of the streets and other public places; may make and enforce all police, health, sanitary, and other regulations, and may pass such ordinances as may be expedient for the protection and maintenance of good government, peace, and welfare of the City, for the performance of the functions thereof, for the order and security of its inhabitants, and to protect the peace, lives, health, and property of the inhabitants; and may provide suitable penalties for the violation of any ordinance enacted by the City of Groves; and, except as prohibited by the Constitution of this State or restricted by this Charter, the City may exercise all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of every name and nature whatsoever. 
Section 2. - General powers adopted. 
    The enumeration of the particular powers in this Charter shall not be held or deemed to be exclusive but in addition to the powers enumerated herein or implied hereby or appropriate to the exercise of such powers, the City shall have and may exercise all power of local self-government and all other powers which, under the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, it would be competent for this Charter specifically to enumerate. 
    The City of Groves shall have and exercise all the powers enumerated in Chapter 13, Title 28, Article 1175 of the Revised Civil Statutes of the State of Texas of 1925 and amendments thereto and hereafter enacted. 
Section 3. - Eminent domain. 
    The City shall have the full power and right to exercise the power of eminent domain when necessary or desirable to carry out any of the powers conferred upon it by this Charter or by the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas. 
    The City may exercise the power of eminent domain in any manner authorized or permitted by the Constitution and laws of this State or in the manner and form that may be provided for by ordinance of the governing body of the City. The power of eminent domain hereby conferred shall include the right of the City to take the fee and so condemn, and such power and authority shall include the right to condemn public property for such purposes. 
    The City shall have and possess the power of condemnation for any municipal or public purposes even though not specifically enumerated in this Charter. 
Section 4. - Streets, sidewalks, bridges, and other public property. 
    The City of Groves shall have the power to construct, acquire, improve, modify, pay for, maintain, control, regulate the use thereof, vacate, close, and operate all streets, sidewalks, bridges, alleys, and other public ways within the City as permitted by law. 
Section 5. - Sanitary sewer system. 
    The City shall have the power to provide for a sanitary sewer system, to require property owners to connect their premises with such sewer system, and to provide for penalties for failure to make sanitary sewer connections. 
Section 6. - Public utilities. 
    The City shall have the power to buy, own, construct, maintain, and operate utilities and to manufacture and distribute electricity, gas, or anything else that may be needed or used by the public and shall have such further powers that may now or hereafter be granted under the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas. 
a.  Operation and Control. All municipally owned utilities shall be operated by the City in such a manner as to be self-sustaining insofar as is practical and shall not be converted into general revenue producing agencies of the City. 
The City Council may transfer funds of municipally owned utilities to the General Fund of the City provided, however, that the amount so transferred shall not exceed annually twenty percent (20%) of the gross revenue of said utilities for the previous fiscal year. 
Such sums so transferred shall be in lieu of taxes, street rentals, or other contributions to general administrative expenses of the City provided, however, nothing herein is to apply to the operation of charitable and educational facilities operated by the City. 
Such transfers shall be made annually and shall be noncumulative. 
b.  Accounts of Municipally Owned Utilities. Accounts shall be kept for each public utility owned or operated by the City in such manner as to show the true and complete financial results of such City ownership and operation, including all assets appropriately subdivided by classes, depreciation reserve, other reserves, and surplus, also revenues, operating expenses including depreciation, interest payments, rental, and other distribution of annual income. 
The accounts shall show the actual capital cost to the City of each public utility owned also the costs of all extensions, additions, and improvements, and the source of the funds expended for such capital purposes. 
They shall show as nearly as possible the cost of any service furnished to or rendered by any such utility to any other city or governmental department. 
The City Council shall annually cause to be made and published a report showing the financial results of such City ownership and operation giving the information specified in this Section and such additional data as the City Council shall deem expedient. 
c.  Sale or Lease of Municipally Owned Utilities. No public utility, park, and/or swimming pool owned by the City of Groves shall ever be sold or leased for a period longer than five (5) years until such sale or lease is authorized by a majority vote of the qualified voters of the City; nor shall same be encumbered for more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) except for purchase money or to refund any existing indebtedness lawfully created, until authorized in like manner. 
d.  Election. When properties named in Section 4 of this Article are to be sold or leased for a period of more than five (5) years or encumbered for more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) as provided in said Section, the City Council shall, by ordinance, call an election submitting said proposition to the qualified voters of the City of Groves; the time and places of holding the election shall be designated in said ordinance; and said election shall be held not less than fifteen (15) nor more than thirty (30) days from the passage of said ordinance. 
Notice of said election shall be given by posting a copy of said ordinance in each of the election precincts in the City and at city hall; such ordinance shall also be published on the same day in each of two (2) successive weeks in the official newspaper of the City of Groves; the date of the first publication to be not less than fourteen (14) days prior to the date set for the elections. 
e.  Form of ballots. The question to sell, lease, or mortgage shall be submitted on ballots which shall describe the property to be sold, leased, or mortgaged and the terms of the sale, lease, or mortgage and shall have printed below the description and terms: 
"For the sale (lease) (mortgage)" 
"Against the sale (lease) (mortgage)" 
No special election shall be called within sixty (60) days of a general municipal election for the submission of a proposition to sell, lease, or mortgage such property, but same shall be submitted as herein provided at said general election. 
Section 7. - Extraterritorial authority. 
    The City shall have the power to define all nuisances and hazards to life, health, and property and prescribe controls for the same within the city limits and outside the city limits for a distance of 5,000 feet. 
Section 8. - Acquisition of property. 
    The City shall have the power and authority, for any municipal purpose, to acquire by purchase, gift, devise, deed, condemnation, or otherwise any character of property, within or without the municipal boundaries; and the police power and all ordinances of the City shall cover such property both within and without the boundaries of the City. 
Section 9. - Insurance. 
    The City Council may provide for group health and life insurance coverage for City employees. 
ARTICLE III. - CITY COUNCIL 

Section 1. - Number and term. 
    The City Council shall be composed of a Mayor and four (4) Councilmembers elected at large in a manner provided for under Article IV of this Charter. 
    The term of office shall be for two (2) years and until their respective successors be elected and qualified. 
    The terms of Mayor and Councilmembers in even-numbered wards will expire in even-numbered years; and the terms of Councilmembers in odd-numbered wards will expire in odd-numbered years. 
Section 2. - Qualifications. 
    The Mayor and each of the Councilmembers shall be a citizen of the United States of America and a qualified elector of the State of Texas, and shall have resided within the corporate limits of the City for at least six (6) months preceding the date of the election for which he/she is a candidate. 
    A member of the Council ceasing to possess any of these qualifications, or convicted of a felony while in office, shall immediately forfeit his/her office. Other than the Mayor, not more than one (1) Councilmember shall be a resident of the same ward. 
Section 3. - Salary. 
    The annual salary of the Mayor shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00), and the salary of each of the Councilmembers shall be ten dollars ($10.00) for each meeting attended, but not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) for any one (1) year. 
    Such salaries may be changed by ordinance, however, the Mayor and each member of the City Council that enacted such ordinance shall not receive any increased salary thereunder until after the expiration of their current term of office. 
Section 4. - Mayor. 
    The Mayor shall preside at the meetings of the Council, and shall be recognized as the head of the City government for all ceremonial purposes and by the Governor for purposes of military law, but shall have no regular administrative duties unless otherwise provided for in other Sections of this Charter. 
    The Mayor shall be entitled to vote upon all matters considered by the Council, but shall have no veto power. 
Section 5. - Mayor pro tempore. 
    The City Council shall elect one (1) of its members Mayor Pro Tempore (Pro Tem) who shall perform the duties of the Mayor in the case of absence or disability of the Mayor; and if a vacancy shall occur, shall become acting Mayor until the vacancy is filled as provided in Section 6 of this Article of the Charter. 
Section 6. - Vacancies. 
    If a vacancy should occur in the office of Councilmember or in the office of Mayor, such vacancy shall be filled in the following manner: 
a.  If any vacancy occurs within ninety (90) days of a general election, the vacancy shall not be filled until the general election. In the case of a vacancy in the office of Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tem shall serve in such capacity until the vacancy is filled at the general election. 
b.  If a vacancy occurs in the office of Mayor longer than ninety (90) days before the next general election, the office of Mayor shall be filled by one (1) of the Councilmembers elected by the members of the Council. The Mayor so appointed shall serve until the next general election. 
c.  If a vacancy occurs in the office of Councilmember, the remaining Councilmembers and Mayor shall appoint, by a majority vote, a qualified citizen from the ward in which the vacancy occurred to serve until the next regular election, at which election a Councilmember shall be elected for such place for the remainder of the two (2) year term, if any. 
d.  If two (2) or more vacancies occur in the offices of Councilmembers within a forty-five (45) day period, or if one (1) or more vacancies occur in the offices of Councilmember and the Mayor within a forty-five (45) day period at a time longer than ninety (90) days before the next general election, a special election must be called by the remaining members of the City Council within forty-five (45) days to fill all such vacancies, unless an appointment to fill the first vacancy has already been made in which case such appointee shall continue to hold office for his/her appointed term, but a special election shall be called to fill the remaining vacancy or vacancies for the remainder of the respective terms. The appointment of a Councilmember to fill the office of Mayor does not constitute a vacancy requiring a special election. 
Section 7. - Meetings. 
    The first meeting of each newly elected Council shall be held within thirty (30) days following an election and the qualification of the newly elected Councilmember(s). Thereafter the Council shall meet as they deem necessary but at least one (1) time each month. 
    Special meetings of the Council may be called at the request of the Mayor, City Manager or three (3) members of the Council. Three (3) or more of the Councilmembers shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
    All regular meetings of the Council shall be held in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act. 
Section 8. - Procedure. 
    The City Council shall determine its own rules and order of business. 
    It shall keep a true and correct journal of all of its proceedings; said journal shall be open to public inspection as provided under the Texas Public Information Act. 
Section 9. - Investigations. 
    The City Council, or any person or committee appointed by the City Council for the purpose of conducting an investigation, shall have the power to inquire into the conduct of any department, office, agency, or officer of the City; to make investigations as to the City affairs and for that purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, and compel the production of books, papers, and other evidence material to said inquiry. 
    The City Council shall provide by ordinance the penalty for contempt in refusing to obey any such subpoena or failure to produce books, papers, and other evidence, and shall have the power to punish such contempt in a manner provided by ordinance. 
ARTICLE IV. - ELECTIONS 

Section 1. - Laws governing city elections. 
    All City elections shall be governed, except as otherwise provided by the Charter, in accordance with the Texas Election Code governing general and municipal elections, so far as same may be applicable thereto; and in the event there should be any failure to the general laws or this Charter to provide for some feature of the City elections, then the City Council shall have the power to provide for such deficiency; and no informalities in conducting a City election shall invalidate same, if it be conducted fairly and in substantial compliance with the general laws where applicable, and the Charter and ordinances of the City. 
Section 2. - General municipal elections. 
    The regular election for the choice of Mayor and members of the Council as provided in Article III shall be held each year on the first Tuesday following the first Monday in November. 
    The Council may, by resolution, order a special election, fix the time for holding same, and provide all means for holding such special elections. 
Section 3. - Council ballots. 
    The names of all candidates for Mayor or the Council, as hereinbefore provided, except such as may have withdrawn, died, or become ineligible, shall be printed on the official ballot with or without party designations. 
    If two (2) candidates have the same surnames, or have names so similar as to be likely to cause confusion, the addresses of the places of residence shall be placed on the ballot. 
    The order in which the names of such candidates are to be printed on the ballot shall be determined by a drawing, as provided by the State Election Code. 
Section 4. - Election of councilmembers by majority. 
    At the general municipal election, the candidates for the office of Councilmember, to the number to be elected, and for the office of Mayor, who shall have received the majority of votes cast in such elections shall be declared elected. 
    Should any candidate fail to receive a majority of votes at the general election for the office for which he/she is a candidate, the Council shall immediately order a special election to be held no less than twenty (20) days nor more than thirty (30) days after the result of the regular election has been declared, at which special election the names only of the two (2) candidates receiving the highest number of votes at the general election, for the office for which they were candidates, shall be printed on the ballots or machines, with or without party designation, and submitted to the qualified voters for election; and the candidate receiving the majority of votes at such special election, for the office for which he/she was a candidate, shall be duly elected. 
Section 5. - Primary elections and nominations. 
    Candidates for the offices of Mayor and Councilmember may be selected by primary election where authorized by the general laws of the State of Texas; and the names of such candidates may be certified to the City Clerk by the chairman of the party conducting such primary; and the same shall be sufficient to entitle said names to be placed on the official ballot or machines as candidates of said political parties. 
Section 6. - Candidates. 
    Any qualified elector may have his/her name placed on the official ballot or machine as a candidate for the office of Mayor or Councilmember by filing with the City Clerk at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of the election a sworn application that said candidate meets all the qualifications prescribed by this Charter for a person to hold office. 
    There shall be a filing fee which shall be set by the City Council. 
    The application shall be verified before an office qualified to administer oaths. 
Section 7. - Election officers and canvassing returns. 
    The election judge and other election officials necessary for conducting all such elections shall be appointed by the Council and shall be qualified voters of the election precinct in which they are to serve. 
    The election judges shall certify their count of the ballots, attaching the tally sheet to their certificate, and deliver the election records to the City Clerk in a sealed envelope within the time required by the Texas Election Code. 
    The Council shall meet and canvass the election returns and officially declare the result of the election in accordance with the Texas Election Code. 
Section 8. - Listing of candidates, printing ballots, absentee voting. 
    The City Clerk shall, thirty (30) days prior to the election, post in a conspicuous place in city hall a complete list of all candidates for the elective offices of the City of Groves. 
    The official ballot shall be printed not less than twenty (20) days before the date of the election. Absentee voting shall conform to State law. 
ARTICLE V. - CITY MANAGER 

Section 1. - Appointment and qualifications. 
    The City Council shall appoint a City Manager by a majority vote of the entire membership of the Council. The City Manager shall be the chief administrative and executive officer of the City and shall be responsible to the City Council for the administration of all the affairs of the City. 
    He/She shall be chosen by the Council solely on the basis of his/her executive and administrative training, experience, and ability, and need not, when appointed, be a resident of the City of Groves, but within six (6) months after being appointed, the City Manager shall have established his/her residency within the City of Groves; and during his/her tenure of office he/she shall reside within the City. 
    The City Manager shall provide a bond with such surety and in such amount as the Council may require. The premium on such bond shall be paid by the City. 
    No member of the Council shall, during the term for which he/she is elected, be chosen as City Manager or acting City Manager. 
Section 2. - Term and salary. 
    The City Manager may be removed at the will and pleasure of the Council by a majority vote of the entire membership of the Council. 
    If removed after serving six (6) months, the City Manager may demand and shall be granted written charges within a period of seven (7) days and the right to be heard thereon at a public meeting of the Council within a period of twenty-one (21) days or prior to the date on which the final removal shall take effect, whichever period is less; but pending such hearing, the Council may suspend the City Manager from office. 
    The action of the Council in suspending or removing the City Manager shall be final, it being the intention of this Charter to vest all authority and fix all responsibility for such suspension or removal in the Council. 
    In case of the absence or disability of the City Manager, the Council may designate some qualified person to perform the duties of the office during such absence or disability. 
    The City Manager shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by the Council. 
Section 3. - Powers and duties of the city manager. 
    The powers and duties of the City Manager shall be as follows: 
a.  Appoint and remove all heads of departments and all subordinate officers and employees of the City, except as otherwise provided by this Charter and except as he/she may authorize the head of a department or office to appoint and remove subordinates in such department or office. The decision of the City Manager or other appointing officer shall be final and there shall be no appeal therefrom to any other office, body, or court whatsoever. However, all department heads after serving six (6) months may demand and receive written charges and the right to be heard thereon at a meeting of the Council prior to the date on which his/her final removal shall take effect; but pending such hearing, the City Manager may suspend him/her from office. The decision of the Council shall be final. 
b.  Prepare and submit to the Council an annual budget and be responsible for its administration after adoption. 
c.  Prepare and submit to the Council as of the end of the fiscal year a complete financial report for the preceding year. 
d.  Keep the Council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the City and to recommend to the Council for adoption such resolutions as he/she may deem necessary or expedient. 
e.  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or required of him/her by the Council not inconsistent with this Charter. 
Section 4. - Interference by the council prohibited. 
    Neither the Council nor any of its committees or members shall dictate the appointment of any person to, or his/her removal from, office or employment by the City Manager or any of his/her subordinates, or in any manner interfere in the appointment of officers and employees in the departments of the administrative service vested in the City Manager by this Charter. 
ARTICLE VI. - CITY CLERK 

[Section 1. - Appointment.] 
    The City Manager shall appoint the City Clerk, with the approval of the Council, who shall give notice of meetings of the Council, keep the journal and minute book of its proceedings, shall authenticate by his/her signature and record in full in a book kept and indexed for the purpose, all ordinances and resolutions, and shall perform such other duties as the City Manager shall assign to him/her and those elsewhere provided in this Charter. 
ARTICLE VII. - FINANCES (GENERALLY) 

Section 1. - Annual budget estimate. 
    The fiscal year of the City shall begin with the first day of October of each year and shall end with the 30th day of September of each year. 
    On or before the first day of August each year the City Manager shall submit to the City Council a budget estimate of the revenues of the City and the expenses of conducting the affairs thereof for the ensuing year. This estimate shall be compiled from detailed information obtained from the departments, divisions, and offices of the City in a format provided by the City Manager or as required by the City Council. The estimate shall be as nearly uniform as possible for the main functional divisions of such departments, divisions, and offices and shall give the following information: 
a.  An itemized estimate of the expense required by each department, division, and office. 
b.  Comparison of such estimates with the corresponding items of expenditure for the last fiscal year and with the expenditure of the current fiscal year, plus an estimate of expenditures necessary to complete the current fiscal year. 
c.  Reasons for proposed increases or decreases of such items of expenditure compared with the current fiscal year. 
d.  A separate schedule for each department showing the things necessary for the department to perform during the year and any desirable things it ought to do if possible. 
e.  Items of payroll increase as either additional pay to present employees or pay for more employees. 
f.  A statement of the total probable income of the City from taxes and all other sources for the periods covered by the estimate. 
g.  The amount required for interest on the City's debt, for sinking fund, and for maturing serial bonds, as well as the reserves required. 
h.  The total amount of outstanding City debts with a schedule of maturities on bond issues. 
i.  Such other information as may be required by the City Council or the City Manager. 
j.  A projection of the future capital improvement needs of the City for at least the next three (3) years. 
Section 2. - Annual appropriation ordinance. 
    Upon receipt of the City Manager's estimate, the City Council shall have prepared an appropriation ordinance, using the City Manager's estimate as a basis. 
    Provisions shall be made for a public hearing on the appropriation ordinance before the City Council. 
    Following the public hearing, and before final adoption of the appropriation ordinance, a summary of the information in such ordinance shall be published in the official newspaper of the City. 
    The City Council shall not adopt the appropriation ordinance until at least ten (10) days after such publication, but shall adopt the appropriation ordinance no later than September 30 of each year. 
    In the event the budget is not adopted by October 1, an ordinance shall be adopted approving a one-month budget equal to one-twelfth ( 1/12 ) of the lesser of the current budget or the proposed budget. In the event the budget is still not adopted at the end of such one-month period, the same procedure shall be repeated for adoption of another one-month budget. 
Section 3. - Transfer of appropriations. 
    The City Council may, at any time, authorize transfers of unreserved fund balances and unencumbered appropriations from one (1) department or fund to another department or fund, except for transfers from enterprise funds to other funds. 
    A three-fourths (3/4) vote of the entire City Council shall be required to transfer unreserved fund balances and/or unencumbered appropriations from enterprise funds. 
Section 4. - Appropriation of excess revenue. 
    If at any time the total accruing revenue of the City shall be in excess of the total estimated income thereof, as set forth in the annual budget estimate, in compliance with Section 1.f. of this Article of the Charter, the City Council may, from time to time, appropriate such excess to any such use as will not conflict with any specific use for which such revenue accrued. 
Section 5. - Expenditures only pursuant to appropriations. 
    No money shall be drawn from the City treasury nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred, except pursuant to appropriations made by the City Council at the close of each fiscal year, the unencumbered balances of each appropriation shall revert to the fund from which it was appropriated and shall be subject to future appropriation. 
Section 6. - Accounts of appropriations. 
    Accounts shall be kept for each item of appropriation made by the City Council; and every warrant on the City treasury shall state specifically against which of such items the warrant is drawn. Each such account shall show in detail the appropriations made thereto by the City Council, the amount drawn thereon, the unpaid obligation charged against it, and the unencumbered balance to the credit thereof. 
Section 7. - Payment of claims. 
    No claim against the City shall be paid, unless it is evident by a voucher approved for payment by the City Manager; hence such City Manager and his/her surety shall be liable to the City for all loss or damage sustained by the City by reason of his/her negligence or corrupt approval of any such claim. 
    The City Manager shall examine all payrolls, bills, and other claims and demands against the City, and shall issue no warrant for payment unless he/she feels that the claim is in proper form, correctly computed, and duly approved; that it is justly and legally due and payable; that an appropriation has been made therefor which has not been exhausted or that the payment has been otherwise legally authorized; and that there is money in the City treasury to make payment. 
    The City Manager may investigate any claim and for that purpose may summon before him/her any officer, agent, or person and examine him/her upon oath or affirmation relative thereto, which oath or affirmation he/she may administer. 
    The City Manager shall not authorize payment of any item for which no appropriation has been made at the fund level, or for the payment of which there is not a sufficient balance in the proper fund appropriation, or which is otherwise contrary to law or ordinance. 
Section 8. - Monies certified in treasury. 
    No contract, agreement, or other obligation involving the expenditure of money shall be entered into, nor shall any ordinance, resolution, or order for the expenditure of money, be passed by the City Council or be authorized by any officer of the City, except in the cases hereinafter specified, unless the City Manager has determined that the money required for such contract, agreement, obligation, or expenditure is in the City treasury to the credit of the fund from which it is to be drawn and not appropriated for any other purpose. 
    The sum so encumbered shall not thereafter be considered unappropriated until the City is discharged from the contract, agreement, or obligation. 
    For the purposes of this Section, monies expected to be received within a fiscal year shall be deemed to be in the City Treasury for such fiscal year. 
Section 9. - Obligations; when void. 
    All contracts, agreements or other obligations entered into, all ordinances passed, and resolutions contrary to the preceding Sections shall be void and no person whatever shall have any claim or demand against the City thereunder; nor shall the City Council or any officer of the City waive or qualify the limits fixed by any ordinance, resolution, or order, as provided in Section 8 of this Article of the Charter, or fasten upon the City any liability whatsoever, in excess of such limits, or relieve any party from an exact compliance with his/her contract under such ordinance, resolution, or order; provided that this Section shall not apply in the case of public disaster calling for extraordinary emergency expenditures. 
Section 10. - Independent audit. 
    The City Council shall cause an independent audit to be made of the books of account, records, and transactions of all the administrative departments of the City at least once yearly, at the end of each fiscal year. 
    Such audit shall be made by one (1) or more certified public accountants, who, for the three (3) preceding years, have held a certificate or certificates issued by the State Board of Accountancy of the State of Texas. 
    The auditor or auditors to make the said audit shall be selected by the City Council, shall be responsible to the City Council, shall serve in such capacity at the will of the City Council, and may be removed at any time by the City Council. 
    They shall have no personal interest, directly or indirectly, in the financial affairs of the City or any of its officers; and any auditor may be employed whether a resident of the City or not, notwithstanding the provisions of Article XVIII, Section 5 of this Charter. 
    The duties of the auditor or auditors so appointed shall include the certification of the balance sheet exhibiting the assets and liabilities of the City. Such balance sheet shall be supported by the departmental schedules and schedules for each utility publicly owned or operated, summaries of income and expenditures supported by detailed schedules, and also comparisons in proper classifications with the last previous year. 
    The report of such auditor or auditors shall be submitted to the City Council within the time period following the close of the fiscal period as required by State law. Such report shall be kept among the permanent records of the City. 
    Such auditor or auditors, so appointed, shall not maintain or keep any of the City's accounts or records. 
ARTICLE VIII. - FINANCE ADMINISTRATION 

Section 1. - Department of finance. 
    There shall be a Department of Finance, the head of which shall be the City Manager or his/her appointee who shall be known as the Director of Finance. 
    Said Director shall provide a bond with such surety and in such amount as the Council may require. The premium on such bond shall be paid by the City. 
Section 2. - Director of finance; powers and duties. 
    The Director of Finance shall administer all financial affairs of the City, under the direction of the City Manager. To that end, the Director of Finance shall have the authority and be required to maintain a complete system of financial controls that address the financial transactions for all agencies and departments of the City, including the investment of funds and the recording, monitoring, and reporting of all revenues, receipts, disbursements, allocations, assets, and liabilities. 
    Such system shall meet all applicable standards required by the state and federal governments, and year-end financial statements shall be prepared in conformance with generally accepted accounting principles relating to governmental accounting. 
Section 3. - Banking. 
    The City Council shall, in cooperation with the City Manager, select and designate a responsible financial institution(s) as a depository for the monies and funds of the City where the Director of Finance shall at all times promptly deposit and maintain the money, funds, and other valuable securities delivered to his/her custody. 
    The Council may at any time, within its judgment, select and designate more than one (1) depository. The financial institution shall be designated by the Council in accordance with such regulations and subject to such requirements as to security for deposits and interest thereon as established by State law and City ordinance. 
    All interest on money so deposited shall accrue to the benefit of the City. 
    All checks for the withdrawal of money from the City depositories shall be signed by the City Manager and countersigned by the Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem. 
    In the absence of the City Manager, checks may be signed by the City Clerk or some other officer designated by the Council by resolution. 
Section 4. - Purchases and contracts. 
    All purchases made and contracts executed by the City shall be made in accordance with the requirements of this Charter and all applicable requirements of the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas. 
    All contracts for purchases or expenditures must be expressly approved in advance by the City Council, except that the City Council may, by ordinance, confer upon the City Manager the general authority to contract for expenditures without further approval of the City Council for all budgeted items the cost of which does not exceed the constitutional and statutory requirements for competitive bidding. 
ARTICLE IX. - TAXATION 

[Section 1. - Power to 
levy, assess and collect an annual property tax.] 
    The City Council shall have the power under the provision of State law to levy, assess, and collect an annual tax upon taxable property within the City to the maximum extent permitted by the Constitution and general laws of the State of Texas. 
ARTICLE X. - ISSUANCE AND SALE OF BONDS 

[Section 1. - Issuance of bonds and warrants.] 
    All bonds and warrants of the City shall be authorized and issued in accordance with the applicable general laws and Constitution of the State of Texas. 
ARTICLE XI. - ORDINANCES 

Section 1. - Definition and purpose. 
    Any rule, law, decree, authoritative direction, public regulation, or provision passed or adopted by the Council not expressly defined by this Charter, shall hereinafter be known and referred to as an ordinance. 
    It shall be the purpose of an ordinance to supplement the provisions of this Charter, provide for municipal legislation, establish local policy, authorize the granting of franchises, and otherwise prescribe the provisions of regulation and disposition of other matters not specifically referred to herein. 
Section 2. - Enactment enacting clause. 
    The method of introduction, consideration, and disposition of any proposed ordinance, resolution, rule, or regulation shall conform to and be covered by the provisions of Article III of this Charter except as otherwise provided herein. 
    Every ordinance passed by the Council shall begin with the following heading: "BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY OF GROVES." 
Section 3. - General prior to this charter. 
    The Code of the City of Groves and all ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations of said City heretofore ordained, passed, adopted, or enacted that are in force at the time this Charter becomes effective and are not in conflict herewith shall remain in full force and effect until amended or appealed, provided the same were valid and authorized by the Charter under which they were enacted. 
Section 4. - Reading and prior notification. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein it shall not be necessary to the validity of any ordinance that prior notification be given, or that it shall be read more than one (1) time or considered at more than one (1) session of the Council. 
Section 5. - Penal ordinances; publication. 
    The City Clerk shall give notice of the passage of every ordinance imposing any penalty, fine, imprisonment, or forfeiture for violation of its provisions by causing the ordinance, or a descriptive caption or title thereof stating in summary the purpose of the ordinance and the penalty for violation thereof, to be published one (1) time in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Groves, within ten (10) days after the passage thereof. 
Section 6. - Publication of ordinances. 
    Unless otherwise provided herein, publication of ordinances shall not be necessary; however, the Council may authorize such publication as it may deem to be advisable, provided said authorization is approved by a majority of the Council present (and provided said authorization is made at the same session in which the ordinance is passed). 
Section 7. - Franchise ordinances; publication. 
    All ordinances granting or confirming a franchise or working agreement shall be accepted in writing by the grantees and before taking effect shall be published as otherwise provided in this Charter; the cost of such publication shall be borne by the grantees of such franchise or working agreement. 
Section 8. - Effective dates. 
    Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from and after their passage unless otherwise therein expressly provided. 
    Ordinances requiring publication shall take effect from and after the last required publication (except as otherwise provided in this Charter). 
Section 9. - Enrollment. 
    Every ordinance passed by the Council shall be enrolled by the City Clerk as soon as practicable after its passage. 
Section 10. - Codification of ordinances. 
    The City Council shall have the power to cause the ordinances of the City to be printed in code form as often as the Council may deem advisable; and such printed code, when adopted by the Council, shall be in full force and effect without the necessity of publishing the same or any part thereof in a newspaper. 
    All printed ordinances or codes of ordinances shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as would the original ordinance. 
ARTICLE XII. - INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM, AND RECALL 

Section 1. - Initiative-Power of. 
    The electors shall have power to propose any ordinance, except an ordinance appropriating money or authorizing the levy of taxes, and to adopt or reject the same at the polls. 
Section 2. - Initiative-Petition. 
    Any proposed ordinance may be submitted to the City Council, in the form in which the petitioner desires the same to be passed, by a petition filed with the City Clerk in the following manner: 
a.  Any elector shall make application to the City Clerk and file an intention to circulate a petition giving the date of the application and the proposed ordinance to be circulated. Unless the final petition with the required number of signatures is returned within twenty (20) days from the date of such application, it shall not be received for any purpose. 
b.  The petition must contain the names and signatures of a number of qualified voters of the City equal to ten percent (10%) of the qualified voters that appeared on the latest available county voter registration list as of the date of the last general municipal election. 
c.  To be valid, a petition submitted for the purpose of complying with this Section must contain: 
(1)  Each signer's printed name, date of birth, voter registration number, residence address, date of signing, and signature; 
(2)  On each page, the text of the proposed ordinance to be circulated; and 
(3)  On each page, the name of the person circulating the petition; which person must be an elector of the City. 
d.  Every person circulating any page of a petition shall file with the City Clerk a sworn, notarized statement containing his/her name, date of birth, address, and the statement, "I circulated this petition. I am an elector of the City of Groves. The signers freely signed this petition." Any petition applicable to the same issue voted on within the six (6) month period immediately preceding the date of submission of such petition shall be rejected by the City Clerk. 
Section 3. - Initiative-Duties of the clerk. 
    All papers comprising a petition shall be assembled and filed with the City Clerk as one (1) instrument. 
    Within ten (10) days after a petition is filed, the City Clerk shall determine whether each paper of the petition has the proper statement of the circulator and whether the petition is signed by a sufficient number of qualified electors. 
    The City Clerk shall declare any petition paper entirely invalid which fails to conform to any of the provisions of Section 2 above. 
    After completing his/her examination of the petition, the City Clerk shall certify the result thereof to the City Council at its next regular meeting. If the petition is found by the Clerk to be insufficient, it shall be returned to the person filing same. 
    A petition may be amended within ten (10) days after notice of insufficiency. 
    The finding of the insufficiency of a petition shall not prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same purpose. 
Section 4. - Initiative-Consideration by city council. 
    Whenever the City Council receives a certified initiative petition from the City Clerk, it shall consider same and shall either: 
(a)  Pass said ordinance within thirty (30) days after date of Clerk's certificate of sufficiency to the petition; or 
(b)  Submit said proposed ordinance to a vote of the people at the next uniform election date, as prescribed by the Texas Election Code, which date is at least sixty (60) days after the date of the City Clerk's certification to the City Council. 
Section 5. - Initiative-Results of election. 
    If a majority of the electors voting on a proposed initiative ordinance shall vote in favor thereof, such ordinance shall thereupon become a valid and binding ordinance of the City of Groves. 
Section 6. - Initiative-Amendments. 
    Initiated ordinances adopted by the electors may be amended or repealed, as is the case of other ordinances, provided that no such ordinance shall be amended in such manner as to defeat its purpose; nor may such ordinance be repealed sooner than six (6) months after its enactment. 
Section 7. - Referendum-Power of. 
    The electors shall have power to approve or reject at the polls any ordinance passed by the City Council or submitted by the City Council to a vote of the electors except an ordinance making the annual tax levy or an ordinance authorizing the issuance of bonds which have been authorized by a vote of the people, such power being known as the referendum. 
Section 8. - Referendum-Petition; effect. 
    The referendum petition shall conform to the provisions of Section 2 herein, and be certified by the City Clerk to the City Council as provided in Section 3 hereof. 
    If a referendum petition is found sufficient and so certified to the City Council, the said ordinance shall thereupon be suspended from going into operation; or further action thereunder shall be suspended if it shall have gone into effect until and unless approved by the electors as herein provided. 
Section 9. - Referendum-Consideration of petition by city council. 
    Upon receipt of the City Clerk's certificate, the Council shall proceed to reconsider said ordinance or part thereof sought to be repealed. If upon such reconsideration, the ordinance or part thereof is not repealed, it shall be submitted to the electors at the next uniform election date, as prescribed by the Texas election Code, which date is at least sixty (60) days after the date of the City Clerk's certification to the City Council. 
Section 10. - Referendum-Results of election. 
    If, when submitted to a vote of the electors, any such referred ordinance be not approved by a majority of those voting thereon, it shall be deemed repealed. 
Section 11. - Form of ballot for initiated and referred ordinances. 
    Ordinances submitted to a vote of the electors in accordance with the initiative and referendum provisions of this Charter shall be submitted by ballot, which shall state the title of the ordinance to be voted on and shall have below the title the following propositions, one above the other in the order indicated: 
"For the Ordinance" 
"Against the Ordinance" 
    Any number of ordinances may be voted on at the same election and may be submitted on the same ballot. 
Section 12. - Recall-General. 
    The Mayor or any member of the City Council or any elected official of the City may be removed from office by recall. 
Section 13. - Recall-Procedure. 
    Any elector of the City of Groves may make and file with the City Clerk an affidavit containing the name(s) of the officer(s) whose removal is sought and a statement of the grounds for removal. The Clerk shall thereupon deliver to the elector making such affidavit copies of petition blanks demanding such removal. 
    The Clerk shall keep a sufficient number of such printed petition blanks on hand for distribution. Such blanks when issued by the City Clerk shall bear the signature of that officer and be addressed to the City Council and shall be numbered, dated, and indicate the name of the person to whom issued. The petition blanks when issued shall also indicate the number of such blanks issued and the name of the officer whose removal is sought. 
    The City Clerk shall enter in a record to be kept in his/her office the name of the elector to whom the petition blanks were issued and the number issued to said person. 
Section 14. - Recall-Petitions. 
    The recall petition, to be effective, must be returned and filed with the City Clerk within twenty (20) days after the filing of the affidavit required in Section 13 herein; and it must be signed by qualified electors of the City equal to at least ten percent (10%) of the total number of qualified voters of the City that appeared on the latest available county voter registration list as of the date of the last general municipal election. 
    Said petition shall conform to the provisions of Section 2 herein. 
    No petition papers shall be accepted as part of a petition unless it bears the signature of the City Clerk as required in Section 13 herein. 
Section 15. - Recall-Election. 
    Each page comprising the petition shall be assembled and filed with the City Clerk as one (1) instrument. 
    Within ten (10) days after a petition is filed, the City Clerk shall determine whether each page of the petition complies with the requirements of Section 2 herein and whether the petition is sufficient. 
    After completing the examination of the petition, the City Clerk shall certify the result thereof to the City Council at its next regular meeting and notify the official sought to be recalled of such action. If the petition is found by the City Clerk to be insufficient, it shall be returned to the person filing same along with a written statement concerning the reason(s) for the insufficiency. 
    The petition may be amended within ten (10) days after such notice of insufficiency. The finding of the insufficiency of a petition shall not prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same purpose. 
    If the official whose removal is sought does not resign within five (5) days after notice from the City Clerk of the sufficiency of the recall petition or amended recall petition, the City Council shall thereupon order and fix a date for holding a recall election. Any such election shall be held at the next uniform election date, as prescribed by the Texas Election Code, which date is at least sixty (60) days after the date of the City Clerk's certification to the City Council. 
Section 16. - Recall-Ballots in election. 
    Ballots used in recall elections shall conform to the following requirements: 
a.  With respect to each person whose removal is sought, the question shall be submitted, "Shall (name of person) be removed from the office of (title of office) by recall?" 
b.  Immediately below each such question there shall be printed the two (2) following propositions, one above the other, in the order indicated: 
"For the recall of (name of person)" 
"Against the recall of (name of person)" 
Section 17. - Recall-Results of election. 
    If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election shall be against the recall of the officer named on the ballot, he/she shall continue in office for the remainder of his/her unexpired term, subject to recall as before. 
    If a majority of the votes cast at such an election be for the recall of the officer named on the ballot, he/she shall, regardless of any technical defects in the recall petition, be deemed removed from office; and the vacancy shall be filled by the City Council as in other vacancies. 
Section 18. - Recall-Limitations. 
    No recall petition shall be filed against the Mayor or a Councilmember or any other elected officer of the City within six (6) months after he/she takes office, nor in respect to an officer subjected to a recall election and not removed thereby, until at least six (6) months after such election. 
Section 19. - District judge may order election. 
    Should the City Council fail or refuse to order any of the elections as provided for in this Article, when all the requirements for such election have been complied with by the petitioning electors in conformity with this Article of the Charter, then it shall be the duty of any one (1) of the District Judges of Jefferson County, upon proper application being made therefor, to order such elections and to enforce the carrying into effect of the provisions of this Article of this Charter. 
ARTICLE XIII. - LAW DEPARTMENT 

Section 1. - The city attorney. 
    The City Council shall appoint a person to serve as attorney that is duly licensed by the State of Texas, to be the City Attorney. 
    The City Attorney shall be entitled to compensation for services as established by the City Council and shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council. 
    The City Attorney shall draft, or approve as to legal form, every ordinance proposed by the City Council and shall review all contracts and other documents in which the City has an interest. 
    The City Attorney, or other attorneys selected by the City Attorney with the approval of the City Council, shall represent the City in all litigation. The City Attorney shall be the legal advisor to the City and counsel for the City and all its officers and departments in the conduct of City business. 
Section 2. - Municipal court. 
    There shall be a court for the trial of misdemeanor offenses known as the Municipal Court of the City of Groves with such powers and duties as are given and prescribed by the laws of the State of Texas. 
Section 3. - Judge of the municipal court. 
    There shall be a Judge of the Municipal Court, who shall be appointed by a majority of the entire City Council for a term of two (2) years. 
    He/She shall be a resident of the City of Groves. 
    His/Her compensation shall be fixed by the City Council. 
    He/She may be removed by the City Council for incompetency, misconduct, or malfeasance. 
    In the event of failure of the Judge of the Municipal Court to act, for any reason, the City Council may appoint an interim Judge of the Municipal Court to act in his/her place and stead until the duly appointed Judge of the Municipal Court returns to duty. 
Section 4. - Clerk of the court. 
    The City Clerk shall be Clerk of the Municipal Court. He/She, or his/her deputies, shall have the power to administer oaths, make certificates, affix the seal of said court thereto, and generally do and perform any and all acts usual and necessary by Clerks of Courts in issuing processes of said court and conducting the business thereof. 
ARTICLE XIV. - ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS 

Section 1. - General. 
    The City Council shall establish other departments and offices of the City by ordinance. All of said departments shall be under the control of the City Manager except where otherwise provided in this Charter. 
    The City Council may discontinue any department or office established by ordinance and may prescribe, combine, distribute, or abolish the functions and duties of departments and offices; but no function or duty assigned by this Charter to a particular department or office shall be abolished or assigned to any other department or office. 
Section 2. - Directors of departments. 
    At the head of each department there shall be a director who shall have supervision and control of the department, subject to supervision and approval by the City Manager, except as specifically provided otherwise by this Charter. 
    Two (2) or more departments may be headed by the same individual. 
    The City Manager may head one (1) or more departments, and directors of departments may also serve as chiefs of divisions. 
    The work of each administrative department may be distributed among such divisions thereof as may be established by resolution of the City Council upon the recommendation of the City Manager. 
Section 3. - Directors of administrative departments; salary. 
    The directors of all administrative departments shall be appointed by the City Manager unless otherwise provided in this Charter and shall receive such compensation as shall be prescribed by the City Council; and before entering upon the duties of the office shall, if required by the Council, make bond in some responsible surety company acceptable to the City Council, for such amount as the Council may prescribe. 
    The premium of which bond shall be paid by the City. 
ARTICLE XV. - FRANCHISES 

Section 1. - General. 
    The ownership and control of the public streets, highways, alleys, parks, public places, and all other real property of the City of Groves are hereby declared to be inalienable to said City except by ordinance duly adopted by City Council not in conflict with the provisions of this Charter. 
    No act or omission of a City officer or agent shall be construed to confer, grant, renew, extend, or amend expressly, or by estoppel, implication, or indirection any right, franchise, or easement affecting such public streets, highways, sidewalks, alleys, parks, and other public places, except as provided in this Charter. 
Section 2. - Power to grant franchise. 
    The City Council shall have power by ordinance to grant, renew, and extend all franchises of all public utilities of every character operating within the City of Groves and with the consent of the franchise holder to amend same. Provided, however, any franchise granted shall be for a definite term not to exceed fifty (50) years. 
Section 3. - Ordinance granting franchise. 
    All ordinances granting, amending, renewing, or extending franchises shall be presented in writing at three (3) separate regular meetings of the City Council and shall not be finally adopted until approved upon final reading, which shall be not less than thirty (30) days from the first reading. 
    After the passage of a franchise ordinance, and before its effective date, the full text of such ordinance shall be published once each week for four (4) consecutive weeks in the official newspaper of the City of Groves; and the expense of such publication shall be borne by the prospective franchise holder. 
Section 4. - Transfer of franchise. 
    No public utility franchise shall be transferred by the holder thereof except with the approval of the City Council expressed by ordinance. 
Section 5. - Franchise value not allowed. 
    In fixing reasonable rates and charges for public utility services within the City, and in determining the just compensation to be paid by the City for public utility property, which the City may acquire by condemnation or otherwise, the value of a franchise granted by the City under this Charter shall not be considered. 
Section 6. - Regulation of franchise. 
    Every grant, renewal, extension, or amendment of a public utility franchise, whether so provided in the ordinances or not, shall be subject to the right of the City Council to: 
a.  Forfeit any such franchise by ordinance at any time for failure of the holder thereof to comply with the terms of the franchise. Such power shall be exercised only after written notice to the franchise holder stating wherein the franchise holder has failed to comply with the terms of the franchise and setting a reasonable time for the correction of such failure, and shall be exercised only after hearing and after such reasonable time has expired. 
b.  Impose reasonable regulations to ensure safe, efficient, and continuous service to the public. 
c.  Require such expansion, extension, enlargement, and improvement of plants and facilities as are necessary to provide adequate service to the public. 
d.  Require every franchise holder to furnish to the City, without cost to the City, full information regarding the location, character, size, length, and terminals of all facilities of such franchise holder in, over, and under the streets, alleys, and other public properties of the City, and to regulate and control the location, relocation, and removal of such facilities. 
e.  Collect from every public utility operating within the City such proportion of the expense of excavating, grading, paving, repaving, constructing, reconstructing, draining, repairing, maintaining, lighting, sweeping, and sprinkling the streets, alleys, ridges, culverts, viaducts, and other public places of the City as represent the increased cost of such operation resulting from the occupancy of such public places by such public utility, and such proportion of the cost of such operations as results from the damage to or the disturbance of such public places caused by such public utility; or to compel such public utility to perform at its own expense, such operations as above listed which are made necessary by the occupancy of such public places by such utility or by damage to or disturbance of such public places caused by such utility. 
f.  Require every franchise holder to allow other public utilities to use its poles and other facilities, including bridges and viaducts, whenever in the judgment of the City Council such use shall be in the public interest, provided that in such an event, a reasonable rental shall be paid to the owner of the facilities for such use. Provided further, the inability of such public utilities to agree upon rental facilities, or the rental amount to be paid therefore, shall not be an excuse for failure to comply with such requirement by the City Council. 
g.  (1)  Require the keeping of accounts in such form as will accurately reflect the value of the property of each franchise holder which is used and useful in rendering its service to the public and the expenses, receipts, and profits of all kind of such franchise holder. 
(2)  Examine and audit at any time during business hours the accounts and other records of any franchise holder. 
(3)  Require reports on the operation of the utility, which shall be in such form and contain such information as the City Council shall prescribe. 
h.  Require that the public utility give notice to any subscriber to its service prior to the permanent or temporary discontinuance or disruption of such service by the public utility, except in cases of emergency, and to require that no officer, agent, servant, or employee of the public utility nor any vehicles or equipment under their control shall make use of or go upon or across any private property within the City without first obtaining the permission of the owner or occupant of such property, except in cases of emergency, and to provide a penalty for the violation of such requirements. 
i.  Impose such other reasonable regulations, restrictions, requirements and conditions as may be deemed necessary or desirable to promote the health, safety, welfare, or accommodations of the public. 
Section 7. - Franchise records. 
    Within six (6) months after the effective date of this provision of the Charter, every public utility operating within the City and every owner of a public utility franchise within the City shall file with the City Clerk certified copies of all franchises owned or claimed or under which such utility is operating within the City. 
    The City shall compile and maintain a public record of all public utility franchises. 
Section 8. - Regulation of rates. 
    The City Council shall have full power, except as otherwise provided by law, after notice and hearing to regulate by ordinance the rates, charges, and fares of every public utility franchise holder operating within the City. 
    Every franchise holder who shall request an increase in rates, charges, or fares shall have, at the hearing of the City Council called to consider such request, the burden of establishing by clear, competent, and convincing evidence of the value of its investments properly allowable to service in the City, and the amount and character of its expenses and revenues connected with the rendering of such service. If, upon such hearing, the City Council is not satisfied with the sufficiency of the evidence so furnished, it shall be entitled to call upon such public utility for the furnishing of additional evidence at a subsequent date to which said hearing may be adjourned. 
Section 9. - Exceptions; spur tracks. 
    The provisions of Section 3 of this Article relating to effective date of ordinance and publication thereof shall not be applicable to the granting of side track, spur track, or switch privileges to any franchise-holding railway company for the purpose of reaching and affording railway connections and switch privileges to the owners or users of any industrial site. 
    Franchises granting these privileges shall take effect ten (10) days after their adoption on third and final reading; and the full text of such ordinance shall be published once in the official newspaper of the City of Groves at the expense of the proponent of the franchise or working agreement. 
Section 10. - Power to regulate. 
    The City Council shall have the power by ordinance to require any or all railroad companies operating any track or tracks upon or across any public streets of the City of Groves to reduce such tracks below the level of the streets intersected or occupied by such tracks or to elevate such tracks above the level of the streets intersected or occupied by such tracks, and to require the company or companies owning or operating such tracks to provide and maintain in good condition necessary and proper crossing for the public travel at intersecting streets or to remove any tracks from any street occupied by such tracks and to reroute same as designated in the ordinance, provided the railway company involved be given thirty (30) days notice prior to the adoption of the ordinance. 
Section 11. - Present franchises to remain in force. 
    All franchises now legally in force shall remain in full force and effect for the remainder of the term designated therein; however, all such franchises shall be subject to the provisions of this Charter, provided no vested rights are impaired thereby. 
ARTICLE XVI. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 1. - Publicity of records. 
    All records and accounts of every office, department, or agency of the City shall be open to inspection by any citizen, any representative of a citizen's organization, or any representative of the press at all reasonable times and under reasonable regulations established by the City Council. 
Section 2. - Conflict of interest. 
    Except as permitted by State law, no member of the Council or any officer or employee of the City shall have a financial interest, direct or indirect or by reason of ownership of stock in any corporation, in any contract or in the sale to the City or to a contractor supplying the City, of any land or rights of interest in any land, material, supplies, or service. Any willful violation of this Section shall constitute malfeasance in office; and any officer or employee of the City found guilty thereof shall thereby forfeit his/her officer or position. Any violation of this Section with the knowledge, express or implied, of the person or corporation contracting with the City shall render the contract voidable by the City Manager or the City Council. 
Section 3. - Oath of office. 
    Every officer shall, before entering upon the duties of his/her office, take and subscribe to an official oath as prescribed in Article 16, Section 1 of the Texas Constitution, as amended. Such oath shall be filed as provided by law and kept in the office of the City Clerk. 
Section 4. - Citizens given preference in employment. 
    Except as herein otherwise provided, qualifications being equal, citizens of Groves shall be given preference in employment by the City as well as by any contractor doing work for the City under contract, and such contractors shall pay the prevailing rate of wages paid for the class of work done; and qualifications, prices, and quality of material being equal, citizens of Groves shall be given preference in the awarding of all contracts over which the City has jurisdiction, provided this Section shall not interfere with the system of purchasing supplies for the various departments by competitive bidding. 
Section 5. - Building code. 
    The City Council shall adopt, by ordinance, technical codes that regulate the construction and improvement of buildings and structures within the City. 
Section 6. - Zoning ordinances. 
    For the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals, or general welfare of the City, the Council may by ordinance regulate the location, height, bulk, and size of buildings and other structures, the size of yards, courts, and other open spaces, the density of population, and the uses of buildings, structures, and land for trade, industry, business, residence, or other purposes. 
    Such ordinances may provide that the Zoning Board of Adjustment may, in appropriate cases and subject to appropriate principles, standards, rules, conditions, and safeguards set forth in the ordinances, make special exceptions to the terms of the zoning regulations in harmony with their general purpose and intent. 
    Such ordinances may provide that the Zoning Board of Adjustment may authorize variances from the strict application of the regulations in such situations and subject to such limitations as may be set forth in ordinances. 
    All of the powers granted by Chapter 211 of the Texas Local Government Code, together with existing amendments and all amendments as hereinafter may be made relating to zoning in cities, are hereby adopted and made a part of this Charter. 
Section 7. - Power to remit penalties. 
    The City Council shall have the right to remit, in whole or in part, any fine or penalty belonging to the City which may be imposed under any ordinance or resolution passed in pursuance of this Charter. 
Section 8. - Power to settle claims. 
    The City Council shall have the power to compromise and settle any and all claims and lawsuits of every kind and character in favor of or against the City, including suits by the City to recover delinquent taxes. 
Section 9. - Provisions relating to assignment. 
    The property, real and personal, belonging to the City shall not be liable to be sold or appropriated under any writ, execution, or cost bill. 
    The funds belonging to the City, in the hands of any person, firm, or corporation, shall not be liable to garnishment, attachment, or sequestration; nor shall the City be liable to garnishment on account of any debt it may owe or funds or property it may have on hand or owing to any person. 
    Neither the City nor any of its officers or agents shall be required to answer any such writ of garnishment or any account whatever. 
    The City shall not be obligated to recognize any assignment of wages or funds by its employees, agents, or contractors. 
Section 10. - City not required to give security or execute bond. 
    It shall not be necessary in action, suit, or proceeding in which the City of Groves is a party for any bond, undertaking, or security to be demanded or executed by or on behalf of said City in any of the state courts, but in all such actions, suits, appeals, or proceedings same shall be conducted in the same manner as if such bond, undertaking, or security had been given as required by law, and said City shall be just as liable as if security of bond had been duly executed. 
Section 11. - Notice of claims. 
    Before the City of Groves shall be liable for the death or personal injuries of any person or for damage to, or destruction of, property of any kind, the person injured, if living, or his/her representative, if deceased, or the owner, his/her agent or attorney, of the property damaged or destroyed shall give the City Council notice in writing of such death, injury, damage or destruction, duty verified by affidavit within six (6) months after same has been sustained, stating specifically in such written notice when, where, and how the death, injury, damage or destruction occurred and the apparent extent of any such injury, the amount of damages sustained, the actual residence of the claimant by street and number on the date the claim is presented, the actual residence of such claimant for six (6) months immediately preceding the occurrence of such death, injury, damage or destruction, and the names and addresses of all witnesses upon whom it is relied to establish the claim for damages; and the failure to so notify the Council within the time and manner specified herein shall exonerate, excuse, and exempt the City from any liability whatsoever. No act of any officer or employee of the City shall waive compliance or estop the City from requiring compliance with the provisions of this Section as to notice, except the City Council may waive compliance herewith by resolution duly adopted and evidenced by official minutes. 
Section 12. - Amending the Charter. 
    Amendments to this Charter may be framed and submitted to the electors of the City by a Charter Commission in the manner provided by law for framing and submitting a new Charter. 
    The City Council may, on its own motion, in the absence of a petition, and shall upon the petition of at least ten percent (10%) of the qualified voters of this City, submit any proposed amendment or amendments to this Charter in the manner prescribed by the general law. 
Section 13. - Rearrangement and renumbering. 
    The City Council shall have the power, by ordinance, to renumber and rearrange all Articles, Sections, and paragraphs of the Charter or any amendments thereto as it shall deem appropriate; and upon the passage of any such ordinance, a copy thereof, certified by the City Clerk, shall be forwarded to the Secretary of State for filing. 
Section 14. - Separability clause. 
    If any Section or part of Section of this Charter shall be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the remainder of this Charter, nor the context in which such Section or part of Section so held invalid may appear, except to the extent that an entire Section or part of Section may be inseparably connected in meaning and effect with the Section or part of Section to which such holding shall directly apply. 
Section 15. - Degrees of relationship; nepotism prohibitions. 
    Except as may be permitted by State law, the Mayor, members of the City Council, or the City Manager may not appoint, confirm the appointment of, or vote for appointment or confirmation of the appointment of an individual to a position that is to be directly or indirectly compensated from City funds or fees of office, if the individual is related to the Mayor, the City Councilmember, or the City Manager within the degree prohibited by State law. 
    Provided, however, this provision shall not affect officers or employees who were already employed by the City at the time when and officer, who may be related within the prohibited degree, takes office. 
ARTICLE XVII. - CITY MARSHAL 

Section 1. - General. 
    There shall be an office of City Marshal whose duty shall be to enforce all general and specific laws of the State of Texas and ordinances passed by the City Council in a manner prescribed by the City Council. 
Section 2. - Election and term. 
    The City Marshal shall be elected by the qualified electors at large of the City of Groves for the term of two (2) years. 
    He/She must meet the same qualifications as a candidate for Mayor and will be subject to all provisions in this Charter relating to elected officials. 
    The City Marshal shall serve in his/her capacity as Marshal on a full-time basis. 
Section 3. - Certification. 
    Within six (6) months after his/her election, the City Marshal shall obtain and maintain during his/her tenure of office, a license and certification by the Texas Commission of Law Enforcement Officers Standards and Education for a peace officer. 
Section 4. - Duties. 
    The City Marshal shall be responsible to the City Council for the performance of his/her duties but may be put on report to the Council by the City Attorney, Municipal Court Judge, or City Manager. 
    The City Marshal, or one of his/her deputies, shall be on duty at all times. 
    He/She shall be removable only for incompetence, malfeasance, misfeasance, neglect of duty, or failure to meet the qualifications for office as prescribed by this Charter. 
    He/She shall be removed only by a majority vote of the entire Council but not before serving at least six (6) months of his/her term. 
    If removed he/she may demand that charges against him/her be put in writing, a copy given to him/her, and the right to be heard at a public meeting of the Council within two (2) weeks after charges are filed. The decision of the Council, based upon the results of such public hearing, shall be final. 
    In the event of a vacancy, by removal or otherwise, the unexpired term of office shall be filled by a special election to be held on an authorized uniform election date occurring within forty-five (45) days of the date of the vacancy, unless no uniform election date within such period affords enough time to hold the election in the manner required by law. In that case, the election shall be held on the first authorized uniform election date occurring after the expiration of such period. 
Section 5. - Salary. 
    The salary of the City Marshal shall be determined by the City Council. 
    The equipment and other items deemed necessary for the performance of his/her duties will be furnished by the City Council. 
    He/She may appoint his/her own deputies with the approval of the City Council, and the Council shall set their compensation. 
Section 6. - Powers. 
    The City Marshal shall have all of the powers vested in law enforcement officers by the Constitution of the State of Texas and the Charter of Groves, Texas. 
Section 7. - Interim city marshal. 
    In the event of the death, resignation, incapacity, or removal of the City Marshal, the City Council shall appoint a City Marshal from the Police Department who shall serve until a City Marshal can be duly elected as provided herein. 
CHARTER DISPOSITION TABLE 
    This table shows the disposition of amendments made to the city's charter as compiled in Chapter 1 of this part. 
Ordinance 
Number Date Section Disposition 162  5-12-59 III(1)       Art. I, § 2   (2)       Art. III, § 6   (3)       Art. V, Catchline   (4)       Art. V, § 1   (5)       Art. V, § 2   (6)       Art. V, § 3(1)   (7)       Art. V, § 5   (8)       Art. VA   (9)       Art. VI, § 11  (10)       Art. VII  (11)       Art. IX  (12)       Art. X, § 7  (13)       Art. XV, § 2  (14)       Art. XVI, § 5  (15)       Art. XVI, § 9  (16)       Art. XX  (17)       Art. XXI  (18)       Art. XXII  (19)       Art. XXIII 232 11- 8-61 III(1)       Art. I, § 3   (2)       Art. III, § 2   (3)       Art. III, § 6   (4)       Art. VI, § 11   (5)       Art. XVIII, § 13   (6)       Art. XIXA, § 3 372  9-18-67 I       Art. XV, §§ 1-4       Art. XVIII, § 12 442 11- 4-70 3(1)       Art. VI, § 11  (2)       Art. IV, § 9 493 11- 8-72 3(1)       Art. III, § 6  (2)       Art. III, § 7  (3)       Art. VI, § 2  (4)       Art. VI, § 11  (5)       Art. XI, § 2  (6)       Art. XI, § 14  (7)       Art. XI, § 15  (8)       Art. XIXA, § 2 553 11- 6-74 3       Art. IV, § 3       Art. X, § 5       Art. XVIII, § 2 617  4- 4-77 3A       Art. VII, § 5  B       Art. XII, § 10  C       Art. XIXA, § 6  D       Art. III, § 6(c) 00-02  3- 6-00 1       Rpld Art. I, §§ 1-6       Art. II, §§ 1-4       Art. III, §§ 1-9       Art. IV, §§ 1-9       Art. V, §§ 1-4       Art. VA, § 1       Art. VI, §§ 1-11       Art. VII, §§ 1-5       Art. VIII, §§ 1-11       Art. IX, § 1       Art. X, §§ 1-10       Art. XI, §§ 1-9       Art. XII, §§ 1-11       Art. XIII, §§ 1-3       Art. XIV, §§ 1, 2       Art. XV, §§ 1-4       Art. XVI, §§ 1-12       Art. XVII, §§ 1-6       Art. XVIII, §§ 1-18       Art. XIXA, §§ 1-6       Art. XX, § 1       Art. XXI, § 1       Art. XXII, § 1       Art. XXIII, § 1       Added Art. I, §§ 1-4       Art. II, §§ 1-9       Art. III, §§ 1-9       Art. IV, §§ 1-8       Art. V, §§ 1-4       Art. VI, § 1       Art. VII, §§ 1-10       Art. VIII, §§ 1-4       Art. IX, § 1       Art. X, § 1       Art. XI, §§ 1-10       Art. XII, §§ 1-19       Art. XIII, §§ 1-4       Art. XIV, §§ 1-3       Art. XV, §§ 1-11       Art. XVI, §§ 1-15       Art. XVII, §§ 1-7  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Groves, Texas" and may be so cited. 
Sec. 1-2. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
Sec. 1-3. - Rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council: 
    Generally. Words shall be construed in their common and usual significance unless the contrary is clearly indicated. 
    City. The words "the city" or "this city" shall mean the City of Groves in the County of Jefferson and State of Texas. 
    City manager, city clerk, city marshal or other city officers. The words "city manager", "city clerk", "city marshal" or other city officers or departments shall be construed to mean the city manager, city clerk, city marshal or such other municipal officers or departments, respectively, of the City of Groves, Texas. 
    Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had shall not be counted. 
    Council. Whenever the words "council" or "this council" or "the council" are used, they shall mean the city council of the City of Groves, Texas. 
    County. The term "county" or "this county" shall mean the County of Jefferson, Texas. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision requires or authorizes an officer or employee of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the act or duty unless the terms of the provision specifically designate otherwise. 
    Easement. A right, liberty, privilege or advantage without profit which the owner of one parcel of land may have in the lands of another. A right in the owner of one parcel of land, by reason of such ownership, to use the land of another for a special purpose not inconsistent with a general property interest in the owner. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships, associations and corporations as well as to males. 
    Highway. The term "highway" shall include any street, alley, highway, avenue or public place or square, bridges, viaducts, tunnels, underpasses, overpasses and causeways in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
    Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three (3) or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared. 
    Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
    Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural and any word importing the plural number shall include the singular. 
    Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named herein they shall mean standard time or daylight-saving time as may be in current use in the city. 
    Or, and. "Or" may be read "and", and "and" may be read "or", if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The word "owner", applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, or the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
    Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of the street between the curb, or the lateral line of the roadway and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature or subscription. The words "signature" or "subscription" shall include a mark when a person cannot write. 
    State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Texas. 
    Street. The term "street" shall include any highway, alley, street, avenue or public place or square, bridges, viaducts, underpasses, overpasses, tunnels and causeways in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
    Time. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Written or in writing. The words "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
    Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
Sec. 1-4. - Amendments or additions to Code. 
    All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the city council. 
    Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _______ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Groves, Texas, is hereby amended to read as follows:..." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
    In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Groves, Texas, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _______, which said section reads as follows:..." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
Charter reference- Ordinance enacting clause, Art. X, § 2; when ordinances shall take effect, Art. X, § 8; publication of ordinances, Art. X, §§ 5, 6 and 7. 
Sec. 1-5. - General penalties; continuing violations; concurrent jurisdiction. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine not to exceed the following: 
(1)  Two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for a provision governing fire safety, zoning, or public health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse; and 
(2)  Five hundred dollars ($500.00) in all other cases arising under ordinances of the city. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have concurrent jurisdiction with any justice of the peace in any precinct in which the city is situated in all criminal cases arising under the criminal laws of this state in which punishment is by fine only and where the maximum of such fine may not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) and arising within such corporate limits; provided, however, that no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or a similar offense under the laws of the state. 
(c)  Each day any violation of this Code or ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)  In the event that any such violation is designated as a nuisance under the provisions of this Code, such nuisance may be summarily abated by the police department of the city; provided however; that the imposition of any fine for any such nuisance violation shall not estop any other relief against any such violation available at law. 
(e)  The municipal court has jurisdiction in the forfeiture and final judgment of all bail bonds and personal bonds taken in criminal cases of which the court has jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 88-10, §§ 1-5, 6-13-88) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 88-10, § 1, adopted June 13, 1988, amended § 1-5, to read as set out in subsection (a) herein; ordinance §§ 2-5, being not expressly amendatory of this section, have been included as subsections (b)-(e) at the discretion of the editor. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to prescribe penalties for violation of Code of Ordinances, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St., art. 1195. 
Sec. 1-6. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Governing body, Art. III; city manager, Art. V; city clerk, Art. VA; finance generally, Art. VI; finance administration, Art. VII; law department, Art. XII; administrative departments, Art. XIII; citizens given preference in employment, Art. XVIII, § 5; relatives of mayor, councilmen, or city manager ineligible for appointment or employment, Art. XVIII, § 15; persons indebted to city shall not hold office or employment, Art. XVIII, § 16. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 1, Ord. No. 87-05, adopted Mar. 9, 1987, repealed § 2-1, which adopted Title 28, R.C.S. of Texas, applicable to the city council form of government, which section derived from Ord. No. 9, § 1, adopted June 18, 1953. 
Sec. 2-2. - Salary of mayor. 
    The annual salary of the mayor shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00), payable in equal monthly installments. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 1, 12-1-54) 
Charter reference- Salary of mayor, Art. III, § 3. 
Sec. 2-3. - Salary of councilmen. 
    The salary of the city councilmen shall be ten dollars ($10.00) for each meeting attended, but shall not exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) for any one year, payable monthly as the same accrues, but not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) for any one year as aforesaid. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 2, 11-23-54) 
Charter reference- Salary of councilmen, Art. III, § 3. 
Secs. 2-4-2-13. - Reserved.[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 413, § 1, enacted May 12, 1969, repealed Ord. No. 387, enacted April 1, 1968, codified as § 2-4, pertaining to the placing of city insurance policies. The section has been reserved and added to already reserved sections 2-5-2-13. 

ARTICLE II. - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Zoning regulations authorized, Art. XVIII. 
Cross reference- Zoning ordinance, App. A. 

Sec. 2-14. - Definition. 
    For the purposes of this article, the word "commission" shall mean the planning and zoning commission of the city. 
(Ord. No. 272, § 1, 8-12-63) 
Sec. 2-15. - Created. 
    There is hereby created and established by the city a planning and zoning commission. 
(Ord. No. 272, § 1, 8-12-63) 
Sec. 2-16. - Composition. 
    The commission shall be composed of five (5) regular members and two (2) alternate members who shall serve in the absence of regular members when requested to do so. All matters to be considered by the planning and zoning commission shall be heard by a minimum number of three (3) regular members or alternate members in the absence of regular members. 
(Ord. No. 272, § 1, 8-12-63; Ord. No. 06-20, § 1, 10-16-06) 
Sec. 2-17. - Qualification of members. 
    The members of the commission shall be resident citizens, taxpayers and qualified voters of the city. 
(Ord. No. 272, § 1, 8-12-63) 
Sec. 2-18. - Appointment of members. 
    Members of the commission shall be appointed as follows: One (1) member and two (2) alternate members shall be appointed by the mayor; one (1) member shall be appointed by each of the four (4) city councilmembers; all such appointments shall be subject to confirmation by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 272, § 1, 8-12-63; Ord. No. 564, § 1, 5-5-75; Ord. No. 06-20, § 1, 10-16-06) 
Sec. 2-19. - Term of office. 
    Members of the commission shall serve for terms of two (2) years or until their successors are appointed and qualified. 
(Ord. No. 272, § 1, 8-12-63) 
Sec. 2-20. - Vacancies. 
    All vacancies on the commission shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as provided in this article for the original appointments. All expired terms shall be filled for terms as provided for the original appointments and in the same manner. 
(Ord. No. 272, § 1, 8-12-63) 
Sec. 2-21. - Removal of members. 
    Members of the commission may be removed by the mayor, with the consent of the city council, after public hearing and for cause assigned in writing. 
(Ord. No. 272, § 1, 8-12-63) 
Sec. 2-22. - Members serve without compensation. 
    The members of the commission shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 272, § 1, 8-12-63) 
Sec. 2-23. - Ex officio members. 
    One member of the city council shall serve on the commission as an ex officio member and shall be appointed by the mayor subject to approval of the council. Such ex officio member shall serve for the remainder of his term of office unless removed and another member of the council appointed in his place by the mayor with the approval of the council. 
(Ord. No. 272, § 1, 8-12-63) 
Sec. 2-24. - Officers elected. 
    The commission shall elect a chairman, vice chairman and secretary from its membership. 
(Ord. No. 273, § 3, 8-12-63) 
Sec. 2-25. - Employment of personnel. 
    The commission shall have the power to employ such qualified persons as may be necessary for the proper conduct and undertakings of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 273, § 3, 8-12-63) 
Sec. 2-26. - Authorized expenses. 
    The commission is hereby authorized to pay for the services of employees and to incur other necessary expenses, provided that the costs of such services and expenses shall not exceed the amount appropriated by the city council for the use of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 273, § 3, 8-12-63) 
Sec. 2-27. - Rules, regulations, bylaws. 
    The commission shall have the power to make rules, regulations and bylaws for its own government which shall conform as nearly as possible with those governing the city council, and the same shall be subject to the approval of such council. Such bylaws shall include, among other items, provisions for: 
(a)  Regular and special meetings open to the public. 
(b)  Records of its proceedings to be open for inspection by the public. 
(c)  Reporting to the governing body and the public from time to time and annually. 
(d)  Holding of public hearings on its recommendations. 
(Ord. No. 273, § 3, 8-12-63) 
Sec. 2-28. - Powers and duties generally. 
    The commission shall have the power, and it shall be its duty, to make and recommend for adoption a master plan, as a whole or in parts, for the future development and redevelopment of the municipality and its environs. It shall also have power, and it shall be its duty, to prepare a comprehensive plan and ordinance for zoning the city in accordance with Chapter 283, Acts of the regular session of the Legislature 1927 (Arts. 1011a to 1011j RCS of Texas 1925) and amendments thereto. The commission shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by applicable provisions of this Code, by city ordinance, rule or regulation, or by state law. 
(Ord. No. 272, § 4, 8-12-63) 
Sec. 2-29. - Fees-Zoning ordinance amendment; specific use permit application. 
    Each application or request by a property owner to the Groves City Planning and Zoning Commission for an amendment to the zoning ordinance of the City of Groves as contained in the Code of Ordinances of the city and each application or request for a specific use permit to the Groves City Planning and Zoning Commission shall be accompanied by a fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) to cover administrative and processing costs, as provided in section 10-506 and section 14-102 of the said zoning ordinance as contained in the Code of Ordinances; provided, however, that if the applicant withdraws his application or request prior to publication of public hearing by the city council, one-half (1/2) of the fee shall be refunded. 
(Ord. No. 501, § 1, 5-7-73; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 8-21-78; Ord. No. 8612, § 1, 2-24-86) 
Note- See ed. note, § 2-30. 
Sec. 2-30. - Same-Appeals from decision or judgment on zoning ordinance. 
    Any person aggrieved, or any official or department of the governing body of the city affected by any decision or judgment of the building official concerning interpretation or administration of the zoning ordinance of the city, who appeals such decision or judgment to the board of adjustment shall pay a fee of seventy dollars ($70.00) to the city before such appeal shall be considered perfected. Such fee is hereby established in accordance with the provisions of section 11-102 of the zoning ordinance of the city as contained in the Code of Ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 501, § 2, 5-7-73; Ord. No. 684, § 1, 10-1-79; Ord. No. 86-12, § 2, 2-24-86) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 501, not expressly amending the Code, was added as §§ 2-29 and 2-30 at the editor's discretion. 
Sec. 2-31. - Purchasing limits. 
(a)  The city manager shall have authority to approve expenditures for budgeted items not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). 
(b)  Purchases or expenditures exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) shall be approved in advance by the city council; however, expenditures for employee payroll and payroll related expenses, utility payments, debt payments and non-discretionary expenses required by the state or federal government shall be exempt from this requirement of prior council approval. 
(c)  In the event the city manager determines that an urgent public necessity exists, the cost of which does not exceed the constitutional and statutory requirement for competitive bidding, the city manager may authorize the necessary expenditures without prior approval of the city council. Any such expenditure(s) shall be presented to the city council, with an explanation of the urgent public necessity, for approval at the first regular meeting of the city council following the date the expenditure was authorized. 
(d)  Checks for expenditures exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), excluding payroll related checks, must be hand-signed by the mayor and the city manager, or other city officials duly authorized to sign in their absence. 
(Ord. No. 00-03, § 1, 3-6-00) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 00-03, § 1, adopted March 6, 2000, did not specifically amend the Code. Hence its inclusion as section 2-31 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Charter reference- Finance administration, Art. VIII, § 4 
Secs. 2-32-2-38. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EMPLOYEE BENEFITS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference- Group insurance plans for city employees, Art. XXII. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-39. - City to provide legal defense for employee under certain circumstances. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be of [and] in the public interest to provide, and the City of Groves shall hereafter provide, for the legal defense of any elected or appointed public official and any employee of the city who may be sued individually for any act or omission arising out of or connected with the good faith performance by such individual of his official duties with or employment by the City of Groves, including all costs and charges of every kind and character entailed in connection with such legal defense. Further, if any such suit should result in an award of damages against any such official or employee, the City of Groves shall indemnify such official or employee for the amount of such damages. 
(b)  It is understood, however, that this authorization for legal defense and indemnity shall not extend to acts which are personal to the official or employee of the city or in which the city has no interest or in which it may have an adverse interest. 
(Ord. No. 567, § 1, 6-2-75) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 567, §§ 1-3, adopted June 2, 1976, did not specifically amend the Code, hence codification as §§ 2-39-2-41 was at editor's discretion. 
Sec. 2-40. - Purchase of insurance. 
    The purchase of insurance to cover any of the matters provided for in section 2-39 hereof is hereby authorized. 
(Ord. No. 567, § 2, 6-2-75) 
Note- See editor's note following § 2-39. 
Sec. 2-41. - Tax levy to provide for payment of obligation. 
    There is hereby levied and there shall be annually levied, assessed, and collected in due time, form and manner, and at the same time as other city taxes are levied, assessed and collected, in each year, a continuing direct annual ad valorem tax upon all taxable property in the City of Groves, sufficient to create and provide a sinking fund, as provided by the constitution and laws of the State of Texas, to provide for the payment of this obligation, together with all interest thereon. 
(Ord. No. 567, § 3, 6-2-75) 
Note- See editor's note following § 2-39. 
Cross reference- Taxation, Ch. 23. 
Secs. 2-42, 2-43. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STATE RETIREMENT PROGRAM 

Sec. 2-44. - Election to participate. 
    On behalf of the city, the city council hereby exercises its option and elects to have the city and all of the employees of all departments participate in the Texas Municipal Retirement System as provided in Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes, Title 110B, section 61.001 et seq., and all of the benefits and obligations of such system are hereby accepted. 
(Ord. No. 150, § 1, 11-24-58; Ord. No. 87-05, § 2, 3-9-87) 
Sec. 2-45. - Employees included. 
    Each person who becomes an employee of any participating department on or after the effective date of participation of such department shall be included within and subject to the provisions of the Texas Municipal Retirement System beginning upon the date such person becomes an "employee," as defined in Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes, Title 110B, section 6.1001(8). 
(Ord. No. 150, § 3, 11-24-58; Ord. No. 87-05, § 3, 3-9-87) 
Sec. 2-46. - Addition or discontinuance of participants. 
    The city may in the future refuse to add new departments or new employees to the Texas Municipal Retirement System, but shall never discontinue as to any participants. 
(Ord. No. 150, § 3, 11-24-58) 
State Law reference- Similar state law, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St., Title 110B, § 62.006(a). 
Sec. 2-47. - Remittance and reports to board of trustees. 
    The city clerk is hereby directed to remit to the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, at its office in Austin, Texas, the city's proper contributions to the system and the amounts which shall be deducted from the compensation or payroll of employees, all as required by such board under the provisions of Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes, Title 110B, section 61.001 et seq., and the city clerk is hereby authorized and directed to ascertain and certify officially, on behalf of the city, the prior service rendered to the municipality by each of the employees of the participating departments, and the average prior service compensation received by each, and to make and execute all other reports and certificates, which may be required by the city under the provisions of Title 110B, section 61.001 et seq., referred to in this section, or the rules and regulations of the Board of Trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System. 
(Ord. No. 150, § 5, 11-24-58; Ord. No. 87-05, § 4, 3-9-87) 
Sec. 2-48. - Maximum earnings for purpose of system. 
    The total earnings (base salary), which may be paid by the City of Groves to any of its employees who are members of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, shall be considered in calculating the amount to be withheld and the deposits and contributions to be made to the Texas Municipal Retirement System by reason of current service rendered by such employee to this city. 
(Ord. No. 150, § 4, 11-24-58; Ord. No. 489, 10-9-72) 
Sec. 2-49. - Deposits to the system. 
    Effective January 1, 1974, all employees of the City of Groves who are members of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, shall make deposits to the system at the rate of five per cent (5%) of their individual earnings. However, this rate shall not be applied to earnings in excess of the maximum earnings subject to retirement deductions as fixed by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 516, 9-24-73) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 516, adopted Sept. 24, 1973, did not expressly amend this Code, but has been included herein by the editors as superseding former § 2-49, which provided for employee deposits to the system at the rate of 3% of earnings and was derived from Ord. No. 150, § 4, adopted Nov. 24, 1958. 
Sec. 2-50. - Mandatory retirement. 
(a)  Every employee of the city shall be retired from employment with the city in accordance with federal law. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  The provisions of this section are for the purpose of regulating the period of service of city employees. Except insofar as such regulation affects the eligibility for benefits under the Texas Municipal Retirement System of such employees by reason of length of service, this section is not intended to affect or regulate the rights of employees to retirement benefits under such system. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 1, 10-12-59; Ord. No. 429, § 1, 5-11-70; Ord. No. 87-05, § 5, 3-9-87) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 429, § 1, repealed former subsection (b) of § 2-50. The subsection has been reserved to conform to the code format. 
Secs. 2-51-2-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SOCIAL SECURITY 

Sec. 2-56. - Execution of agreements. 
(a)  The city council acting for and on behalf of the city shall enter into all necessary agreements with the state department of public welfare for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of applicable state and federal laws relative to federal old age and survivors' insurance benefits for employees of the city. 
(b)  The mayor is hereby appointed as agent of the city council and of the city to execute all necessary agreements and instruments for and in behalf of said city council and city. 
(Ord. No. 70, §§ 1, 2, 3-14-55) 
State Law reference- Social security coverage for municipal employees, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 695g. 
Sec. 2-57. - Duties of city clerk. 
    The city clerk is hereby directed to be the person responsible for making assessments, collections, payments and reports, as required by the Employees Retirement System of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 70, § 3, 3-14-55; Ord. No. 87-05, § 6, 3-9-87) 
Sec. 2-58. - Fund established. 
    A sufficient sum of money shall be allocated and set aside from available funds for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of the above-mentioned acts, such money so allocated and set aside to be known as the City of Groves Social Security Fund, which fund shall be set aside and maintained in the regular city depository. 
(Ord. No. 70, § 4, 3-14-55) 
Secs. 2-59-2-64. - Reserved. 
Chapter 3 - ADVERTISING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Amusement rides conducted for advertising purposes, § 21-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 3-1-3-11. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HANDBILLS, CIRCULARS AND SAMPLES 

Sec. 3-12. - Voluntary acceptance required. 
(a)  Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, cast, distribute, scatter, deposit or place upon any public place within the city, including streets, alleys, public parks and school grounds, any handbill, dodger, circular, paper, booklet, poster, card, newspaper, or any other printed matter or literature, except that the same may be personally delivered to those who are willing to accept the same. 
(b)  Samples, devices, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, cast, distribute, scatter, deposit or place upon any public place within the city, including streets, alleys, public parks and school grounds, any advertising literature of any kind, or any advertising sample or device, except that the same may be personally delivered to those who are willing to accept the same. 
(Ord. No. 25, § 1, 10-22-53) 
Sec. 3-13. - Exclusions from article provisions; newspaper defined. 
(a)  This article shall not be deemed to prohibit the distribution of United States Mail, nor the delivery of any newspaper to any subscriber thereof or to any person who has requested the delivery of the same, nor to the sale of separate copies thereof. 
(b)  The term "newspaper," as herein used, shall be construed to mean a newspaper of general circulation as the same is defined in Article 28a of Vernon's Annotated Revised Civil Statutes of the State of Texas, as amended. 
Secs. 3-14-3-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SIGNS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Unauthorized signs in the view of a vehicle operator on streets or highways, § 25-122; electrical code requirements regarding electric signs, § 29-136 et seq. 

Sec. 3-26. - Political signs-Permitted; time limits. 
    Political signs in the city shall be permitted for a period of sixty (60) days before any election, on private property and on property maintained by the property owner. Said signs shall be removed within two (2) days after any such election. Such signs shall be placed at least three (3) feet behind the curb on a street with a curb, and three (3) feet behind the back slope of the side drainage ditch on streets without curbs. The placing of such signs less than three (3) feet behind the curb and less than three (3) feet behind the back slope of the drainage ditch shall be unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 289, § 1, 3-27-64; Ord. No. 86-17, § 1, 6-2-86) 
Sec. 3-27. - Same-Size limitation. 
    For the purposes of this article, political signs shall not be larger than four (4) feet by eight (8) feet in size. 
(Ord. No. 289, § 2, 3-27-64) 
Sec. 3-28. - Same-Placement limitation. 
    Political signs permitted under this article shall be placed so as not to obstruct the view at intersections and/or driveways. 
(Ord. No. 289, § 2, 3-27-64) 
Sec. 3-29. - Same-Billboards excluded. 
    The provisions of this article are limited to political signs that are not exhibited on permanent billboards. 
(Ord. No. 289, § 3, 3-27-64) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Coin-operated machines regulated, § 21-35 et seq.; poolrooms regulated, § 21-93 et seq., transporting alcoholic beverages by taxicab, § 24-9. 
State Law reference- Alcoholic Beverages Code, §§ 11.38(c), 61.36(cc). 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, all definitions of words, terms, and phrases as set forth in the Texas Liquor Control Act are hereby adopted and made a part hereof. 
(Ord. No. 325, § 1, 12-18-61) 
Sec. 4-2. - Permit to manufacture, sell, distribute, etc. 
    No person shall manufacture, sell, distribute, or store any intoxicating liquor, malt liquor or other alcoholic beverage, or engage in any other activity with relation to the same for which a permit is required by the Texas Liquor Control Act, within the city, without first obtaining a license so to do from the city. The fee for such license shall be an amount equal to one-half (1/2) the permit or license fee charged by the state under the Texas Liquor Control Act. 
State Law reference- Permit and license fees authorized, Alcoholic Beverage Code, §§ 11.38, 61.36. 
Sec. 4-3. - Prerequisites to issuance of permit. 
    No permit required under the terms of this chapter shall be issued to any person until he shows that he holds a state permit for the particular phase of the liquor traffic in which he desires to engage in the city and until the fee required by said city for such permit has been paid to the city. 
Sec. 4-4. - Duration of permit. 
    All permits issued under the terms of this chapter shall expire at the time shown in the state permit presented by the applicant. If the permit sought is issued for a period of time less than one year, only a proportionate part of the annual fee shall be exacted and collected; provided, however, a fractional part of any month shall be counted as one month in calculating the fee which is to be paid. 
Sec. 4-5. - Sales near public school, church or public hospital. 
(a)  The city council of the City of Groves hereby adopts regulations applicable in the city for the sale of alcoholic beverages by a dealer whose place of business is within three hundred (300) feet of a church, public school or public hospital. 
(b)  The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the church or public hospital shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door, and in a direct line across intersections. The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the public school shall be from the nearest property line of the public school to the nearest doorway by which the public may enter the place of business, along street lines and in a direct line across intersections. For any permit or license covering a premise where minors are prohibited from entering the premises under Section 109.53 of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, the measurement of the distance between the premises and a public school shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door, and in a direct line across intersections. 
(c)  Every applicant for an original alcoholic beverage license or permit for a location with a door by which the public may enter the place of business of the applicant that is within one thousand (1,000) feet of the nearest property line of a public school, measured along street lines and directly across intersections, must give written notice of the application to officials of the public school before filing the application with the commission. A copy of the notice must be submitted to the commission with the application. This subsection (c) does not apply to a permit or license covering a premise where minors are prohibited from entering the premises under Section 109.53 of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code. 
(d)  As to any dealer who held a license or permit on September 1, 1983, in a location where a regulation under this section was in effect on that date, for purposes of subsection (a), but not subsection (c), of this section, the measurement of the distance between the place of business of the dealer and a public school shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door, and in a direct line across intersections. This subsection applies only as long as the place of business is continuously in operation from that date, whether or not under the same license or permit. 
(e)  The city council may also allow variances to the regulation if it determines that enforcement of the regulation in a particular instance is not in the best interest of the public, constitutes waste or inefficient use of land or other resources, creates an undue hardship on an applicant for a license or permit, does not serve its intended purpose, is not effective or necessary, or for any other reason the city council, after consideration of the health, safety and welfare of the public and the equities of the situation, determines is in the best interest of the community. 
(Ord. No. 313, § 1, 4-19-65; Ord. No. 87-06, § 1, 3-9-87; Ord. No. 90-08, § 1, 8-6-90) 
State Law reference- Authority to restrict location of sale, Alcoholic Beverage Code, § 109.33. 
Sec. 4-6. - Areas where sale of beer and wine permitted for consumption on premises. 
    The sale of beer [or wine] by retailers for consumption on the premises where sold within the city shall be unlawful and permitted only in the following areas or zones: 
(a)  Being a tract of land out of and a part of Lot 16, in Block 1 of Country Club Estates and Country Club Estates Replat, as the same appears upon the map or plat thereof, on file and of record in Volume 5, Pages 109-110 Map Records of Jefferson County, Texas, said tract being more particularly described by metes and bounds as follows, to wit: 
Beginning at a point which lies North 41 degrees, 13 minutes East a distance of 519.70 feet, and North 48 degrees, 47 minutes West a distance of 148.20 feet from the Southwest corner of said Lot 16, Block 1 of Country Club Estates and Country Club Estates Replat, said point being at the Northwest corner of an existing brick and frame building, and being the point of beginning of the tract described herein; 
Thence North 41 degrees, 13 minutes East along the outside wall of said building a distance of 38.50 feet to point for corner; 
Thence South 48 degrees, 47 minutes East into said building, a distance of 30.30 feet to point for corner; 
Thence South 41 degrees, 13 minutes West a distance of 4.10 feet to point for corner; 
Thence South 48 degrees, 47 minutes East a distance of 5.70 feet to point for corner; 
Thence South 41 degrees, 13 minutes West a distance of 23.80 feet to point for corner; 
Thence North 48 degrees, 47 minutes West a distance of 12.00 feet to point for corner; 
Thence South 41 degrees, 13 minutes West a distance of 10.60 feet to point for corner on the outside westerly wall of said building; 
Thence North 48 degrees, 47 minutes West along the westerly outside wall of said building, a distance of 24.00 feet to the point of beginning, and being that area of said building now being used as a serving and dining area within said building; and being further described as Larry's French Market & Cajun Cafeteria, 3701 Pure Atlantic Highway, Groves, Texas. 
(b)  Reserved. (Repealed by Ord. No. 88-03, § 1, adopted April 4, 1988) 
(c)  Reserved. (Repealed by Ord. No. 88-17, § 1, adopted July 25, 1988) 
(d)  Reserved. (Repealed by Ord. No. 87-26, § 1, adopted June 15, 1987) 
(e)  Reserved. (Repealed by Ord. No. 802, § 1, adopted December 20, 1982) 
(f)  Reserved. 
(g)  On the north right-of-way of Townsend Road, beginning at the most southerly corner of Lot 2, Block 8, Range E of the Port Arthur Land Company Survey, thence North 48 degrees, 47 minutes West a distance of twenty (20) feet; thence North 41 degrees, 13 minutes East a distance of one hundred ten (110) feet, said point being the beginning point of a tract of land on which is located the Port Groves Golf Course Clubhouse; thence North 48 degrees, 47 minutes West a distance of one hundred fifty (150) feet; thence North 41 degrees, 13 minutes East a distance of seventy-five (75) feet; thence South 47 degrees, 48 minutes East a distance of one hundred fifty (150) feet; thence South 41 degrees, 13 minutes West a distance of seventy-five (75) feet to the point of beginning. 
(h)  A tract of land out of and a part of Lots Numbered Three (3) and Four (4) in Block Number Seven (7), Range F of the lands of the Port Arthur Land Company Survey according to the recorded plat thereof filed in Volume 1, Page 22, of the Map Records of Jefferson County, Texas, and being more fully described by metes and bounds as follows, to wit: 
Beginning at a point in the South right-of-way line of the City of Port Arthur Storm Levee, said point lying North 41 degrees, 13 minutes East two hundred thirty (230) feet and South 48 degrees, 47 minutes East one hundred twenty (120) feet from the common corner of Lots 3, 4, 5 and 6, Block 7, Range F of the lands of the Port Arthur Land Company Survey, said point being the point of beginning of the tract of land herein described; 
Thence, South 48 degrees, 47 minutes East along the west right-of-way line of a fifty-foot wide drainage channel easement a distance of 332.64 feet to a point for second corner in the northerly right-of-way line of State Highway 73; 
Thence, South 62 degrees, 31 minutes 18 seconds West along the northerly right-of-way line of State Highway 73 a distance of 217.51 feet to a point for third corner; 
Thence, continuing along the northerly right-of-way line of State Highway 73 on a bearing of South 52 degrees, 13 minutes West a distance of 475.0 feet to a point for fourth corner; 
Thence, continuing along the northerly right-of-way line of State Highway 73 on a bearing of North 78 degrees, 33 minutes 33 seconds West a distance of 187.47 feet to a point for fifth corner, said point lying in the easterly right-of-way line of State Highway 347, said point also lying in the southerly right-of-way line of the City of Port Arthur Storm Levee; 
Thence, following along the southerly right-of-way line of the City of Port Arthur Storm Levee on a bearing of North 41 degrees, 13 minutes East a distance of 762.0 feet to the point of beginning of the tract of land herein described, containing 3.7650 acres of land. 
(i)  Reserved. (Repealed by Ord. No. 600, adopted Sept. 20, 1976) 
(j)  Reserved. (Repealed by Ord. No. 531, adopted March 11, 1974) 
(k)  Reserved. (Repealed by Ord. No. 87-01, § 1, adopted Jan. 12, 1987) 
(l)  Reserved. (Repealed by Ord. No. 550, adopted November 4, 1974) 
(m)  The East three hundred thirty feet (E. 330') of the South Half (S 1/2) of Lot Number Nine (9) in Block Number Three (3) of Country Club Estates and Country Club Estates Replat, in Jefferson County, Texas, as same appears upon the map or plat thereof in the county clerk's office of Jefferson County, Texas. 
(n)  Reserved. (Repealed by Ord. No. 716, § 1, adopted Sept. 15, 1980) 
(o)  Begin at the Southwest corner of Lot Number Four (4) in Block Number Eight (8), Range F of the lands of the Port Arthur Land Company Survey, Jefferson County, Texas; 
Thence, North 41 degrees, 13 minutes East a distance of 68 feet; 
Thence, North 48 degrees, 47 minutes West a distance of 320 feet to a point for corner; said point being in the East right-of-way line of State Highway 347 and also being the point of beginning of the tract of land herein described; 
Thence, North 41 degrees, 13 minutes East a distance of 210 feet to a point for corner; 
Thence, North 48 degrees, 47 minutes West a distance of 130 feet to a point for corner; 
Thence, South 41 degrees, 13 minutes West a distance of 210 feet to a point for corner in the East right-of-way line of State Highway 347; 
Thence, South 48 degrees, 47 minutes East a distance of 130 feet along the East right-of-way line of State Highway 347 to the point of beginning. 
(p)  Reserved. (Repealed by Ord. No. 87-40, § 1, adopted December 14, 1987) 
(q)  Reserved. (Repealed by Ord. No. 88-02, § 1, adopted March 21, 1988) 
(r)  Reserved. (Repealed by Ord. No. 86-21, § 1, adopted July 28, 1986) 
(s)  Reserved. (Repealed by Ord. No. 01-01, § 1, adopted February 12, 2001) 
(t)  Reserved. (Repealed by Ord. No. 94-13, § 1, adopted September 26, 1994) 
(u)  Reserved. (Repealed by Ord. No. 01-01, § 2, adopted February 12, 2001) 
(v)  A part of Lot Number Five (Pt. of 5) in Block Number Seven (7), Range F of the lands of the Port Arthur Land Company, being more fully described by metes and bounds as follows, to wit: 
Commencing at the common corner of Lot 5, Block 7, Range F, Lot 8, Block 7, Range G, Lot 4, Block 8, Range F, and Lot 1, Block 8, Range G of the Port Arthur Land Company Survey; 
Thence, South 48 degrees, 47 minutes East a distance of 276.55 feet to a point for turn; 
Thence, North 41 degrees, 13 minutes East a distance of 131.00 to the point of beginning of the tract of land herein described; 
Thence, South 48 degrees, 47 minutes East a distance of 68.00 feet to a point for corner; 
Thence, North 41 degrees, 13 minutes East a distance of 54.00 feet to a point for corner; 
Thence, North 48 degrees, 47 minutes West a distance of 68.00 feet to a point for corner; 
Thence, South 41 degrees, 13 minutes West a distance of 54.00 feet to the point of beginning of the tract of land herein described; and being further designated as 4700 Twin City Highway, Groves, Texas. 
(w)  Reserved. (Repealed by Ord. No. 90-02, § 1, adopted April 16, 1990) 
(x)  Chris Roark Lions Park, subject to and only upon the granting and issuance of a special event temporary permit granted by the city council upon terms and conditions established by the city council, said property being fully described as follows, to-wit: 
Lots numbered one through twelve, inclusive, (1-12, incl.) and lots fourteen through twenty-four, inclusive (14-24, incl.) in Block Number Two (2) of The Groves, a Subdivision in Jefferson County, Texas, as the same appears upon the map or plat thereof, on file and of record in Office of the County Clerk of Jefferson County, Texas, at Beaumont; 
Also all that certain triangular tract of land out of and a part of and being the Southwesterly corner of the 9.94 acre tract of land in the Joseph Grigsby League in Jefferson County, Texas, conveyed by J. C. Beaumont, and wife, to T. B. Jordan, by Deed dated January 5, 1937, as same now appears of record in Volume 426, page 516, Deed Records of Jefferson County, Texas, which record is hereby referred to for all aid in description. The triangular tract of land now herein sold and conveyed being that tract of land cut off from the aforesaid 9.94 acre tract, and lying Westerly or Southwesterly of the new County Road, an extension of Grant Avenue, of The Groves, in Jefferson County, Texas, as said new road right-of-way is conveyed to Jefferson County, by Deed dated October 10, 1944, and now here referred to for location of said road and the triangular tract of land now conveyed being otherwise described as bounded on the West by the West line of the aforesaid 9.94 acre tract, on the South by the South line of the said 9.94 acre tract, and on the Northeast by the Road formed by the conveyance of a 50-foot strip of land to Jefferson County, Texas, as aforesaid, according to the recorded plat thereof, on file and of record in the Office of the County Clerk of Jefferson County, Texas, at Beaumont. 
(Ord. No. 139, § 1, 6-30-57; Ord. No. 202, § 1, 5-10-60; Ord. No. 356, § 1, 9-19-66; Ord. No. 393, § 2(3), 8-19-68; Ord. No. 446, § 1, 3-1-71; Ord. No. 465, § 1, 12-7-71; Ord. No. 475, § 1, 3-3-72; Ord. No. 519, § 1, 10-8-73; Ord. No. 529, § 1, 1-14-74; Ord. No. 530, § 1, 3-11-74; Ord. No. 531, § 1, 3-11-74; Ord. No. 532, § 1, 3-25-74; Ord. No. 553, § 1, 3-25-74; Ord. No. 550, § 1, 11-4-74; Ord. No. 570, § 1, 8-11-75; Ord. No. 601, § 1, 10-4-76; Ord. No. 606, § 1, 11-1-76; Ord. No. 611, § 1, 1-10-77; Ord. No. 651, § 1, 6-26-78; Ord. No. 661, § 1, 10-2-78; Ord. No. 188, § 1, 11-12-79; Ord. No. 694, § 1, 2-4-80; Ord. No. 695, § 1, 2-18-80; Ord. No. 696, § 1, 2-18-80; Ord. No. 716, § 1, 9-15-80; Ord. No. 720, § 1, 9-29-80; Ord. No. 732, § 1, 12-22-80; Ord. No. 733, § 1, 12-22-80; Ord. No. 734, § 1, 12-22-80; Ord. No. 736, § 1, 1-19-81; Ord. No. 738, § 1, 2-2-81; Ord. No. 739, § 1, 2-2-81; Ord. No. 740, § 1, 3-2-81; Ord. No. 761, § 1, 11-23-81; Ord. No. 765, § 1, 1-18-82; Ord. No. 766, § 1, 3-15-82; Ord. No. 767, § 1, 3-29-82; Ord. No. 802, § 1, 12-20-82; Ord. No. 85-01, § 1, 1-14-85; Ord. No. 85-23, § 1, 12-16-85; Ord. No. 86-21, § 1, 7-28-86; Ord. No. 87-01, § 1, 1-12-87; Ord. No. 87-19, § 1, 3-9-87; Ord. No. 87-26, § 1, 6-15-87; Ord. No. 87-40, § 1, 12-14-87; Ord. No. 88-01, § 1, 2-8-88; Ord. No. 88-02, § 1, 3-21-88; Ord. No. 88-03, § 1, 4-4-88; Ord. No. 88-09, § 1, 6-13-88; Ord. No. 88-17, § 1, 7-25-88; Ord. No. 88-19, § 1, 8-8-88; Ord. No. 89-02, § 1, 2-6-89; Ord. No. 90-02, § 1, 4-16-90; Ord. No. 90-04, § 1, 4-30-90; Ord. No. 91-13, § 1, 8-5-91; Ord. No. 94-13, § 1, 9-26-94; Ord. No. 97-18, § 1, 12-29-97; Ord. No. 00-06, § 1, 4-3-00; Ord. No. 01-01, §§ 1, 2, 2-12-01; Ord. No. 2009-02, § 1, 2-2-09) 
Editor's note- Section 4-6 is derived from and has been amended by the ordinances listed in the history note following said section. The extent of the amendment precludes editorial analysis. 
 Ord. No. 2009-02, § 1, adopted February 2, 2009, changed the title of section 4-6 from "Areas where sale of beer permitted for consumption on premises" to "Areas where sale of beer and wine permitted for consumption on premises." 
Sec. 4-7. - Hours for sale of beer and wine. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell beer, or offer the same for sale, for on-premises consumption: 
(1)  On Sunday at any time between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Monday following. 
(2)  On any day except Sunday at any time between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. 
(b)  Provided however that the provisions of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code providing that the holder of a retail dealer's on-premises late hours license allowing extended hours and Sunday sales of beer and wine for on-premises consumption in public places until 2:00 a.m. are hereby adopted by the city. The penalty for violation of this subsection shall be the same as provided by state law. 
(c)  The sale of beer shall be allowed for off-premises consumption on Sunday between the hours of 12:00 noon and 12:00 midnight by the holder of a retail dealer's off-premises license. 
(Ord. No. 235, § 2, 12-18-61; Ord. No. 556, § 1, 11-18-74; Ord. No. 582, § 2, 12-16-75; Ord. No. 585, § 2, 1-26-76; Ord. No. 84-23, §§ 1, 3, 12-17-84) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate hours of beer sales, V.T.C.A. Alcoholic Beverage Code, § 109.32(a)(2). 
Sec. 4-8. - Hours of consumption-Generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage in any public place, or for any person to possess any alcoholic beverage in any public place for the purpose of consuming the same in such public place, at any time on Sunday between the hours of 1:15 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following Monday morning, and on all other days at any time between the hours of 12:15 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.; provided, however, that hours of consumption of beer and wine shall be subject to the time limitations set out in section 105.06(c) of the state Alcoholic Beverage Code. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Ord. No. 87-06, § 2, 3-9-87) 
State Law reference- Similar state law, V.T.C.A. Alcoholic Beverage Code, § 105.06. 
Sec. 4-9. - Same-Private clubs. 
    In the City of Groves the holders of private club registration permits or licenses or the holders of mixed beverage permits or licenses for private clubs or public places under the Texas Liquor Control Act shall be governed and controlled by the provisions of said act, and regulations thereunder. 
    The provisions of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code providing that the holder of a private club late hours permit may allow persons to consume or be served alcoholic beverages on club premises until 2:00 a.m. are hereby adopted by the City of Groves. The penalty for violation of this section shall be the same as provided by state law. 
(Ord. No. 477, § 1, 4-24-72; Ord. No. 581, § 2, 12-16-75; Ord. No. 586, §§ 2-4, 1-26-76; Ord. No. 84-23, §§ 1, 3, 12-17-84) 
Sec. 4-10. - Consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages on street, sidewalk or park prohibited unless permitted by special event temporary permit. 
    Unless a special event temporary permit has been granted by the city council, it shall be unlawful to consume, or to possess for the purpose of consumption' any alcoholic beverage (as defined by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, or subsequent amendments thereto), while on any street, sidewalk or other public way, or in any park in the city. 
    Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to the provisions of section 1-5. 
(Ord. No. 2009-02, §§ 2, 3, 2-2-09) 
Secs. 4-11-4-18. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 3, Ord. No. 87-06, adopted Mar. 9, 1987, repealed §§ 4-10-4-18, relative to drunkenness, intoxication and consumption, sale, purchase and possession of alcoholic beverages and unlawful conduct on premises where sold. Such sections contained no historical notation and are presumed adopted with the adoption of this Code. 
Chapter 5 - ANIMALS AND FOWL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Health and sanitation generally, Ch. 13; application of traffic regulations to person riding animals or driving animal drawn vehicles, § 25-6. 
State Law reference- Duties of officers, V.T.C.A. Agric. Code, §§ 143.031, 143.080; sale of impounded stock, §§ 143.029, 143.032, 143.081, fees for sale of impounded stock, § 143.031. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5-1. - Report of rabid animals. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner or harborer of any animal, and any practicing veterinarian, to report to the city health officer all cases of rabies with which he comes into contact or to which his attention has been directed. This report shall be made immediately upon diagnosis or suspicion of such cases of rabies. 
Sec. 5-2. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined in a sum not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) 
(Ord. No. 538, § 8, 4-8-74) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 538, § 8, adopted April 8, 1974, amended § 5-101 by making the penalty provisions applicable to the entire Chapter 5, whereas formerly § 5-101 set out the penalty for violation of Art. VI only. In this regard the editors, at their discretion, have deleted said former § 5-101 and designated the provisions of § 8 of Ord. No. 538 as new § 5-2 in order to preserve Code format. 
Sec. 5-3. - Snakes and other reptiles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any snake or other reptile in captivity on any premises in the City of Groves except in a cage or other enclosure constructed in such a manner as to prevent their escape therefrom. 
(b)  Any person who keeps or harbors any snake or other reptile in captivity on any premises in the City of Groves shall not allow any such snake or reptile outside a cage or other enclosure at any time. 
(c)  Any snake or other reptile found outside a cage or other enclosure may be captured or destroyed by any police officer or humane officer of the city whether on private or public property. 
(Ord. No. 559, §§ 1-3, 3-10-75) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 559, §§ 1-3, adopted March 10, 1975, being nonamendatory of this Code, was codified as § 5-3 at the discretion of the editors. 
Sec. 5-4. - Keeping wild animals within the city. 
(a)  Definition. A "wild animal" shall mean and include any mammal, amphibian, reptile or fowl, which is of a species which is wild by nature, and of a species which, due to size, vicious nature, or other characteristic, is dangerous to human beings. Such animals shall include, but not be limited to, lions, tigers, leopards, panthers, ocelots, wildcats, bears, wolves, raccoons, skunks (whether deodorized or not), apes, gorillas, monkeys, foxes, elephants, rhinoceros, alligators, crocodiles, and all forms of poisonous reptiles. The term "wild animals," as used in this section, shall not include gerbils, hamsters, guinea pigs, mice, or rabbits. 
(b)  Nonapplicability to veterinary treatment. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the keeping of wild animals for treatment in a facility operated by a veterinarian licensed by the State of Texas. 
(c)  Prohibition; exception. It shall be unlawful within the corporate boundaries of the city for a person or persons to possess, keep, or maintain any wild animal; except, that such possessing, keeping, or maintaining by circuses, zoos, or educational institutions for purposes of study or exhibition, in accordance with such regulations as shall be established, is not prohibited. 
(d)  Enforcement. The city humane officer or any police officer shall seize all animals found in violation of this section and impound all such animals at the city animal shelter or in a facility operated by a veterinarian licensed by the State of Texas. If within seven (7) days the owner of such animal does not locate a facility for housing the animal outside the city limits, said animal shall be destroyed. 
(e)  Fees. If the wild animal is impounded in the city animal shelter, the impoundment fee shall be the same as provided in section 5-47 of the Code of Ordinances. If, however, the animal is impounded in a facility operated by a veterinarian as provided herein, the owner shall pay a fifty dollar ($50.00) impoundment fee to the city and shall pay the veterinarian his usual and customary charges for such services. 
(Ord. No. 83-03, § 1, 3-14-83) 
Cross reference- Impoundment fees set out, § 5-47. 
Sec. 5-5. - Disposal fee for large and small household pets in city crematoriums. 
    The following fees shall be charged for the disposal of household pets in the city crematorium of the City of Groves: 
(1)  Small household pets ..... $1.00 
(2)  Large household pets ..... 2.00 
(Ord. No. 91-01, § 1, 1-21-91) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 91-01, § 1, adopted Jan. 21, 1991, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, its inclusion herein as § 5-5 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 5-6-5-11. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LIVESTOCK AND DOMESTIC FOWL 

Sec. 5-12. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    Domestic fowl shall mean and include any or all of the following: chickens, ducks, geese, guineas, peafowl, turkeys, or any other fowl, owned or possessed by or under the control of any person. 
    Livestock shall mean and include any or all of the following: horses, mules, colts, jacks, jennets, cows, bulls, calves, sheep, goats, swine or other domesticated animals, except common household pets. 
(Ord. No. 183, § 1, 12-21-59) 
Cross reference- General definitions and rules of construction, § 1-3. 
Sec. 5-13. - Livestock not to run at large. 
    It shall be unlawful for any livestock owned, kept, or under the control or care of any person to run at large within the limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 538, § 1, 4-8-74) 
State Law reference- Stock running at large, V.T.C.A. Agric. Code, §§ 143.029, 143.032, 143.017 et seq. 
Sec. 5-14. - Staking of livestock restricted. 
    It shall be unlawful for any livestock to be tied or staked upon any open or unfenced lot or land within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 183, § 4, 12-21-59) 
Sec. 5-15. - Keeping livestock and domestic fowl restricted. 
    It shall be unlawful to keep, feed, breed, stable, pasture, herd or maintain any livestock on or in any lot, pen, building, parcel of land, stable or other enclosure in the city; or to keep, feed, breed or maintain domestic fowl on or in any lot, pen, building, parcel of land or other enclosure in the city, any part of which enclosure is nearer than seventy-five (75) feet to a building which is occupied by any person for residential or business purposes. 
(Ord. No. 183, § 3, 12-21-59; Ord. No. 393, § 2(4), 8-19-68; Ord. No. 406, § 1, 12-9-68; Ord. No. 94-16, § 1, 12-5-94) 
Sec. 5-16. - Maintenance of premises where kept. 
    Any person owning or keeping any livestock or domestic fowl within the city shall be required to keep such livestock or domestic fowl adequately penned in an enclosure sufficiently secure to prevent escape therefrom. 
    Each such enclosure shall be maintained in a sanitary condition subject to the approval of the health officer. 
    Each place used for feeding, stabling, pasturing or keeping any livestock or domestic fowl shall be kept free from offensive odors, flies, rodents and other pests. 
(Ord. No. 183, § 3, 12-21-59) 
Cross reference- Ratproofing of feed storage required, § 13-37; electric fence prohibited, § 16-13. 
Sec. 5-17. - Compliance with technical provisions required. 
    Any building, pen, storage bin, or other structure used or constructed for the feeding, stabling, maintaining or keeping of any livestock or domestic fowl shall conform with the applicable provisions of the building, electrical and plumbing codes of the city. 
Cross reference- Building code, Ch. 28; electrical code, Ch. 29, plumbing code, Ch. 31. 
Sec. 5-18. - Disposal of dead livestock. 
    The carcass of any livestock dead of disease or other cause not slaughtered for food shall be removed and/or disposed of by the owner, at his own expense, within twenty-four (24) hours after such death, according to such method as may be approved by the health officer. 
Cross reference- Disposal of animal wastes and dead animals, § 12-14. 
Sec. 5-19. - Domestic fowl not to run at large. 
    It shall be unlawful for any domestic fowl owned, kept, or under the control or care of any person to run at large within the limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 538, § 2, 4-8-74) 
Sec. 5-20. - Keeping of gamefowl and gamecocks. 
(a)  This section shall not be construed to authorize the fighting of gamecocks, since the causing of one animal to fight with another is prohibited by V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, organization, group or association to keep or maintain any gamecock in such a manner than such fowl, by crowing or otherwise, creates such a noise as to cause serious disturbance, annoyance or inconvenience to persons residing in the vicinity and interferes with the reasonable and comfortable use and enjoyment of their property. 
(c)  All gamefowl or gamecocks shall be penned, staked or fenced to prevent the fowl from running at large as prohibited by section 5-19. 
(d)  No gamefowl or gamecock shall be kept, possessed or maintained within three hundred (300) feet of any residence or building used for human habitation (other than that of the keeper or owner of such fowl), any business, church, school or hospital. The distance of three hundred (300) feet shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest point of the pen, gamecock, game fowl or fence to the nearest point of such building used for human habitation, business, church, school or hospital. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, possess or maintain more than five (5) gamecock or gamefowl on any premises in the city unless that premises has at least one acre (43,560) square feet of area. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person living in the city to keep more than ten (10) gamecock or gamefowl per premises unless that person has at least five (5) acres (217,800 square feet) of land. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 3-16-09) 
Sec. 5-21. - Chickens, ducks and fowl numbers limited; pools prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, possess or maintain chickens, ducks or fowl within the city, except when the chickens, ducks or fowl are fenced in, and coops, pens or cages are provided. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, possess or maintain any such fowl within three hundred (300) feet of any residence or building used for human habitation (other than that of the keeper or owner of such fowl), any business, church, school or hospital. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person living in the city to keep a combination of no more than five (5) chickens, ducks or fowl on any premises in a residential district unless that premises has at least one acre (43,560) square feet of area. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person living in the city to keep more than ten (10) chickens, ducks or fowl per premises unless that person has at least five (5) acres (217,800 square feet) of land. Duck or waterfowl pools are prohibited within the city. 
(e)  All droppings from coops, pens, cages, yards and other enclosures shall be removed regularly, and disposal of the excretions shall be handled in such manner as to keep the premises free of any public health nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 3-16-09) 
Sec. 5-22. - Nuisances declared. 
    The keeping of any animal or bird which, by causing frequent or long-continued noise, disturbs the comfort and repose of any person of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity is declared a nuisance and is in violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 3-16-09) 
Secs. 5-23-5-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WILD FOWL 

Sec. 5-30. - Bird sanctuary created. 
    The area within the city is hereby designated as and declared to be a bird sanctuary. 
(Ord. No. 198, § 1, 1-25-60) 
Sec. 5-31. - Destroying or molesting wild fowl prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, shoot or attempt to shoot, or molest in any manner any bird or wild fowl or to rob bird or wild fowl nests within the city. 
(Ord. No. 198, § 2, 1-25-60) 
Sec. 5-32. - Congregating of birds declared nuisance; meeting with bird and garden clubs required; emergency power in city marshal. 
(a)  If starlings, pigeons or similar birds are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality so as to constitute a nuisance or a menace to health or property in the opinion of the health authorities of the city, such health authorities shall meet with representatives of the Audubon Society, Bird Club, Garden Club or Humane Society, after having given at least three (3) days' notice of the time and place of such meeting to the representatives of such clubs. 
(b)  If at the meeting required in subsection (a) of this section no satisfactory means of dispersing such congregation of birds is found, such birds may be destroyed in such manner as is deemed advisable by the health authorities under the supervision of the city marshal. 
(c)  If in the opinion of the city marshal an emergency exists making it impossible or impracticable to give such notice to the various clubs and societies, the city marshal is hereby authorized, in his/her discretion, to take any action, including the destruction of such birds, to protect the health and welfare of the community, without such meeting. 
(Ord. No. 198, §§ 2, 3, 1-25-60) 
Secs. 5-33-5-42. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CITY POUND 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 5-43. - Created. 
    There is hereby created a city pound. 
(Ord. No. 126, § 1, 9-13-65) 
Sec. 5-44. - Poundmaster appointed; duties; compensation. 
    The city manager shall appoint, for a period to be terminated at his discretion, a qualified person as city poundmaster, who shall enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 326, § 1, 9-13-65) 
Sec. 5-45. - Impoundment of animals, fowl. 
    Any animal or fowl except household pets, which may be found in violation of any provision of this chapter or other applicable provision of this Code, state law or city ordinance, within the city shall be impounded by any authorized officer of the city. 
Sec. 5-46. - Duty of poundmaster upon impoundment. 
    The poundmaster shall deliver to the owner, after proper evidence of ownership is given him, each animal or fowl impounded by him under the provisions of section 5-45, provided that such owner shall pay all charges which may have accrued against such animal or fowl. 
Sec. 5-47. - Impoundment fees. 
    A pound fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be charged against each animal or fowl which may be impounded under the provisions of section 5-45, and an additional charge of four dollars ($4.00) shall be made against each such animal or fowl for each day or part of a day after the first day which such animal or fowl may be impounded. 
(Ord. No. 393, § 2(5), 8-19-68; Ord. No. 723, § 1, 10-13-80) 
Sec. 5-48. - Sale of unredeemed, impounded animals-Authorized, notice. 
    After the expiration of three (3) days after any animal or fowl may have been impounded, if the owner of such animal or fowl shall not have appeared and redeemed such animal or fowl, the poundmaster shall advertise the same for sale at public auction on a date not earlier than three (3) days after the first publication of such advertisement. Each such advertisement shall describe the animal or fowl to be sold as clearly as possible, shall name the date on which such animal or fowl was impounded, shall state the amount of the pound fees which have accrued against such animal or fowl, and shall name a definite date and hour at which the same is to be sold. All notices of sales of impounded animals or fowl shall be posted for the full period of three (3) days at some public place within the city, one of which places shall be the city hall, another the public pound, and the third shall be at some place which the poundmaster may select. 
(Ord. No. 504, § 1, 6-18-73) 
Sec. 5-49. - Same-Procedure. 
    At each sale of unredeemed, impounded animals or fowl, the poundmaster shall sell for cash only and to the highest bidder and shall deliver to the purchaser a bill of sale in the name of the city which shall have impressed thereon by the city clerk the corporate seal of the city, and shall be signed by both the city clerk and the poundmaster. 
Sec. 5-50. - Same-Disposition of receipts. 
    In the event of the sale of any animal or fowl which has been impounded under the provisions of section 5-45, the poundmaster shall deduct from the price of said animal or fowl obtained at such sale the full amount of such lawful fees and charges as shall have accrued prior to the sale. The remainder of such sale price shall be delivered by the poundmaster to the city clerk. Such money so paid to the treasurer shall be held by the clerk in a separate account for a period of one year from the date of such sale, and if the owner of any animal or fowl so sold shall appear within the year and establish his ownership to the satisfaction of the treasurer, the full amount so held shall be delivered to such claimant upon his executing a receipt for the amount and a full release of all claim against the city for the value of the animal or fowl. In the event that such money be not claimed within one year by a person who can show his ownership, then the full amount of such money shall be placed in the general fund of the city. 
Sec. 5-51. - Records to be kept by poundmaster. 
    The poundmaster shall keep a book in which he shall carefully record the following information concerning each animal or fowl which may be impounded therein, to wit: 
(a)  The date on which such animal or fowl was impounded; 
(b)  The name of the owner, if known; 
(c)  A full and clear description of the animal or fowl; 
(d)  The date on which such animal or fowl was discharged from the pound; 
(e)  The name of the person to whom delivered; 
(f)  The date on which such animal or fowl was advertised for sale; 
(g)  The places where notice of sale were posted; 
(h)  The number of days that notices were posted before sale; 
(i)  The price at which such animal or fowl was sold; 
(j)  The person to whom sold and his place of residence; 
(k)  The amount of charges accrued against such animal or fowl before sale; 
(l)  The amount of charges accrued before delivery to owner. 
Sec. 5-52. - Liability of owners of impounded animals or fowl. 
    The payment of pound fees shall not exempt the owner or person in control of any animals or fowl impounded from prosecution under the provisions of this chapter. 
Sec. 5-53. - Destruction of animals, fowl. 
    If at the time of the sale of any animal or fowl that may have been impounded, no purchaser can be found for such animal or fowl, the poundmaster shall kill or otherwise destroy or dispose of such animal or fowl. 
Sec. 5-54. - Confinement of rabid animals. 
(a)  Any animal or household pet that has rabies or symptoms thereof that is suspected of having rabies, or that has been exposed to rabies, shall at once be released by its possessor for disposal or confinement in a veterinary hospital approved by the city health officer, or immediately and securely confined by typing with a chain of good quality and kept there under the supervision of the department of health and sanitation for a period of not less than ten (10) days. 
(b)  Every animal or pet that has rabies or symptoms thereof, or any animal that bites, scratches or otherwise attacks any person shall be immediately quarantined and held for ten (10) days in any veterinary hospital approved by the city health officer, or shall be held at the city pound for ten (10) days. After such ten day period of time if the animal or pet has not been redeemed by the owner, or if it has rabies, it shall be destroyed at the city pound. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 12, 7-2-62; Ord. No. 444, § 1, 2-1-71) 
Amendment note- Ord. No. 444, § 1, amended § 5-54(b) pertaining to the same subject matter to read as hereinabove set out. 
Ord. No. 44, § 2, provided: 
"Section 2. Penalty for violation of this ordinance shall be the same as provided in Section 5-101 of the Code of Ordinances, City of Groves, Texas." 
Sec. 5-55. - Payment of pound fees. 
    Every owner of any animal, including household pets, impounded, whether by the city or voluntarily by the owner, shall be liable for all costs and fees incurred by such impoundment or confinement and testing. 
Sec. 5-56. - Fees collected to be paid to city clerk. 
    The poundmaster shall collect all fees and other moneys required to be paid under the provisions of this article and shall pay all such fees and other moneys to the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 11, 6-2-62) 
Secs. 5-57-5-61. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - IMPOUNDMENT OF PETS 

Sec. 5-62. - Authorized. 
    Any household pet found in violation of any applicable provision of this Code, state law or city ordinance, rule or regulation shall be taken up and impounded by the poundmaster or any other authorized officer or employee of the city. The poundmaster shall provide suitable and necessary sustenance for all pets impounded under the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 8, 7-2-62) 
Sec. 5-63. - Impoundment fees. 
(a)  Impoundment. 
(1)  The following fees shall be charged for the impoundment of any pet under the provisions of this division: 
    Licensed dog ..... $40.00 
    Unlicensed dog ..... 60.00 
    Other pets ..... 40.00 
(2)  If any licensed dog, unlicensed dog or other pet shall be impounded a second time, within sixty (60) days of the first impoundment, the impoundment fee shall be twice the fee set out in subsection (1) above. 
(3)  If any licensed dog, unlicensed dog or other pet shall be impounded a third time, within sixty (60) days of the first impoundment, the impoundment fee shall be three (3) times the fee set out in subsection (1) above. 
(b)  Feeding. A fee of ten dollars ($10.00) per day shall be charged for the feeding, care and handling of each pet impounded under the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 472, § 1, 2-28-72; Ord. No. 504, § 2, 6-18-73; Ord. No. 723, § 2, 10-13-80; Ord. No. 93-5, § 1, 5-24-93; Ord. No. 06-22, § 1, 12-11-06) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 472, § 3, provided: "Section 3. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined in a sum not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00)." 
Sec. 5-64. - Redemption-Right, conditions. 
    The owner of any pet which has been impounded under the provisions of this division shall have the right to redeem the same upon the payment of any and all fees which may be due and payable for the impoundment of such pet. 
    The owner of any impounded pet may, within thirty (30) days after such dog [pet] is sold, redeem the same from the purchaser by paying to him the amount of the purchase price paid by him to the poundmaster, and in addition thereto the licensing fee and the vaccination charges, if any were incurred, and in addition thereto a charge of one dollar ($1.00) per day for the number of days from the date of sale to the day of redemption. At the end of thirty (30) days from the date the pet is sold, the right to redeem shall expire. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 8, 7-2-62) 
Sec. 5-65. - Same-Time. 
    All impounded pets shall be redeemed within the length of time set forth below. Any such pet not redeemed within such time may be sold or destroyed. 
    Licensed dog ..... 5 days 
    Unlicensed dog ..... 3 days 
    Other pets ..... 3 days 
(Ord. No. 249, §§ 8, 9, 7-2-62) 
Sec. 5-66. - Redeemed dogs and cats must be vaccinated. 
    All dogs and cats redeemed at the pound must be immediately vaccinated against rabies. 
Sec. 5-67. - Records of impoundment. 
    The poundmaster, upon receiving any pet, shall make a complete registry, entering the breed, color, sex and species of such pet together with a statement of whether such pet, if a dog, is licensed or not, and the time and place of taking into custody. If such pet be licensed, the poundmaster shall enter the name and address of the owner and the number of the license tag upon such registry. In addition to such records, the poundmaster shall also keep necessary records as are required to show in detail the disposition of all pets impounded and the money collected by him and other records as are required by the city. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 10, 7-2-62) 
Sec. 5-68. - Sale, destruction. 
    At any time after the expiration of the period of time for redemption of impounded pets shall have expired, the poundmaster may, without further notice and without advertising in any manner, sell at private sale or public auction, for cash, any dog not redeemed or reclaimed. All pets impounded and not redeemed, reclaimed or sold after the period of time for redemption has expired, shall forthwith be humanely destroyed by the poundmaster. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 9, 7-2-62) 
Sec. 5-69. - Reports. 
    The poundmaster shall file such reports under oath as are required by the city manager or city council. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 10, 7-2-62) 
Sec. 5-70. - Licensed dogs to be kept separate. 
    All licensed dogs impounded under the provisions of this division shall be kept separated from unlicensed dogs and other pets at all times. 
Sec. 5-71-5-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DOGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 06-22, § 2, adopted Dec. 11, 2006, repealed article V, sections 5-81-5-95, in its entirety and replaced it with a new article V, sections 5-81-5-95. Former article V pertained to similar material and derived from Ord. No. 249, §§ 1, 3-6, 13, 14, adopted July 2, 1962; Ord. No. 472, § 2, adopted Feb. 28, 1972; Ord. No. 538, §§ 3-7, adopted April 8, 1974; Ord. No. 87-07, § 1, adopted March 9, 1987. 

Sec. 5-81. - License-Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to own, keep, possess, or harbor upon premises under his control, any dog, male or female, without having obtained a license therefor as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 06-22, § 2, 12-11-06) 
Sec. 5-82. - Same-When not required. 
    The provisions of this article requiring a licensing of dogs shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Dogs under the age of six (6) months if kept within a sufficient enclosure. 
(2)  Dogs owned by or in custody or under the control of persons who are not residents of the city but who are traveling through said city or temporarily sojourning therein for a period not exceeding twenty (20) days. 
(3)  Dogs brought to the city exclusively for the purpose of entering or exhibiting same in any dog show, and which are actually entered in and kept at said show for exhibition. 
(Ord. No. 06-22, § 2, 12-11-06) 
Sec. 5-83. - Same-Fee. 
    There shall be an annual fee of one dollar ($1.00) charged for each animal license for each dog. 
(Ord. No. 06-22, § 2, 12-11-06) 
Sec. 5-84. - Same-Duration. 
    The dog license required under the provisions of this article shall be issued for a period of one (1) year and must be obtained on or before the first day of January of each year. 
(Ord. No. 06-22, § 2, 12-11-06) 
Sec. 5-85. - Proof of rabies vaccination required. 
(a)  Each owner of a dog shall have such dog vaccinated against rabies by the time such dog is four (4) months of age and at regular intervals thereafter as prescribed by rules of the state board of health. 
(b)  No license shall be issued for any dog owned, kept, possessed, harbored or allowed upon the premises of any person and under his control unless said dog shall have been vaccinated against rabies within twelve (12) months prior to the issuance of such license by a veterinarian licensed to practice in the state. 
(c)  There shall be delivered to the poundmaster of the city, prior to the issuance of such license, a certificate signed by such veterinarian, stated that the dog has been duly vaccinated and giving the date of vaccination therefor. 
(Ord. No. 06-22, § 2, 12-11-06) 
Sec. 5-86. - License-Tags. 
(a)  Issuance. Upon payment of the license fee required, it shall be the duty of the poundmaster to furnish the owner of such animal a license number and durable tag of a distinctive design, on one (1) side of which is stamped the words "fee paid" with the year for which the same is paid and the serial number of the tag, which tag shall at all times be securely attached to a collar around the neck of the dog or to a harness around the neck and body of the dog. 
(b)  Duplicates. In the event of loss or destruction of any dog tag issued by the city, and upon proper and satisfactory proof to the city of such loss or destruction, and upon proper application to the city with payment of a fee of fifty cents ($0.50) the city shall issue a substitute dog tag to replace the one so lost or destroyed. 
(Ord. No. 06-22, § 2, 12-11-06) 
Sec. 5-87. - Same-Removal of tag prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any tag issued under the provisions of this article from any dog without the written consent of the owner of such dog. 
(Ord. No. 06-22, § 2, 12-11-06) 
Sec. 5-88. - Register of licenses. 
    The poundmaster shall keep a register of all licenses issued under the provisions of this article in which shall be entered the name of the applicant, description of the dog, the numbers of the license and tag issued, and the date of issuance and expiration. 
(Ord. No. 06-22, § 2, 12-11-06) 
Sec. 5-89. - "At large" defined. 
    For the purpose of this article, the phrase "to run at large" shall mean to go free, or be free, with or without the knowledge of the owner, on private or public property outside of a secure enclosure and with a lease securely attached to the dog and being held by a person of competent strength to hold and control such dog, or securely fastened in a manner to cause such dog to be unable to leave the property. 
(Ord. No. 06-22, § 2, 12-11-06) 
Sec. 5-90. - Running at large prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any dog owned, kept or under the control or care of any person, whether licensed or not, to run at large within the limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 06-22, § 2, 12-11-06) 
Sec. 5-91. - Dangerous dogs. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the term "dangerous dog" means a dog that: 
(1)  Has inflicted severe injury or death to a person or bites a person other than the owner or a member of the owner's immediate family, without provocation on public or private property. 
(2)  Has killed or severely injured a domestic animal without provocation while off the owner's property. 
(3)  Has a known or apparent propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury, or to otherwise threaten the safety of persons or domestic animals; or 
(4)  Is trained or harbored for fighting which may be determined based on whether the dog exhibits behavior and/or bears physical scars or injuries which indicate that the animal has been trained or used for the purpose of fighting. 
(b)  If a dog acts as stated in subsection (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section or is trained or harbored for fighting, the animal control officer shall impound the dog immediately if it is at large; or if it is in the possession of some person, the animal control officer may issue a notice requiring that the dog be taken to a designated location for impoundment. A dog that is impounded shall not be released until a final determination is made of the disposition of the animal. 
(Ord. No. 06-22, § 2, 12-11-06) 
Sec. 5-91.1. - Declaration of dangerous dog. 
(a)  The animal control officer may declare a dog to be a dangerous dog if the official has sufficient cause to believe that the animal is dangerous as defined under subsection 5-91(a). 
(b)  Within five (5) working days of declaring a dog to be a dangerous dog, written notice shall be given to the owner that the animal control officer has determined that the animal is a dangerous dog. This notice shall also set out the requirements for a dangerous dog with which the owner must comply as set forth in section 5-91.2. This notice shall be given to the owner by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested. In the event that personal delivery or certified mail, return receipt requested, cannot be delivered, is refused, or is unclaimed, the animal control officer may then give notice by first class mail. Receipt of notice sent by first class mail is deemed to be two (2) working days after the letter is postmarked and deposited in the mail. 
(c)  The owner of a dog declared to be a dangerous dog may appeal the determination of the animal control officer. Appeal of the animal control officer's determination is accomplished by filing a written request for a determination hearing with the municipal court no later than five (5) working days from receipt of the written notice referenced in subsection 5-91.1(b). Failure to appeal the declaration by filing a written request for a determination hearing with the municipal court within five (5) working days from the owner's receipt of the written notice described in subsection 5-91.1(b) shall result in the animal control officer's declaration as being final. 
(d)  If the owner of a dangerous dog cannot be determined after reasonable efforts to do so and after holding the dog for seventy-two (72) hours, the animal may be disposed of in a humane manner. If the owner of a dangerous dog that has been impounded is known, but cannot be located for service of the notice required herein either in person or by mail, the animal may be disposed of in a humane manner after a reasonable effort has been made to locate such owner. Nothing herein shall be construed to require the city to hold the dangerous dog longer than seventy-two (72) hours because it is unclaimed. 
(e)  Determination hearing. 
(1)  Upon written request for a determination hearing by the owner of a dog declared dangerous, the animal control officer shall schedule said hearing with the municipal court. The determination hearing shall be conducted by the municipal court judge within the ten (10) days of receipt of the request of such a hearing. The owner shall be notified of said hearing by first class mail. Failure of the owner to appear at the determination hearing shall in no way prevent the municipal court judge from proceeding with the hearing. The decision of the municipal court judge shall be the final administrative determination by the city. 
(2)  Pending the outcome of the determination hearing, the dog must be securely confined in the animal control facility or, at the request of the owner of the dog, with a licensed veterinarian. The costs of securing the dog at the animal control facility or with a licensed veterinarian pending the determination hearing shall be borne by the owner. 
(Ord. No. 06-22, § 2, 12-11-06) 
Sec. 5-91.2. - Requirements for owner of a dangerous dog. 
(a)  No later than fifteen (15) days after a dog is declared dangerous, the owner must comply with all of the following requirements before the subject animal can be released to the owner by animal control: 
(1)  Register the animal as a dangerous dog with the animal control officer. The cost of registration shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) per year. 
(2)  Obtain and maintain liability insurance coverage or show financial responsibility in the amount of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) to cover damages resulting from an attack by a dangerous dog causing bodily injury to a person or for damages to any person's property resulting from the keeping of such dangerous dog. A certificate of insurance or other evidence of meeting the above requirements shall be filed with the city animal control officer before said dangerous dog shall be returned to the owner if it is being held by the city or a veterinarian. 
(3)  Restrain the dangerous dog at all times on a secure leash in the immediate control of a person or in a secure enclosure. The enclosure must have secure sides, a secure top attached to the sides, and a secure bottom which is either attached to the sides or else the sides of the structure must be embedded in the ground no less than two (2) feet. 
In addition, the secure enclosure must be: 
a.  Locked; 
b.  Capable of preventing the escape or release of the dog; and 
c.  Clearly marked as containing a dangerous dog. 
(4)  The owner shall post a sign on his premises warning that there is a "dangerous dog on the property." This sign shall be visible and capable of being read from the public street or highway. In addition, the area where the animal is kept must be kept secure from small children gaining access. 
(5)  The dangerous dog, when taken outside the enclosure, must be securely muzzled in a manner that will not cause injury to the animal nor interfere with its vision or respiration, but shall prevent it from biting any person or animal. 
(6)  A dangerous dog may not be chained to any object outside of a secure enclosure either on or off the property of the owner. 
(7)  If the owner of a dangerous dog is unable or unwilling to comply with the ownership requirements listed above at any time, the animal must be euthanized in a humane manner by the city animal control officer or a licensed veterinarian or removed from the city. A dangerous dog shall not be offered for adoption or sale within the city unless the new owner is willing to comply and does comply with the provisions of this section. Transfer of the dangerous dog to a new owner must be approved by the municipal court judge. 
(Ord. No. 06-22, § 2, 12-11-06) 
Sec. 5-91.3. - Report significant events. 
    The owner of a dangerous dog shall as soon as possible report to the animal control officer any of the following events: 
(1)  The escape of the animal; 
(2)  An attack or biting of a person or other animal; 
(3)  Change of location within the city; 
(4)  Permanent removal of the dog from the city; or 
(5)  Death of the dog. 
(Ord. No. 06-22, § 2, 12-11-06) 
Sec. 5-91.4. - Exceptions. 
(a)  No dog shall be declared a dangerous dog if: 
(1)  The threat, injury or damage caused by the animal was the result of a willful trespass upon another's property, or the person injured was tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal or its owner, or was committing or attempting to commit a crime at the time of injury unless other independent grounds exist for such a declaration; or 
(2)  The sole cause of the attack was that the animal was injured and responding to pain. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to dogs under the control of law enforcement or military. 
(Ord. No. 06-22, § 2, 12-11-06) 
Sec. 5-92. - Destruction of dangerous dogs. 
    Any dangerous dog found at large after the owner thereof has previous knowledge or notice that such dog is dangerous, may be killed by any police officer of the city without such officer having to catch or impound such dog. 
(Ord. No. 06-22, § 2, 12-11-06) 
Sec. 5-93. - Confinement during estrus. 
    Any female dog in the stage of estrus (heat) shall be confined during such period of time in a house, building, or secure enclosure. Such areas of enclosure shall be so constructed that no other dog may gain access to the confined animal. Owners who do not comply shall be ordered to remove the animal in heat to a boarding kennel, veterinary hospital or the city animal shelter. All expenses incurred as a result of the confinement shall be paid by the owner. Failure to comply with the removal order of the animal control officer shall be a violation of this article and the dog will then be impounded. 
(Ord. No. 06-22, § 2, 12-11-06) 
Sec. 5-94. - Maintenance of premises where dogs kept. 
    Any person keeping one (1) or more dogs within the city shall be required to maintain the area in which said dog or dogs are kept in a sanitary condition subject to the approval of the poundmaster. 
(Ord. No. 06-22, § 2, 12-11-06) 
Sec. 5-95. - Issuance of citations. 
    The animal control officer may issue a citation for a violation of this chapter. The citation shall include: the name of the accused; the nature of the violation; the ordinance section violated; the date and location of the violation; that a complaint will be filed in the municipal court of the city; and that the person cited must appear at municipal within fourteen (14) days from the date shown on the citation, and shall be signed by the officer. 
(Ord. No. 06-22, § 2, 12-11-06) 
ARTICLE VI. - CATS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Article VI, §§ 5-96-5-101, is derived from Ord. No. 418, §§ 1-6, enacted Sept. 5, 1969. This ordinance did not amend this Code. 

Sec. 5-96. - Vaccination against rabies. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to own, keep, possess, harbor, or to allow to remain upon premises under his control, any cat that has not been vaccinated against rabies by a veterinarian duly licensed to practice in the State of Texas by the time such cat is four (4) months of age and at regular intervals thereafter as prescribed by rules of the state board of health. 
(Ord. No. 418, § 1, 9-8-69; Ord. No. 87-07, § 2, 3-9-87) 
Sec. 5-97. - Impoundment of cats running at large without vaccination tag. 
    Any cat running at large without a vaccination tag attached to its collar or harness indicating the cat has been vaccinated within the last twelve months from the time said cat is found running at large shall be impounded and kept in the city pound and redeemed by the owner, or sold or destroyed by the poundmaster, in the same manner as dogs, in accordance with Articles IV and V [of this chapter] of the Code of Ordinances, City of Groves, Texas. Impoundment fees shall be the same as those provided for dogs in said Code. 
(Ord. No. 418, § 2, 9-8-69) 
Sec. 5-98. - License not required. 
    No license from the city shall be required for cats. 
(Ord. No. 418, § 3, 9-8-69) 
Sec. 5-99. - Dangerous or vicious cats. 
(a)  No cat of dangerous, vicious, fierce or mischievous propensities or tendencies may be at large at any time within the limits of the city. 
(b)  If any cat bites or attempts to bite any person while such cat is at large, then such cat shall be conclusively presumed to be a dangerous cat and a cat of dangerous propensities and tendencies. 
(c)  If any cat attacks or attempts to attack any other cat or other animal while such cat is at large, or chases or otherwise attempts to catch a person, then such cat shall be conclusively presumed to be a vicious cat and to have vicious propensities and tendencies. 
(Ord. No. 418, § 4, 9-8-69) 
Sec. 5-100. - Disposition of dangerous or vicious cats found at large. 
    Any dangerous or vicious cat or cat having dangerous or vicious propensities and tendencies found at large may be killed by any police officer of the city or the poundmaster without such officer or poundmaster having to catch or impound such cat. 
(Ord. No. 418, § 5, 9-8-69) 
Sec. 5-101. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- See the editor's note following § 5-2. 
Chapter 6 - TOW TRUCKS AND TOW TRUCK COMPANIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2013-09, § 1, adopted June 17, 2013, amended Ch. 6 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 6, §§ 6-1-6-25, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from: Ord. No. 195, adopted Mar. 14, 1960; Ord. No. 207, adopted Aug. 15, 1960; Ord. No. 410, adopted Mar. 31, 1969; Ord. No. 466, adopted Dec. 20, 1971; Ord. No. 473, adopted Feb. 28, 1972; Ord. No. 499, adopted Feb. 12, 1973; Ord. No. 562, adopted Apr. 21, 1975; Ord. No. 85-03, adopted Feb. 11, 1985; Ord. No. 88-29, adopted Dec. 13, 1988; and Ord. No. 2011-07, adopted July 18, 2011. 
Cross reference- Location restriction on junked motor vehicles, parts thereof, § 14-37 et seq.; removal of glass, etc., from streets when wrecked vehicle removed, § 25-16; garages to report damaged vehicles, § 25-36; removing vehicles from scene of accident, §§ 25-37, 25-38. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Ambulance means any vehicle of the modular or van type which is used, designed or redesigned for the purpose of transporting the dead, sick or injured, including any nongovernmental emergency medical service vehicle. 
    City means the City of Groves, a political subdivision of the State of Texas and of the area within its corporate limits. 
    City marshal means the City Marshal of the City of Groves and any employee(s) of the police department assigned by him to perform the duties and/or actions prescribed in this chapter. 
    Commission means the Texas Commission of Licensing and Regulation. 
    Consent tow means any tow of a motor vehicle initiated by the owner or operator of the vehicle or by a person who has possession, custody or control of the vehicle. The term does not include a tow of a motor vehicle initiated by a police officer investigating a traffic accident or a traffic incident that involves the vehicle. 
    Department means the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation. 
    Non-consent tow means any tow of a motor vehicle that is not a consent tow. 
    Public roadway means a public street, alley, road, right-of-way or other public way, including paved and unpaved portions of a right-of-way. 
    Tow truck means a motor vehicle, including a wrecker, equipped with a mechanical device used to tow, winch or otherwise move another motor vehicle. 
    Towing company means an individual, association, corporation or other legal entity that controls, operates or directs the operation of one (1) or more tow trucks over a public roadway in this state, but does not include a political subdivision of this state. 
    Vehicle means a device in, on or by which a person or property may be transported on a public roadway. The term includes an operable or inoperable automobile, truck, motorcycle, recreational vehicle or trailer, but does not include a device moved by human power or used exclusively on a stationary rail or track. 
    Vehicle owner means a person: 
(1)  Named as the purchaser or transferee in the certificate of title issued for the vehicle under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 501; 
(2)  In whose name the vehicle is registered under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 502, or a member of the person's immediate family; 
(3)  Who holds the vehicle through a lease agreement; 
(4)  Who is an unrecorded lien holder entitled to possess the vehicle under the terms of a security agreement; or 
(5)  Who is a lien holder holding an affidavit of repossession and entitled to repossess the vehicle. 
    Vehicle storage facility means a garage, parking lot or other facility that is: 
(1)  Owned by a person other than a governmental entity; 
(2)  Is used to store or park at least ten (10) vehicles each year; and 
(3)  Is operated by a person who holds a license issued under V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 2303, to operate the facility. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, § 1, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 6-2. - Penalty. 
    Any person, either by himself or by his agent, who shall do any act or thing prohibited by the terms of this chapter, or who in any way violates provisions hereof, shall be fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00). It shall not be necessary for the complaint to allege or for proof to be made that the act was knowingly done, nor shall it be necessary for the complaint to negate any exception contained in this chapter concerning any prohibited act, but any such exception made in this chapter may be urged as a defense by any person charged by such complaint. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, § 1, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 6-3. - Applicability of federal and state law. 
    This chapter shall be cumulative of all laws of the state and the United States governing the subject matter of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, § 1, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 6-4. - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of this chapter are not and shall not be held applicable to: 
(1)  A tow truck towing a wrecked or disabled vehicle from a point outside the city to a destination within the city; or 
(2)  A tow truck towing a wrecked or disabled vehicle from a point within the city to another destination within the city or outside the city, but not including the towing of vehicles that are considered non-consent tows. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, § 1, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 6-5. - General requirements. 
    All tow trucks operating within the city must have and maintain a valid and current license, inspection and registration pursuant to V.T.C.A., Transportation Code chs. 502, 548 and 643; and 16 Texas Admin. Code, Economic Regulations § 5.1 et seq., and their future amendments. All drivers of tow trucks must possess a valid and currents driver's license issued in accordance with V.T.C.A., Transportation Code chs. 522 and 524, and their future amendments. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, § 1, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 6-6. - Duties of drivers; prohibited acts by drivers. 
(a)  Operator's license required. Every tow truck driver shall hold a valid Texas operator's license of the proper class. 
(b)  Obedience to police officers. Every tow truck driver shall obey all lawful orders given by any police officer and shall not in any manner interfere with any police officer in the performance of such officer's duty. 
(c)  Authorization to remove vehicle. Tow truck drivers shall not remove any wrecked or disabled or illegally parked vehicle from any public street without authorization from a police officer; provided, however, that the driver or a stalled or disabled vehicle not involved in an accident may authorize a wrecker driver to remove his/her vehicle when no police officer is present. 
(d)  Transport of vehicle to storage facility. Upon authorization to remove any vehicle that is a non-consent tow, every wrecker driver shall transport such vehicle to his/her storage facility that is approved by the city or to such other destination as ordered by the police officer or vehicle driver immediately and by the most direct route. 
(e)  Removal of debris. Any tow truck driver towing a vehicle from the scene of a vehicular collision shall be responsible for the removal from the scene of such collision any broken glass or other debris resulting from such collision. If more than one (1) tow truck is summoned, each driver shall be responsible for such cleanup and removal. 
(f)  Receipt for payment of fee. The driver of any tow truck that performs any towing or other service and is paid a fee directly for such service shall issue to the vehicle driver or such driver's agent a signed receipt itemizing the services rendered and the fee collected for such services. 
(g)  Solicitation of business. No person shall solicit in any manner, directly or indirectly, on the streets of the city, the business of towing, removing, repairing, wrecking, storing, trading or purchasing any vehicle that is wrecked or disabled on a public street. 
(h)  Driving or parking near scene of accident. No person shall drive, stop or park a wrecker nearer than one hundred fifty (150) feet to the scene of an accident or collision on the streets of the city until directed to do so by the officer investigating the accident; and the person driving the wrecker shall remain with the wrecker at all times unless otherwise directed by the police officer in charge of the investigation. The prohibition of this subsection shall not apply when necessary to prevent death or bodily injury to any person involved in an accident or collision. 
(i)  Compliance with traffic laws. No tow truck driver, whether responding to or returning from the scene of an accident, is authorized to violate any traffic law as set forth in the Rules of the Road (V.T.C.A., Transportation Code chs. 541-600). 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, § 1, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 6-7. - Influence by police as to selection of wrecker. 
(a)  No police officer investigating or present at the scene of any wreck, accident or collision on a public street shall, directly or indirectly, either by word, gesture, sign or otherwise, recommend to any person the name of any particular person engaged in the wrecker services or repair business, nor shall any such police officer influence or attempt to influence in any manner the decision of a person in choosing or selecting a wrecker or repair service. 
(b)  However, should the driver of the vehicle be incapacitated and the officer not be able to promptly locate a person who has sufficient authority for the care of the vehicle, then the officer may, if it appears necessary and in such officer's judgment, order the removal of the vehicle to a place of safety for the benefit of the driver or owner of the vehicle. Charges for service or storage in such cases will be the responsibility of the owner. 
(c)  In any instance where the driver or owner of the vehicle does not have a preference and requests the officer to call a wrecker or if the driver is incapacitated as described in subsection (b), the officer will call central dispatch and request that the next towing company listed on the non-consent list be called to move the vehicle to safety. The non-consent list will be maintained by the city marshal and it shall include only permitees that have obtained permits in compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, § 1, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 6-8. - Non-consent rotation system; charges for towing and storage. 
(a)  The non-consent rotation system has been established as a means of securing immediate wrecker service in cases of emergency relating to accidents on the public streets, abandoned vehicles on the public streets and other circumstances of public necessity arising out of law enforcement. The non-consent rotation system, therefore, is subject to the governance of the police department in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The police department shall maintain a list of participating vehicle storage facilities that hold a city permit. If owners/operators of disabled vehicles need towing company service but have no preference of towing companies or are unavailable to request a particular towing company, the police department will call participating vehicle storage facilities on a rotating basis until contact is made with a company that can perform the desired service. 
(c)  Police officers are empowered in exigent circumstances to select available tow trucks without regard to the rotation lists maintained by the police department. If a tow truck is utilized in the manner described in this subsection, that particular service will be charged to the towing company's next rotation turn. 
(d)  When a driver or owner of a vehicle to be towed away indicates or requests a particular towing company, the officer on the scene shall notify the communications dispatcher to summon that company by request. Any requested tow truck must be one that has obtained all necessary permits under this chapter. 
(e)  If the driver or owner of a vehicle to be towed expresses no preference as to wrecker service or for any reason cannot be questioned as to a preference, the officer on the scene shall notify the communications dispatcher to summon the vehicle storage facility whose name appears at the top of the non-consent rotation list. All vehicles that need to be towed incidental to an arrest will be considered a non-consent tow. 
(f)  Upon accepting a summons from the communications dispatcher, a towing company shall be allowed a maximum of twenty (20) minutes to appear on the scene. If the company does not appear on the scene within such a time limit, its call may be cancelled, its name placed on the bottom of the list and the next towing company on the list will be called. One towing company cannot respond for another towing company if the contacted company cannot respond to the call from the dispatcher. 
(g)  Towing companies participating in the non-consent rotation system are also required to comply with the following: 
(1)  The participating vehicle storage facility permit holder is responsible for the actions of tow truck drivers and employees or anyone acting on behalf of the company. 
(2)  Vehicle storage facility owners, drivers and employees, or anyone acting in their behalf, must fully comply with all state laws and local ordinances. 
(3)  A vehicle storage facility called to perform service shall be required to perform such service in a tow truck that has a tow truck permit in its name. 
(4)  A tow truck business cannot refuse to respond to a call from the police department and perform the requested service unless its tow trucks are all incapacitated or otherwise unavailable due to another bona fide engagement for their service. 
(5)  Towing companies are required to be on call for summons by the police department twenty-four (24) hours a day, including weekends and holidays. Repeated failure to respond to such summons shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this provision; such violation, however, is subject only to administrative action, which may be taken by the city marshal. 
(6)  Fees charged shall be subject to the following: 
a.  Fees charged by towing companies for non-consent rotation tows, pickups or related towing service shall not exceed the following: 
1.  Fees for use of standard tow truck and equipment shall not exceed the following: 
To remove any vehicle from public or private property to any storage area or destination within the city, by a standard tow truck, a basic fee may be charged not to exceed the following: 
(i)  First hour ..... $125.00 
(ii)  Each successive hour ..... $75.00 
(iii)  Use of rescue kit (air bags) when required ..... $115.00 
per bag, per hour 
2.  To remove any vehicle from a canal, river, lake or waterway and transport to any storage area or destination within the city by a tow truck, an additional fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) may be charged as well as costs for the actual cost of diver services. 
3.  When any standard or heavy-duty tow truck is called for towing service and is unable to perform the required service and has need of an additional tow truck to perform such service, upon prior approval by the police officer on the scene, the towing company initially summoned shall be allowed to select and employ an additional tow truck to assist in performing the required service. The additional tow truck so employed shall be one that is permitted under this chapter to engage in the towing business in the city, if possible. The basic fee for the additional tow truck shall be the same as the first. 
4.  A fee for storage of a vehicle shall not exceed twenty dollars ($20.00) per day, and shall not be charged during the first twenty-four (24) hours such vehicle is in the storage facility. 
5.  Fees for a medium-duty tow (the towed vehicle is between ten thousand and one (10,001) and twenty-four thousand nine hundred ninety-nine (24,999) pounds) and a heavy-duty tow (the towed vehicle is twenty-five thousand (25,000) pounds or more) are not regulated by the ordinance codified in this chapter, but rather by state law. 
b.  Fees established in this chapter with respect to non-consent towing calls are inclusive. Additional fees for initial services are prohibited. This restriction does not apply to additional fees charged for subsequent services later requested by the vehicle owner or such owner's agent(s). 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, § 1, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 6-9. - Impoundment of towed vehicles by police. 
    Any police officer, in the exercise of his/her discretion as a police officer, may direct that any vehicle shall be taken by the driver of the tow truck towing the vehicle directly to a designated area or licensed vehicle storage facility and there be held by the city for inspection or investigation to determine the cause or reason for the accident such vehicle was involved in or such vehicle's disability or for any lawful purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, § 1, 6-17-13) 
Secs. 6-10-6-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMITS 

Sec. 6-20. - Required permits for persons performing non-consent tows. 
    The city marshal shall develop necessary application and permit forms to enact these provisions. Any person desiring to operate a towing company in the city shall make application with the police department for the issuance of a towing company permit. Such application shall be submitted on the forms furnished by the police department. The applicants shall furnish all required information and supporting documents listed on the application form. A towing company permit shall not be issued by the city marshal unless the applicant meets all the required provisions of this chapter, including but not limited to: 
(1)  All information on the submitted application shall be true and accurate and all required supplemental documents or information have been furnished. 
(2)  The towing company must operate a vehicle storage facility in the city, that is, at all times licensed pursuant to the Texas Vehicle Storage Facility Act, any provisions of the Texas Administrative Code relevant to operation of a vehicle storage facility and all other applicable laws. 
(3)  The physical facility to be operated by the towing company must meet the following requirements: 
a.  The facility must be in compliance with all zoning requirements of the City of Groves and all applicable state laws or regulations; 
b.  The physical facility operated by the towing company must not be a part of any other business which performs towing services and must not be located at the same physical location as any other tow truck company; 
c.  The towing company must have a physical office of not less than two hundred (200) square feet and storage facility located in the city, with the exception of towing companies operating heavy-duty specialty tow trucks capable of towing eighteen-wheeled vehicles or other commercial vehicles, which companies are not required to maintain a physical office or storage facility within the city limits of the City of Groves, Texas, and the services of which may be procured by a city-approved towing company if necessary; 
d.  The towing company must have a telephone number that is different from any other tow truck company; 
e.  The towing company must have a sign on the business premises identifying the towing company by the name as it appears on the license application, street address, telephone number, hours of business and any vehicle storage facility license number issued for that location. Said sign shall be of a size that may be read from a distance of not less than one hundred fifty (150) feet; 
f.  All sites for outdoor storage or disabled motor vehicles and associated auto parts shall provide a screening fence for any area within one hundred (100) feet of any public street right-of-way or any lot containing a residential use or zoned residential. Such screening fence shall be not less than six (6) feet in height and constructed of wood, metal, concrete or other substantial material and shall be so constructed that any open space between solid material shall be a maximum of one-half inch in width, and the solid material between open spaces shall be at least two (2) inches in width; and 
g.  Maintained exclusively for storage of vehicles towed by wreckers operating under such permit. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, § 1, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 6-21. - Permit and inspection fees. 
    The permit fee to operate a towing company under the terms and conditions of this chapter shall be payable as follows: 
At the time of the original or renewal application for a towing company permit, the applicant shall pay a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) as a nonrefundable application fee. If the permit is granted, there will be no additional charge for the inspection of one (1) tow truck, such fee being included in the aforementioned permit fee. Should the applicant desire to operate more than one (1) tow truck, an inspection fee of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be charged for each additional tow truck and such fees must be paid at the time application for the permit is made. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, § 1, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 6-22. - Insurance. 
(a)  Each applicant for a permit under this article shall file satisfactory proof of garage keeper's legal liability insurance for the vehicle storage facility for which authorization to operate is sought. Such insurance shall include coverage for comprehensive, specified perils and collision per incident and shall be issued by a company duly authorized to write such insurance in the state. Such insurance shall be in the amount of not less than what is required in the rules adopted by the state transportation commission pursuant to the provisions of the Vehicle Storage Facility Act (V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 2303). 
(b)  Each applicant shall file satisfactory proof for each wrecker for which a permit is sought of a policy of public liability property damage insurance issued by a casualty insurance company authorized to do business in the state and in the standard form approved by the state board of insurance commissioners. The coverage provision will insure the public from loss or damage that may arise to any person or property by reason for the operation of a tow truck. The amount of recovery on each tow truck shall be in limits of not less than what is required by the provisions of V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 601. 
(c)  The certified insurance form shall be kept on file with the permit application, and it must warrant to the city that the insurance will not be cancelled without thirty (30) days prior notice, in writing, to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, § 1, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 6-23. - Issuance of tow truck permit. 
(a)  After the application for a permit under this article has been approved by the city marshal or such official's designee(s), the city clerk shall issue a permit to applicants complying with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  All permits issued shall be personal to the permit holder and may not be sold, leased or otherwise transferred to any other party. If a business or transfer holder sells, leases or conveys ownership or control of its tow truck business, the new owner shall not operate such tow truck business without obtaining all necessary permits. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, § 1, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 6-24. - Revocation. 
    The city council shall revoke any permit issued under the provisions of this article when it finds any of the following: 
(1)  The permit was procured by fraudulent conduct or false statement of a material fact in the written application; or 
(2)  The permit holder has violated any applicable provision of this Code, state law, or city ordinance, rule or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, § 1, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 6-25. - Vehicle inspection permits. 
(a)  No city vehicle inspection permit shall be issued for any tow truck proposed to be used by the applicant, unless the applicant holds a valid tow truck company permit issued in accordance with this article and the tow truck complies with the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  The tow truck shall have a current license tag and state inspection sticker; 
(2)  The tow truck shall be not less than three-quarter ton in size and must be equipped with booster brakes; 
(3)  The tow truck shall be equipped with a power or hand-operated winch, winch line and boom where applicable, with a factory rated lifting capacity or a city-tested capacity of not less than five thousand (5,000) pounds, single line capacity; 
(4)  Each tow truck must carry proper safety equipment that includes, but is not limited to the following: 
a.  At least one (1) ten-pound or two (2) five-pound multiple-purpose fire extinguishers in good working condition; 
b.  Magnetic tow lights, unless wireless, with appropriate cable and cushions to protect a vehicle's finish; 
c.  Tow dollies as appropriate; 
d.  Straps and tie downs as specified by the tow truck manufacturer; 
e.  Gloves; 
f.  Wheel chocks; 
g.  Five-gallon trash receptacle and material designed to absorb oil and fluids; 
h.  Broom and shovel; 
i.  Thirty-six inch crow bar; and 
j.  Triangle reflectors, flares, cones, safety lights or other appropriate safety signals. 
(b)  Payment of city taxes prerequisite to issuance. No city vehicle inspection permit shall be issued to any applicant if the applicant owns any tow truck upon which delinquent taxes are due the city, nor for any tow truck if the applicant therefore has failed to render the tow truck for ad valorem taxation. 
(c)  Display. Each city vehicle inspection permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be affixed securely to the windshield of the appropriate tow truck and it shall be unlawful for any person to operate any tow truck which does not have such permit so posted and displayed. 
(d)  Revocation. Any vehicle inspection permit issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked or suspended by the city police or fire chief for the violation of any provision of this Code, any state law, or any city ordinance, rule or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, § 1, 6-17-13) 
Secs. 6-26-6-50. - Reserved. 
Chapter 7 - DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLAN[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 06-04, §§ 1, 2, adopted Jan. 23, 2006, repealed chapter 7, sections 7-1-7-12, in its entirety and replaced it with a new chapter 7, sections 7-1-7-12. Former chapter 7 pertained to similar material and derived from Ord. No. 99-12, § 1, adopted Aug. 23, 1999. 

Sec. 7-1. - Declaration of policy, purpose and intent. 
    In order to conserve the available water supply and protect the integrity of water supply facilities, with particular regard for domestic water use, sanitation, and fire protection, and to protect and preserve public health, welfare, and safety and minimize the adverse impacts of water supply shortage or other water supply emergency conditions, the city hereby adopts the following regulations and restrictions on the delivery and consumption of water through ordinance passed by the city council. Water uses regulated or prohibited under this drought contingency plan (the plan) are considered to be non-essential and continuation of such uses during times of water shortage or other emergency water supply condition are deemed to constitute a waste of water which subjects the offender(s) to penalties as defined in section 7-9 of this plan. 
(Ord. No. 06-04, §§ 1, 2, 1-23-06) 
Sec. 7-2. - Public involvement. 
    The city shall actively inform the public and wholesale water customers and affirmatively provide opportunity for input from the public and from wholesale water customers regarding the plan. Such provision includes, but is not limited to, notifying the public and wholesale water customers of the city's public meeting regarding the proposed plan, notice of which will be given pursuant to the Open Meetings Act. 
(Ord. No. 06-04, §§ 1, 2, 1-23-06) 
Sec. 7-3. - Public education. 
    The city will periodically provide the public with information about the plan, including information about the conditions under which each stage of the plan is to be initiated or terminated and the drought response measures to be implemented in each stage. This information will be provided by means of: 
(1)  Publications of articles in a newspaper or newsletter of general circulation in the service area, providing information regarding the plan and/or information regarding water conservation techniques; 
(2)  Direct distributions to all residents and other users of water within the city, and all wholesale water customers of the city, if any, ("users") explaining the plan; 
(3)  Direct distributions to users of educational and informational material regarding the plan; and 
(4)  Additional educational activities consisting of: 
a.  Conducting an informational school program in a school attended by students within the city's service area; 
b.  Conducting an educational program for users at a public place within or accessible to residents of the city; 
c.  Conducting or engaging in such other informational or educational activity designed to further the plan as may be consistent with the purposes and policies of this plan; or 
d.  Any combination of the foregoing. 
(Ord. No. 06-04, §§ 1, 2, 1-23-06) 
Sec. 7-4. - Coordination with regional water planning groups. 
    The service area of the city is located within East Texas Regional (Region I) Water Planning Group and the city has provided a copy of this plan to the East Texas Regional Water Planning Group. 
(Ord. No. 06-04, §§ 1, 2, 1-23-06) 
Sec. 7-5. - Coordination with Lower Neches Valley Authority. 
    All water for the city is supplied through a municipal raw water contract with the Lower Neches Valley Authority (LNVA). LNVA has implemented its own drought contingency plan that includes water use restrictions that are applicable to its retail and wholesale customers. The LNVA's drought plan requires its wholesale customers to enforce similar or more stringent standards and procedures in their water systems. A copy of the LNVA drought contingency plan is [available for inspection in the offices of the city]. 
(Ord. No. 06-04, §§ 1, 2, 1-23-06) 
Sec. 7-6. - Authorization. 
    The city's designee authorized and directed to implement the applicable provisions of this plan is as named in the ordinance approving the plan. The city's designee has the authority to determine when implementation is necessary to protect public health, safety, and welfare. The city's designee shall have the authority to initiate or terminate drought or other water supply emergency response measures as described in this plan. 
(Ord. No. 06-04, §§ 1, 2, 1-23-06) 
Sec. 7-7. - Application. 
    The provisions of this plan shall apply to all persons and customers utilizing water provided by the city. The terms "person" and "customer" as used in the plan include individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, and all other legal entities. 
(Ord. No. 06-04, §§ 1, 2, 1-23-06) 
Sec. 7-8. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this plan, the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  Aesthetic water use: Water use for ornamental or decorative purposes such as fountains, reflecting pools, and water gardens. 
(2)  Commercial and institutional water use: Water use that is integral to the operations of commercial and non-profit establishments and governmental entities such as retail establishments, hotels and motels, restaurants, and office buildings. 
(3)  Conservation: Those practices, techniques, and technologies that reduce the consumption of water, reduce the loss or waste of water, improve the efficiency in the use of water or increase the recycling and reuse of water so that a supply is conserved and made available for future or alternative uses. 
(4)  Construction water use: Water used in the process of building or erecting structures, streets, ditches, etc. or water used to prepare a surface for building and/or rehabilitation. Construction water use may occur through a fixed tap or through a mobile unit that fills at a fixed tap. 
(5)  Customer: Any person, company, or organization using water supplied by the city. 
(6)  Domestic water use: Water use for personal needs or for household or sanitary purposes such as drinking, bathing, heating, cooking, sanitation, or for cleaning a residence, business, industry, or institution. 
(7)  Even number address: street addresses, box numbers, or rural postal route numbers ending in 0, 2, 4, 6, or 8 and locations without addresses. 
(8)  Industrial water use: The use of water in processes designed to convert materials of lower value into forms having greater usability and value. 
(9)  In-service production capacity: The production capacity of the treatment plant taking into account temporary loss in capacity due to removal of treatment units/equipment for non-scheduled repairs or maintenance or modifications in treatment operation due to changes in surface water quality. 
(10)  Landscape irrigation use: Water used for the irrigation and maintenance of landscaped areas, whether publicly or privately owned, including residential and commercial lawns, gardens, golf courses, parks, and rights-of-way and medians. 
(11)  Non-essential water use: Water uses that are not essential nor required for the protection of public, health, safety, and welfare, including: 
a.  Irrigation of landscape areas, including parks, athletic fields, and golf courses, except otherwise provided under this plan; 
b.  Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle; 
c.  Use of water to wash down any sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts, or other hard-surfaced areas; 
d.  Use of water to wash down buildings or structures for purposes other than immediate fire protection; 
e.  Flushing gutters or permitting water to run or accumulate in any gutter or street; 
f.  Use of water to fill, refill, or add to any indoor or outdoor swimming pools or jacuzzi-type pools; 
g.  Use of water in a fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes except where necessary to support aquatic life; 
h.  Failure to repair a controllable leak(s) within a reasonable period after having been given notice directing the repair of such leak(s); and 
i.  Use of water from hydrants for construction purposes or any other purposes other than fire fighting. 
(12)  Odd numbered address: Street addresses, box numbers, or rural postal route numbers ending in 1, 3, 5, 7, or 9. 
(Ord. No. 06-04, §§ 1, 2, 1-23-06) 
Sec. 7-9. - Criteria for initiation and termination of drought response stages. 
(a)  The city's designee shall monitor water supply and/or demand conditions and shall determine when conditions warrant initiation or termination of each stage of the plan, that is, when the specified "triggers" are reached. The trigger conditions are for the purpose of responding to, but not limited to, the following situations: 
(1)  Reduction in available water supply from the LNVA; 
(2)  Water production or distribution system limitations; 
(3)  Supply source contamination; or 
(4)  Water system outage due to the failure or damage of major water system components (i.e. pumps, tanks, etc.). 
(b)  Stage 1 triggers-Mild water shortage conditions. 
(1)  Requirements for initiation. Stage 1 may be initiated if one (1) or more of the following occur: 
a.  When, pursuant to requirements specified in the city raw water contract with Lower Neches Valley Authority, notification is received requesting initiation of stage 1 of the LNVA drought contingency plan. 
b.  When demand on the city's water supply facilities reaches or exceeds eighty (80) percent of the in-service production capacity of such facilities for three (3) consecutive days, as determined by the city's operator. 
c.  Level in storage tanks are consistently below three-fourths (3/4) full for five (5) consecutive days. 
d.  Disruption in supply facilities (LNVA canal conditions, transmission line from canal) result in the city's reservoir being depleted to two-thirds ( 2/3 ) normal operating conditions. 
(2)  Requirements for termination. Stage 1 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of three (3) consecutive days. 
(c)  Stage 2 triggers-Moderate water shortage conditions. 
(1)  Requirements for initiation. Stage 2 may be initiated when one (1) or more of the following occur: 
a.  When, pursuant to requirements specified in the city raw water contract with Lower Neches Valley Authority, notification is received requesting initiation of stage 2 of the LNVA drought contingency plan. 
b.  When demand on the city's water supply facilities reaches or exceeds eighty-five (85) percent of the in-service production capacity of such facilities for three (3) consecutive days, as determined by the city's operator. 
c.  Level in storage tanks is consistently below one-half (1/2) full for three (3) consecutive days. 
d.  Disruption in supply facilities (LNVA canal conditions, transmission line from canal) result in the city's reservoir being depleted to one-half (1/2) normal operating conditions. 
(2)  Requirements for termination. Stage 2 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of three (3) consecutive days. Upon termination of stage 2, stage 1 becomes operative. 
(d)  Stage 3 triggers-Severe water shortage conditions. 
(1)  Requirements for initiation. Stage 3 may be initiated when one (1) or more of the following occur: 
a.  When, pursuant to requirements specified in the city raw water contract with Lower Neches Valley Authority, notification is received requesting initiation of stage 3 of the LNVA drought contingency plan. 
b.  When demand on the city's water supply facilities exceeds ninety (90) percent of the in-service production capacity of such facilities for three (3) consecutive days, as determined by the city's operator. 
c.  Level in storage tanks is one-quarter (1/4) full. 
d.  Disruption in supply facilities (LNVA canal conditions, transmission line from canal) result in the city's reservoir being depleted to one-quarter (1/4) normal operating conditions 
(2)  Requirements for termination. Stage 3 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of three (3) consecutive days. Upon termination of stage 3, stage 2 becomes operative. 
(e)  Stage 4 triggers-Critical water shortage conditions. 
(1)  Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements and restrictions on certain non-essential water uses for stage 4 of this plan when one (1) or more of the following occur: 
When demand on the city's water supply facilities reaches or exceeds ninety-five (95) percent of the in-service production capacity of such facilities for three (3) consecutive days, as determined by the city's operator. 
(2)  Requirements for termination. Stage 4 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of three (3) consecutive days. Upon termination of stage 4, stage 3 becomes operative. 
(f)  Stage 5 triggers-Emergency water shortage conditions. 
(1)  Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements and restrictions for stage 5 of this plan when the city's designee determines that a water supply emergency exists based on: 
a.  Notification is provided by LNVA to the city that they have encountered a major system failure which may cause unprecedented loss of capability to provide water service; 
b.  Major disruption in the city's treatment and/or distribution system causing an unprecedented loss of capability to provide water service; or 
c.  Natural or man-made contamination of the water supply source. 
(2)  Requirements for termination. Stage 5 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased. 
(Ord. No. 06-04, §§ 1, 2, 1-23-06) 
Sec. 7-10. - Drought response stages. 
(a)  The city's designee shall declare stage conditions, as set forth in Section I of this plan, and implement the appropriate response. The city's designee, on all stages, shall implement the following notification procedures: 
(1)  Notification of the public: The city's designee shall notify the public by means of any combination of the following: 
a.  Dissemination of press releases to the local news media (a list of public media information is [available for inspection in the offices of the city]); 
b.  Direct mail to each customer; 
c.  Public service announcements; 
d.  Signs posted in public places; 
e.  Posting of signs at the entrances to the city; and/or 
f.  Telephone calls. 
Notices issued shall contain (i) the date the drought response measures will begin, (ii) the date the drought response measures will terminate, if known, (iii) a list of drought response measures to be implemented, and (iv) an explanation of penalties for violations of such drought response measures. Notices shall also be issued when actions for each stage has been terminated. 
(2)  Additional notification: The city's designee shall notify directly, or cause to be notified directly, the following individuals and entities: 
a.  City manager, mayor and city council members (all conditions); 
b.  City fire chief (severe, critical and/or emergency); 
c.  City attorney (moderate, severe, critical and/or emergency); 
d.  County emergency management coordinator (critical and/or emergency); 
e.  County commissioner (critical and/or emergency); 
f.  Critical water users (critical and/or emergency); 
g.  Major water users (critical and/or emergency); 
h.  TCEQ (required for: moderate, severe, critical, emergency); 
(b)  Stage 1 response-Mild water shortage conditions. 
Target: Achieve a voluntary five (5) percent reduction in total water use. 
(1)  Best management practices for supply management: The following measures will be implemented directly by the city to manage limited water supplies and/or reduce water demand: reduce or discontinue flushing of water mains, careful monitoring of system to prevent tank overflows and/or quickly repair line breaks/leaks. 
(2)  Voluntary water use restrictions for reducing demand: 
a.  Water customers are requested to voluntarily limit the irrigation of landscaped areas to Sundays and Thursdays for customers with a street address ending in an even number (0, 2, 4, 6 or 8), and Saturdays and Wednesdays for water customers with a street address ending in an odd number (1, 3, 5, 7 or 9), and to irrigate landscapes only between the hours of midnight and 10:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. to midnight on designated watering days. 
b.  All operations of the city shall adhere to water use restrictions prescribed for stage 2 of the plan. 
c.  Water customers are requested to practice water conservation and to minimize or discontinue water use for non-essential purposes. 
d.  Establish an information center to answer inquiries and to discuss water shortage and its potential impact on water supply. 
(c)  Stage 2 response-Moderate water shortage conditions. 
Target: Achieve a ten (10) percent reduction in total water use. 
(1)  Best management practices for supply management: The following measures will be implemented directly by the city to manage limited water supplies and/or reduce water demand: reduce or discontinue flushing of water mains, careful monitoring of system to prevent tank overflows and quickly repair line breaks/leaks. 
(2)  Water use restrictions for demand reduction: Under threat of penalty for violation, the following water use restrictions shall apply to all persons: 
a.  Irrigation of landscaped areas with hose-end sprinklers or automatic irrigation systems shall be limited to Sundays and Thursdays for customers with a street address ending in an even number (0, 2, 4, 6 or 8), and Saturdays and Wednesdays for water customers with a street address ending in an odd number (1, 3, 5, 7 or 9), and irrigation of landscaped areas is further limited to the hours of 12:00 midnight until 10:00 a.m. and between 8:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight on designated watering days. However, irrigation of landscaped areas is permitted at anytime if it is by means of a hand-held hose, a faucet filled bucket or watering can of five (5) gallons or less, or drip irrigation system. 
b.  Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle is prohibited except on designated watering days between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 10:00 a.m. and between 8:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight. Such washing, when allowed, shall be done with a hand-held bucket or a hand-held hose equipped with a positive shutoff nozzle for quick rises. Vehicle washing may be done at any time on the immediate premises of a commercial car wash or commercial service station. Further, such washing may be exempted from these regulations if the health, safety, and welfare of the public is contingent upon frequent vehicle cleansing, such as garbage trucks and vehicles used to transport food and perishables. 
c.  Use of water to fill, refill, or add to any indoor or outdoor swimming pools, wading pools, or jacuzzi-type pools is prohibited except on designated watering days between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 10:00 a.m. and between 8:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight. 
d.  Operation of any ornamental fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes is prohibited except where necessary to support aquatic life or where such fountains or ponds are equipped with a recirculation system. 
e.  Use of water from hydrants shall be limited to fire fighting, related activities, or other activities necessary to maintain public health, safety, and welfare, except that use of water from designated fire hydrants for construction purposes may be allowed under special permit from the city. 
f.  Use of water for the irrigation of golf course greens, tees, and fairways is prohibited except on designated watering days between the hours 12:00 midnight and 10:00 a.m. and between 8:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight. However, if the golf course utilizes a water source other than that provided by the city, the facility shall not be subject to these regulations. 
g.  All restaurants are prohibited from serving water to patrons except upon request of the patron. 
h.  The following uses of water are defined as non-essential and are prohibited: 
1.  Wash down of any sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts, or other hard-surfaced areas; 
2.  Use of water to wash down buildings or structures for purposes other than immediate fire protection; 
3.  Use of water for dust control; 
4.  Flushing gutters or permitting water to run or accumulate in any gutter or street; and 
5.  Failure to repair a controllable leak(s) within a reasonable period after having been given notice directing the repair of such leak(s). 
i.  The city manager may direct any or all commercial, industrial and recreational users to suspend use of city water for purposes other than domestic use. 
(d)  Stage 3 response-Severe water shortage conditions. 
Target: Achieve a twelve and one-half (121/2) percent reduction in total water use. 
(1)  Best management practices for supply management: The following measures will be implemented directly by the city to manage limited water supplies and/or reduce water demand: reduce or discontinue flushing of water mains, careful monitoring of system to prevent tank overflows and/or to quickly repair line breaks and possible interconnection to Port Neches water system as back-up supply. 
(2)  Water use restrictions for demand reduction: All requirements of stage 2 shall remain in effect during stage 3 except: 
a.  Irrigation of landscaped areas shall be limited to designated watering days between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 10:00 a.m. and between 8:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight and shall be by means of hand-held hoses, hand-held buckets, drip irrigation, or permanently installed automatic sprinkler system only. The use of hose-end sprinklers is prohibited at all times. 
b.  The watering of golf course tees, greens and fairways is prohibited unless the golf course utilizes a water source other than that provided by the city. 
c.  The city manager may direct any or all commercial, industrial and recreational users to suspend use of city water for purposes other than domestic use. 
(e)  Stage 4 response-Critical water shortage conditions. 
Target: Achieve a fifteen (15) percent reduction in total water use. 
(1)  Best management practices for supply management: The following measures will be implemented directly by the city to manage limited water supplies and/or reduce water demand: reduce or discontinue flushing of water mains, careful monitoring of system to prevent tank overflows and quickly repair line breaks/leaks and possible interconnection to Port Neches water system as back-up supply. 
(2)  Water use restrictions for reducing demand: All requirements of stage 2 and 3 shall remain in effect during stage 4 except: 
a.  Irrigation of landscaped areas shall be limited to designated watering days between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. and between 8:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight and shall be by means of hand-held hoses, hand-held buckets, or drip irrigation only. The use of hose-end sprinklers or permanently installed automatic sprinkler systems are prohibited at all times. 
b.  Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle not occurring on the premises of a commercial car wash and commercial service stations and not in the immediate interest of public health, safety, and welfare is prohibited. Further, such vehicle washing at commercial car washes and commercial service stations shall occur only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. and between 6:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
c.  The filling, refilling, or adding of water to swimming pools, wading pools, and jacuzzi-type pools is prohibited. 
d.  No application for new, additional, expanded, or increased-in-size water service connections, meters, service lines, pipeline extensions, mains, or water service facilities of any kind shall be approved, and time limits for approval of such applications are hereby suspended for such time as this drought response stage or a higher-numbered stage shall be in effect. 
e.  The city manager may direct any or all commercial, industrial and recreational users to suspend use of city water for purposes other than domestic use. 
(f)  Stage 5 response-Emergency water shortage conditions. 
Target: Achieve a minimum fifteen (15) percent reduction in total water use. 
(1)  Best management practices for supply management: The following measures will be implemented directly by the city to manage limited water supplies and/or reduce water demand: reduce or discontinue flushing of water mains, careful monitoring of system to prevent tank overflows and to quickly repair line breaks/leaks, and notify the public and enforcement agencies of the immediate need for water use reduction. 
(2)  Water use restrictions for reducing demand. All requirements of stage 2, 3, and 4 shall remain in effect during stage 5 except: 
a.  Irrigation of landscaped areas is absolutely prohibited. 
b.  Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle is absolutely prohibited. 
c.  The city manager may direct any or all commercial, industrial and recreational users to suspend use of city water for purposes other than domestic use. 
(Ord. No. 06-04, §§ 1, 2, 1-23-06) 
Sec. 7-11. - Enforcement. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly or intentionally allow the use of water from the city for residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural, governmental, or any other purpose in a manner contrary to any provision of this plan, or in an amount in excess of that permitted by the drought response stage in effect at the time pursuant to action taken by city's designee, in accordance with provisions of this plan. 
(b)  The penalty for violation of this chapter shall be the same as provided in section 1-5 of the City Code of Ordinances, as amended. 
(c)  Each day that one (1) or more of the provisions in this plan is violated shall constitute a separate offense. If a person is convicted of three (3) or more distinct violations of this plan, the city's designee shall, upon due notice to the customer, be authorized to discontinue water service to the premises where such violations occur. Services discontinued under such circumstances shall be restored only upon payment of a re-connection charge, and any other costs incurred by the city in discontinuing service. In addition, suitable assurance must be given to the city's designee that the same action shall not be repeated while the plan is in effect. Compliance with this plan may also be sought through injunctive relief in the city court. 
(d)  Any person, including a person classified as a water customer of the city, in apparent control of the property where a violation occurs or originates shall be presumed to be the violator, and proof that the violation occurred on the person's property shall constitute a rebuttable presumption that the person in apparent control of the property committed the violation, but any such person shall have the right to show that he/she did not commit the violation. Parents shall be presumed to be responsible for violations of their minor children and proof that a violation, committed by a child, occurred on property within the parents' control shall constitute a rebuttable presumption that the parent committed the violation, but any such parent may be excused if he/she proves that he/she had previously directed the child not to use the water as it was used in violation of this plan and that the parent could not have reasonably known of the violation. 
(e)  Any employee of the city and/or police officer may issue a citation to a person he/she reasonably believes to be in violation of this chapter. The citation shall be prepared in duplicate and shall contain the name and address of the alleged violator, if known, the offense charged, and shall direct him/her to appear in justice of the peace court on the date shown on the citation for which the date shall not be less than three (3) days nor more than five (5) days from the date the citation was issued. The alleged violator shall be served a copy of the citation. Service of the citation shall be complete upon delivery of the citation to the alleged violator, to an agent or employee of a violator, or to a person over fourteen (14) years of age who is a member of the violator's immediate family or is a resident of the violator's residence. The alleged violator shall appear in justice of the peace court to enter a plea of guilty or not guilty for the violation of this plan. If the alleged violator fails to appear in justice of the peace court, a warrant for his/her arrest may be issued. A summons to appear may be issued in lieu of an arrest warrant. These cases shall be expedited and given preferential setting in justice of the peace court before all other cases. 
(f)  The city also may, at its option, install a flow restriction device in the service line of any user for violation of this ordinance. The city may charge the user for the cost of the flow restriction device, including installation, and may disconnect service for failure to pay for this item. 
(g)  To further enhance the effectiveness of water conservation. The city council may, after declaring a water usage emergency, impose surcharges not to exceed the following amounts on all water usage (per two-month period) by any users: 
0-6,000 gallons $0.75 per 1,000 gallons 6,000-10,000 gallons $1.00 per 1,000 gallons 10,000-20,000 gallons $1.50 per 1,000 gallons Over 20,000 gallons $1.75 per 1,000 gallons  
No surcharge for any bracket may be less than the surcharge for the next lower bracket. These surcharges shall become effective for each users as soon as the city can read the meter serving that user and notify that user. 
(Ord. No. 06-04, §§ 1, 2, 1-23-06) 
Sec. 7-12. - Variances. 
(a)  The city's designee, may, in writing, grant temporary variance for existing water uses otherwise prohibited under this plan if it is determined that failure to grant such variance would cause an emergency condition adversely affecting the health, sanitation, or fire protection for the public or the person requesting such variance and if one (1) or more of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Compliance with this plan cannot be technically accomplished during the duration of the water supply shortage or other condition for which the plan is in effect. 
(2)  Alternative methods can be implemented which will achieve the same level of reduction in water use. 
(b)  Persons requesting an exemption from the provisions of this chapter shall file a petition for variance with the city within five (5) days after the plan or a particular drought response stage has been invoked. All petitions for variances shall be reviewed by the city's designee, and shall include the following: 
(1)  Name and address of the petitioner(s). 
(2)  Purpose of water use. 
(3)  Specific provision(s) of the plan from which the petitioner is requesting relief. 
(4)  Detailed statement as to how the specific provision of the plan adversely affects the petitioner or what damage or harm will occur to the petitioner or others if petitioner complies with this drought contingency plan. 
(5)  Description of the relief requested. 
(6)  Period of time for which the variance is sought. 
(7)  Alternative water use restrictions or other measures the petitioner is taking or proposes to take to meet the intent of this plan and the compliance date. 
(8)  Other pertinent information. 
(c)  Persons who anticipate, in advance, the need for a variance may apply for a standing variance by filing a petition with the city. If a standing variance is granted, the city reserves the right to override or modify such variance as conditions arise. 
(d)  Variances granted by the city shall be subject to the following conditions, unless waived or modified by the city's designee: 
(1)  Variances granted shall include a timetable for compliance. 
(2)  Variances granted shall expire when the plan is no longer in effect, unless the petitioner has failed to meet specified requirements. 
(3)  No variance shall be retroactive or otherwise justify any violation of this plan occurring prior to the issuance of the variance. 
(Ord. No. 06-04, §§ 1, 2, 1-23-06) 
Chapter 8 - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1, Ord. No. 87-08, adopted March 9, 1987, amended ch. 8 to change all references to "corporation court" to "municipal court." Section 2 of this ordinance repealed § 8-3, relative to justice of the peace courts, which section contained no historical notation and is presumed adopted with the adoption of this Code. 
Charter reference- Corporation [municipal] court, Art. XII, § 9; city judge, Art. XII, § 10; clerk of court, Art. XII, § 11. 
State Law reference- Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1194 et seq.; Vernon's C.C.P. art. 45.01 et seq. 

Sec. 8-1. - Created. 
    There is hereby created a municipal court in and for the city. 
(Ord. No. 87-08, § 1, 3-9-87) 
Sec. 8-2. - Jurisdiction. 
    The municipal court shall have jurisdiction within the city with the power to hear and determine all cases of violation of this Code, the ordinances of the city, and all other cases of which municipal courts are given jurisdiction by state law. 
(Ord. No. 87-08, § 1, 3-9-87) 
State Law reference- Jurisdiction and powers of justice of the peace courts, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. arts. 2385-2387; Vernon's C.C.P. arts. 4.01, 4.11. 
Sec. 8-3. - Reserved. 
Note- See the editor's note to this chapter title. 
Sec. 8-4. - Authority to collect special expense in certain dismissed cases. 
(a)  The municipal court of the city be and the same is hereby authorized to collect a special expense for services performed in cases in which the laws of this state require that the case be dismissed because of actions by or on behalf of the defendant which were subsequent to the date of the alleged offense. Such actions are limited to compliance with the provisions of subsection (a), section 143A, Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways (article 6701d, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes). Such special expense shall not exceed the actual expenses incurred for the services or ten dollars ($10.00), whichever is less. 
(b)  The imposition of this special expense applies only to offenses committed on or after September 1, 1987. 
(c)  All monies collected under this section shall be paid into the treasury of the city for the benefit of the city. 
(Ord. No. 87-35, §§ 1-3, 9-21-87) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 87-35, §§ 1-3, adopted Sept. 21, 1987, being not specifically amendatory of this Code, has been included as § 8-4 at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 8-5. - Municipal court technology fund. 
(a)  Establishment of municipal court technology fund. 
(1)  There is hereby created and established a municipal court technology fund, herein known as the fund, pursuant to art. 102.0172 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(2)  The fund may be maintained in an interest bearing account and may be maintained in the general revenue account. 
(b)  Establishment of amount of the fee and assessment and collection. 
(1)  The fee shall be in the amount of four dollars ($4.00). 
(2)  The fee shall be assessed and collected from the defendant upon conviction for a misdemeanor offense in the municipal court as a cost of court. A defendant is considered convicted if: 
a.  A sentence is imposed on the person; 
b.  The person is placed on community supervision, including deferred adjudication, community supervision; or 
c.  The court defers final disposition of the person's case. 
(3)  The fee shall be collected upon conviction for an offense committed on or after September 1, 1999. 
(4)  The clerk of the court shall collect the fee and pay the fee to the director of finance of the city, who shall deposit the fee into the municipal court technology fund. 
(c)  Designated use of the fund and administration. 
(1)  The fund shall be used only to finance the purchase of technological enhancements for the municipal court of the city, including: 
a.  Computer systems; 
b.  Computer networks; 
c.  Computer hardware; 
d.  Computer software; 
e.  Imaging systems; 
f.  Electronic kiosks; 
g.  Electronic ticket writers; or 
h.  Docket management systems. 
(2)  The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city council of the city. 
(Ord. No. 99-16, §§ 1-3, 8-31-99) 
Sec. 8-6. - Municipal court building security fund. 
(a)  Establishment. 
(1)  There is hereby created and established a municipal court building security fund, herein known as the municipal court building security fund, pursuant to article 102.017 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(2)  The municipal court building security fund may be maintained in an interest bearing account and may be maintained in the general revenue account. 
(b)  Establishment of amount of the security fee and assessment and collection. 
(1)  The security fee shall be in the amount of three dollars ($3.00). 
(2)  The security fee shall be assessed and collected from the defendant upon conviction of a misdemeanor offense in the municipal court as a cost of court. A defendant is considered convicted if: 
a.  A sentence is imposed on the person; 
b.  The person receives community supervision, including deferred adjudication; or 
c.  The court defers final disposition of the person's case. 
(3)  The clerk of the court shall collect the security fee and pay the fee to the director of finance of the city, who shall deposit the fee into the municipal court building security fund. 
(c)  Designated use of the fund and administration. 
(1)  The fund may be used only to finance items when used for the purpose of providing security services for the building housing the municipal court of the city, including: 
a.  The purchase or repair of X-ray machines and conveying systems; 
b.  Handheld metal detectors; 
c.  Walkthrough metal detectors; 
d.  Identification cards and systems; 
e.  Electronic locking and surveillance equipment; 
f.  Bailiffs, deputy sheriffs, deputy constables, or contract security personnel during times when they are providing appropriate security services; 
g.  Signage; 
h.  Confiscated weapon inventory and tracking systems; 
i.  Locks, chains, alarms, or similar security devices; 
j.  The purchase or repair of bullet-proof glass; and 
k.  Continuing education on security issues for court personnel and security personnel. 
(2)  The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 03-01, §§ 1-3, 4-7-03) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 03-01, §§ 1-3, adopted April 7, 2003, did not specifically amend the Code. Hence, its inclusion herein as section 8-6 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Chapter 9 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Elections, Art. IV. 
State Law reference- Elections generally, V.A.T.S. Election Code. 

Sec. 9-1. - State law and charter to govern. 
    All elections pertaining to municipal affairs shall be governed by the election laws of the state. 
Sec. 9-2. - General duties of officers; notice of election. 
    In all city elections, the mayor, city clerk, or city council shall do and perform each act in other elections required to be done and performed respectively by the county judge, the county clerk, or the commissioners' court. In all city elections, the mayor, or if he fails to do so, the city council, shall order the election, give notice and appoint election officers to hold the election. In general elections for officers the notice or proclamation shall be issued and posted at the polling places not later than thirty (30) days before the first Tuesday in November of the year in which the election is to be held. 
Sec. 9-3. - Procedure for getting candidate's name on ballot-Generally. 
    Any eligible and qualified person may have his name printed upon the official ballot as a candidate for the office of mayor, councilman or other city office by filing his sworn application with the city clerk at least thirty (30) days prior to the election day. The application shall state the specific office or place being sought by the applicant and that the applicant is eligible and qualified under state law to become a candidate for and hold the office being sought, if elected. 
Sec. 9-4. - Same-Form of application. 
    The form of the sworn application required in section 9-3 shall be substantially as follows: 
    "To the City Clerk of the City of Groves, Texas, Greetings: 
    "I, _______, hereby make application to have my name printed on the official ballot as a candidate for the office of _______ to be voted upon at the city election to be held on the _______ day of _______, _______ and I hereby certify that I am qualified to make this application and that I am legally qualified to hold such office, if elected. 
    "State of Texas) 
    County of Jefferson) 
    _______, being duly sworn, deposes and says that the statements contained in the foregoing application are true. 
    (Signed) _______ 
    "Subscribed and sworn to before me, this the _______ day of _______, _______. 
    _______ 
    (Seal) 
    Notary Public, in and for Jefferson County, Texas." 
Sec. 9-5. - Same-Loyalty oath. 
    The application required by section 9-3 shall be accompanied with an executed copy of the "Loyalty Affidavit" as required by Article 6.02 V.A.T.S. Election Code, in substantially the following form: 
    "I, _______, of the City of Groves, County of Jefferson, State of Texas, being a candidate for the office of _______, do solemnly swear that I believe in and approve of our present representative form of government, and if elected, I will support and defend our present representative form of government, and will resist any effort or movement from any source which seeks to subvert or destroy the same or any part thereof, and I will support and defend the Constitution and Laws of the United States and of the State of Texas. 
    _______ 
    (Candidate's Signature) 
    "Sworn to and subscribed before me, at _______, Texas, this the _______ day of _______, A.D., _______. 
    _______ 
    Notary Public, in and for Jefferson County, Texas." 
Sec. 9-6. - Posting of candidates' names; objection; procedure. 
    The names of all those who have filed their sworn applications to have their names printed on the official ballot as candidates shall be posted by the city clerk in a conspicuous place at his office for the inspection of the public for at least ten (10) days before he orders the ballots to be printed. All objections to the regularity or validity of the application of any person shall be made within five (5) days after such posting, by written notice filed with the city clerk, setting forth the grounds of objections. In case no such objection is filed within the time prescribed, the regularity or validity of the application of no person whose name is so posted, shall be thereafter contested. The city clerk shall preserve in his office for a period of two (2) years all applications, notice of objections and other related papers. 
Sec. 9-7. - Withdrawal of candidate. 
    Any person eligible to the office of mayor, councilman, or other office who has filed his sworn application in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall have his name printed on the official ballots. Any such person may cause his name to be withdrawn at any time before the official ballots are actually printed, by filing in writing with the city clerk a request to that effect over his own signature, duly attested to by a notary public. No name so withdrawn shall be printed on the ballots. 
Sec. 9-8. - Printing of ballots. 
    Not later than twenty (20) days before the city general election the city clerk shall have the official ballots printed. 
Sec. 9-9. - Absentee voting. 
    Each qualified voter who desires to cast an absentee vote and who expects to be absent on the day of the city general election shall be entitled to an official ballot and the right to cast such ballot in accordance with the provisions of Article 7.14 V.A.T.S. Election Code. 
Sec. 9-10. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 87-09, § 1, adopted Mar. 9, 1987, repealed § 9-10, relative to election officers or judges, which section contained no historical notation and is presumed adopted with the adoption of this Code. 
Sec. 9-11. - Election proclamation, posting. 
    The city marshal shall post a properly executed copy of the election proclamation and notice at the places where the election is to be held. Said notice shall be posted thirty (30) days before the date of said election. 
Sec. 9-12. - Expense, contribution reports. 
    All candidates for municipal offices shall file with the city clerk an itemized list of expenses incurred and contributions received before the seventh day prior to election and also within ten (10) days after the election. 
Sec. 9-13. - When elected officials to take office. 
    All successful candidates for all offices of the city elected at the general election held on the first Tuesday following the first Monday in November of each year and/or all candidates elected to office in a special run-off election held after the general election in accordance with the terms of the city charter shall take the oath of office and qualify for said office on the first Wednesday in December of each year thereafter. 
The duly qualified and elected officers of the city then serving shall hold over and remain in said office until their successors have qualified as provided in this section. 
(Ord. No. 62, 10-28-54) 
Sec. 9-14. - Notice to elected officers; time for qualification. 
    It shall be the duty of the city clerk to notify all persons elected, and all newly elected officers may enter upon their duties on the fifth day thereafter, Sundays excepted. If any such officer fails to qualify within thirty (30) days after his election, his office shall be deemed vacant, and a new election held to fill the same. 
Sec. 9-15. - Filing fee for office of mayor or councilmember. 
    There shall be a filing fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for a candidate for the office of mayor or councilmember. 
(Ord. No. 00-04, § 1, 3-6-00) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 00-04, § 1, adopted March 6, 2000, did not specifically amend the Code. Hence its inclusion as section 9-15 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Chapter 91/2 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 86-33, adopted Dec. 15, 1986, did not specifically amend this Code; hence inclusion of §§ 1-8 and 10 as Ch. 91/2, §§ 91/2-1-91/2-9, was at the discretion of the editor. 
Charter reference- General powers of city, Art. II. 
State Law reference- Texas Disaster Act of 1975. Vernon's Ann. Civ. St., art. 6889-7, § 8. 

Sec. 91/2-1. - Emergency management director-Program, organization. 
    There exists the office of emergency management director of the City of Groves, which shall be held by the mayor in accordance with state law. 
(1)  An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director. 
(2)  The director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management within the city and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this chapter. He may delegate authority for execution of these duties to the coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for such execution shall remain with the director. 
(3)  The operational emergency management organization of the City of Groves shall consist of the officers and employees of the city so designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well as organized volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan. 
(Ord. No. 86-33, § 1, 12-15-86) 
Sec. 91/2-2. - Same-Powers and duties. 
    The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following: 
(1)  Conduct of an on-going survey of actual or potential hazards which threaten life and property within the city and on-going program of identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur; 
(2)  Supervision of the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the City of Groves and recommending for adoption by the city council all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary for the implementation of such plan; 
(3)  Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The declaration may not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven (7) days, except by or with the consent of the city council. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing or terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the city clerk; 
(4)  Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations or directives which are necessary for carrying out the purposes of this chapter. Such proclamations, regulations or directives shall be disseminated promptly by means calculated to bring their contents to the attention of the general public and, unless circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or impede, promptly filed with the city clerk; 
(5)  Direction and control of the operations of the Groves emergency management organization as well as the training of emergency management personnel; 
(6)  Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency management organization of the city; 
(7)  Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional or federal emergency management organizations; 
(8)  Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any department of the city to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan; 
(9)  Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which said city is located, and with other municipalities within the county, for the county-wide coordination of emergency management efforts; 
(10)  Supervision of, and final authorization for, the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency management within the city; 
(11)  Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for public shelter and other purposes; 
(12)  Survey of the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies and services which could be used during a disaster, as provided for herein; 
(13)  Other requirements as specified in the Texas Disaster Act of 1975 (V.A.C.S. article 6889-7). 
(Ord. No. 86-33, § 2, 12-15-86) 
Sec. 91/2-3. - Emergency management plan. 
    A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be developed and maintained in a current state. The plan shall set forth the form of the organization, establish and designate divisions and functions, assign responsibilities, tasks, duties and powers and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of this chapter. As provided by state law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the State Division of Emergency Management of the State of Texas. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the State Division of Emergency Management. When approved, it shall be the duty of all departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The emergency management plan shall be considered supplementary to this chapter and have the effect of law during the time of disaster. 
(Ord. No. 86-33, § 3, 12-15-86) 
Sec. 91/2-4. - Interjurisdictional program. 
    The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the county judge of the County of Jefferson and the mayors of the other cities in said county in the formation of an emergency management council for the County of Jefferson and shall have the authority to cooperate in the preparation of a joint emergency management plan and in the appointment of a joint emergency management coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a county-wide program of emergency management, insofar as said program may affect the City of Groves. 
(Ord. No. 86-33, § 4, 12-15-86) 
Sec. 91/2-5. - Emergency override of existing ordinances, rules. 
    At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall be in effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations, insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. 
(Ord. No. 86-33, § 5, 12-15-86) 
Sec. 91/2-6. - Liability. 
(a)  This chapter is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health and safety, and neither the City of Groves, the agents and representatives of said city, nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of said activity. 
(b)  Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the City of Groves a license or privilege, or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part or parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice enemy attack or natural or man-made disaster shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. 
(Ord. No. 86-33, § 6, 12-15-86) 
Sec. 91/2-7. - Commitment of funds. 
    No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this chapter without prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person have any right to bind the city by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city council unless during a declared disaster. During a declared disaster, the mayor may expend and/or commit public funds of the city when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of health, life or property. 
(Ord. No. 86-33, § 7, 12-15-86) 
Sec. 91/2-8. - Offenses; penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the enforcement of any rules or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or to do any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this chapter. 
(b)  It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or any other means of identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the City of Groves, unless authority to do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials. 
(c)  Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a warning signal, or the termination of a warning, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the penalties imposed by this section. 
(d)  Convictions for violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Ord. No. 86-33, § 8, 12-15-86) 
Sec. 91/2-9. - Limitations. 
    This chapter shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statute or with any military or naval order, rule or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 86-33, § 10, 12-15-86) 
Chapter 93/4 - EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 04-05, § 1, adopted Aug. 23, 2004, amended chapter 93/4, §§ 93/4-1-93/4-12, in its entirety. Former chapter 93/4 pertained to similar material and derived from Ord. No. 96-02, § 1, adopted Feb. 12, 1996; Ord. No. 99-04, §§ 1, 2, adopted April 19, 1999. 

Sec. 93/4-1. - Definition of terms. 
    The following words and phrases as used in this chapter, unless a different meaning is plainly required by context, shall have the following meanings: 
    Advanced life support (ALS). Emergency pre-hospital care that uses invasive medical acts. 
    Ambulance. Any vehicle licensed by the state for the purpose of transporting sick and/or injured persons. 
    Ambulance permit. The permit issued to an EMS provider for a specific ambulance meeting all the requirements set forth in this chapter. 
    Arrival, arrive or arrives. An ambulance "arrives" at the scene of an incident when it is on-scene and is not moving. 
    Basic life support (BLS). Emergency pre-hospital care that uses noninvasive medical acts. 
    Basic life support vehicle (BLS). An ambulance that is staffed and equipped to provide basic life support that uses noninvasive acts. 
    Central dispatch. Emergency communications center for Nederland, Port Neches, and Groves. (911 answering point.) 
    Code 2. An ambulance urgent response without red lights and siren operating. (Priority two.) 
    Code 3. An ambulance emergency response with red lights and siren operating. (Priority one.) 
    Dispatch. Any instructions from the provider's dispatcher for an ambulance to travel in response to an emergency or urgent call for service. 
    EMD (Emergency medical dispatcher). Dispatcher specifically trained to triage 911 calls and dispatch the appropriate level of care and response type (code 3, code 2) to an emergency that requires medical assistance. 
    EMS. Emergency Medical Services. 
    EMS provider. Any company that is permitted to operate licensed ambulances within the city response area. 
    EMS provider permit. The sum of all the ambulance permits issued to an EMS provider for response in the city response area. 
    Emergency medical services personnel. Includes emergency care attendant (ECA), emergency medical technician (EMT), emergency medical technician-intermediate (EMT-I), emergency medical technician-paramedic (EMT-P), or licensed paramedic. 
    Emergency care attendant. An individual certified by the state department of health as minimally proficient to perform emergency pre-hospital care as an emergency care attendant. 
    Emergency medical technician (EMT). An individual certified by the state department of health as minimally proficient to perform emergency pre-hospital care that is necessary for basic life support and that includes cardiopulmonary resuscitation and the control of hemorrhaging. 
    Emergency medical technician-Intermediate (EMT-I). An individual certified by the state department of health as minimally proficient to provide emergency pre-hospital care by initiating under medical supervision, certain procedures, including intravenous therapy and endotracheal or esophageal intubation. 
    Emergency medical technician-Paramedic (EMT-P). An individual certified by the state department of health as minimally proficient to provide advanced life support that includes initiating under medical supervision certain procedures, including intravenous therapy, endotracheal or esophageal intubation, electrical cardiac defibrillation or cardio version, and drug therapy. 
    Emergency pre-hospital care. Care provided to the sick or injured before or during transportation to a medical facility, including any necessary stabilization of the sick or injured in connection with that transportation. 
    Emergency response vehicle. A vehicle that meets the requirements of V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 547.702 and is authorized to respond to emergency medical calls to begin immediate on-scene care to the injured or ill persons. 
    Incident commander. Fire, police, or public safety officer who has overall control and command at an incident. 
    Licensed paramedic. An individual meeting the qualifications for an emergency medical technician-paramedic who has completed the curriculum that includes college-level course work in accordance with rules adopted by the state department of health. 
    Mass casualty incidents (MCI). Incidents involving three (3) or more casualties and needing multiple ambulances. MCIs are declared to be MCIs by the incident commander at the scene. 
    Material breach. Any one (1) violation of this chapter that is an imminent threat to public safety and health or failure to correct a minor violation after notification and before responding to another emergency call within the response area. 
    Medical priority dispatching. Medical dispatching that triages calls and enables the EMS provider to dispatch the appropriate response (code 3 or code 2) to a call that is presumed by the caller to be a true medical emergency. 
    Minor violation. Any one (1) violation of this chapter that is not an imminent threat to public health or safety. 
    Mobile intensive care unit (MICU). Any ambulance that is licensed by the state department of health that meets the requirements of rule 157.14, as is currently defined and subsequently amended, and rule 157.11(a)(6), as is currently defined and subsequently amended, by the Texas Administrative Code. 
    Medical officer. Designated EMS provider employee responsible to the incident commander for communications, transportation, and logistics for the EMS response. 
    Medical supervision. Direction given to emergency medical services personnel by a licensed physician under the Medical Practices Act (Texas Revised Civil Statute article 4495b) and the rules adopted under that Act by the state board of medical examiners. 
    Person. An individual, partnership, corporation, trust, entity, or association of individuals. 
    Public safety personnel. Any person or persons that respond to emergency calls that assist in operations that do not ordinarily respond unless requested or needed for special situations. 
    Service area. The area within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 04-05, § 1, 8-23-04) 
Sec. 93/4-2. - Operation of an ambulance without a permit prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate an ambulance for the purpose transporting a sick or injured person in the city unless there is a valid ambulance permit issued and posted for inspection on the rear window of said ambulance by the city. 
(b)  There shall be exempted from the provisions of the permit and license requirements of this chapter the following: 
(1)  Any ambulance that transports the sick and injured from outside the service area into the service area. 
(2)  Any ambulance that transports the sick or injured through the service area. 
(3)  Any ground or air service that does not advertise as an EMS provider vehicle and is not licensed by the state department of health for such service. 
(4)  Any ambulance that is needed in a casualty situation or evacuation that exceeds the basic vehicle capacity or capability of emergency medical services providers in the area. 
(5)  An industrial emergency medical service vehicle that does not respond to emergency medical calls except in the industrial facility that operates the service. 
(6)  Any physician, registered nurse, or other health care practitioner licensed by the state department of health, unless the health care practitioner staffs an emergency medical services vehicle on a for hire basis for responding to medical emergencies. 
(7)  Any ambulance that transports a patient to a private physician's office for an appointment and requires EMS personnel to stand-by with the patient (waiting returns). 
(Ord. No. 04-05, § 1, 8-23-04) 
Sec. 93/4-3. - EMS permit; application, conditions of issuance. 
(a)  Every person desiring to obtain an EMS provider permit shall make application in writing on a form provided by the city for that purpose to the city fire department. The city fire chief may permit one (1) EMS provider for the city. Any additional EMS providers must be approved by the city council. See section 93/4-3(b) for conditions of approval. 
(b)  If an EMS provider is currently operating in the city and an additional EMS provider requests a permit to operate, it shall be at the discretion of the city council. The city council shall determine if there is a need and necessity for any additional EMS providers. In determining whether public need and necessities require the permitting of additional EMS providers, the city council shall consider whether the public is, at any time, adequately served, the financial responsibility of the applicant, the number, kind, and type of equipment to be operated by the applicant, a list of standard prices proposed to be charged, whether the safe use of the streets by the public, both vehicular and pedestrian will be preserved, any degradation of existing services through loss of revenue or the inability to maintain the standard of care and response needs and such other facts as the city council shall consider relevant. This information shall be presented to the city council at a public forum where all effected parties may be heard. 
(c)  There shall be an administrative fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) assessed for each ambulance that is permitted to operate in the service area. This administrative fee will be assessed annually only if the EMS provider's permit is renewed. Additional ambulances permitted throughout the year shall be prorated at two dollars $2.00) per month per ambulance. This fee will be figured on the original permitting date. All permits for the EMS provider will expire on the same day. 
(d)  An ambulance permit may be transferred to another ambulance within the company that the original permit was issued, only with the approval of the fire chief or his designee. 
(e)  No ambulance permits issued to an EMS provider shall be purchased, swapped, or transferred to any other EMS company desiring to operate in the city. If the name, ownership or more than fifty (50) percent of the EMS providers company is changed, the ambulance permits shall be void. 
(f)  The fire chief may issue a temporary EMS providers permit for up to ninety (90) days for a company that has made application to operate in the city if there is an immediate need for EMS providers. At the end of this ninety (90) days, or if the EMS company is issued a EMS providers permit by the city, or the EMS company is unable or unwilling to abide by this chapter the temporary permits will be void. 
(g)  If an EMS provider is currently permitted to operate in the city response area, and there are any additional applications requesting an EMS provider permit, it shall be brought before the city council for consideration in the order they are received and as scheduling permits. 
(h)  Every application shall be accompanied with the following information: 
(1)  Number of ambulances to be permitted; 
(2)  State department of health master roster of all the providers licensed ambulances; 
(3)  Make, model, motor number and correct state license number; 
(4)  Current protocols; 
(5)  List of prices to be charged for services; 
(6)  Employee roster with certification levels of each employee; this shall include dispatchers EMD certification; and 
(7)  Current MCI operation plans and protocols. 
(i)  No EMS provider permits shall be issued unless there is in full force and effect a policy or policies of public liability and property damage insurance, issued by a casualty insurance company authorized to do business in the state, and in the standard form approved by the board of insurance commissioners of the state, with coverage provisions insuring the public from any loss or damage that may arise to any person or property by reason of the operation of the EMS vehicle for which the permit is issued, and providing that the amount of recovery shall be in limits not less than the following sums: 
(1)  For damages arising out of bodily injury to or death of one (1) person in any one (1) accident, five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00). 
(2)  For damages arising out of bodily injury to or death of two (2) or more persons in any one (1) accident, eight hundred thousand dollars ($800,000.00). 
(3)  For any injury to or destruction of property in any one (1) accident one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). 
(j)  No ambulance permits shall be issued unless the applicant has been issued a license by the state department of health pursuant to chapter 773 of the Texas Health and Safety Code. 
(k)  No ambulance permits shall be issued if the applicant, an employer or any employee of the applicant, or any person residentially domiciled with the applicant has had an EMS provider permit revoked in the state within one (1) year preceding the date of application. 
(l)  No ambulance permits shall be issued for any emergency medical services vehicle, which is classified as a basic life support (BLS) vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 04-05, § 1, 8-23-04) 
Sec. 93/4-4. - Required equipment. 
(a)  As a minimum requirement, every ambulance for which an ambulance permit is issued shall be equipped with, clean, and in working order: 
(1)  Cotton or woolen style blankets; 
(2)  All equipment now or hereafter required by the rules and regulations of the state department of health for a state ambulance permit; and 
(3)  All equipment now or hereafter required by the Texas Motor Vehicle Laws governing authorized emergency vehicles. 
(b)  Supplies that are purchased by the city and used on emergency medical calls shall be replaced by the EMS provider that responds to the incident. If the supplies are not replaced, the EMS provider will not bill the patient or insurance carrier for those supplies. 
(Ord. No. 04-05, § 1, 8-23-04) 
Sec. 93/4-5. - Certified and licensed personnel requirements. 
(a)  Every ambulance, when responding to 911 calls, must be staffed with at least two (2) attendants, one (1) of whom shall be the holder of a current EMT-P certification or licensure and the other the holder of at least a current EMT certificate, both issued by the state department of health. The following exceptions may be granted: 
(1)  There shall be exempt from this provision a permitted ALS ambulance that first responds to an emergency call to provide immediate medical care until the arrival of an EMT-P. 
(2)  There shall also be exempt from this provision an emergency response vehicle that is responding to a medical emergency that is providing manpower, additional supplies, or equipment. This vehicle however cannot transport any sick or injured persons unless it is a permitted ambulance that meets minimum requirements of this chapter. 
(3)  There shall also be exempt from this provision any emergency or non-emergency vehicle that is needed to transport patients with minor or no injuries during an MCI. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an emergency response vehicle on the streets of the city without a current, valid driver's license issued by the state department of public safety for the purpose of operating such vehicles, except as provided in section 93/4-2(b). 
(Ord. No. 04-05, § 1, 8-23-04) 
Sec. 93/4-6. - Personnel identification. 
(a)  All on duty EMS ambulance personnel shall be required to be clearly and easily identified by name, company, and certification level. 
(b)  All of the EMS provider's management and supervisory personnel shall be easily identified as to rank, title, and or certification level when on an emergency scene. 
(c)  Any EMS provider personnel other than emergency medical in nature, such as mechanics, students, or dispatchers shall also be clearly and easily identified as to their job designation or title while on an emergency scene. 
(Ord. No. 04-05, § 1, 8-23-04) 
Sec. 93/4-7. - Communications. 
(a)  Every ambulance for which an ambulance permit has been issued shall be equipped with a fully operational two-way radio communications system. Mobile or portable type 800 MHz radios may be used; however, there shall be sufficient radios for each unit providing service to the area. 
(b)  This system shall have a minimum of two (2) radios: 
(1)  The first shall be attuned to the frequency of 155.340 MHz FM for communication with hospitals in the county having emergency medical facilities; and 
(2)  The second shall be an 800 MHz radio capable of communicating with the city fire department. 
(c)  Any ambulance responding to a 911 emergency medical call in the response area shall contact the city fire department via 800 MHz radio immediately upon receiving the call. The EMS personnel responding shall call en-route upon receiving the call and on scene upon arrival. 
(d)  All ambulances responding to emergency medical or stand-by calls within the response area shall monitor the city fire department's frequency until the incident is over or is released by the incident commander. 
(e)  All radio traffic shall be kept to a minimum and plain language used at all times. At no time shall ten (10) codes be utilized in communicating with the city fire department. 
(f)  Any 911 calls that are emergency medical in nature may be triaged by the provider's dispatchers using medical priority dispatching if the dispatcher is currently certified as an emergency medical dispatcher and has been approved to by the EMS provider to EMD calls. 
(g)  When a 911 call is found to be non-life threatening by the emergency medical dispatcher, the responding ambulance will down grade to code 2. The responding EMS personnel shall notify the city fire department of the change in response immediately upon changing response. (See section 93/4-8 for emergency responses) 
(h)  All radios to be programmed for the city fire department shall first be approved by both the Groves and Port Neches fire chiefs. No radios shall be programmed with theses frequencies without prior approval from both fire chiefs. 
(Ord. No. 04-05, § 1, 8-23-04) 
Sec. 93/4-8. - Emergency operations. 
(a)  EMS providers who hold a valid permit issued by the city shall operate on a rotation basis for emergency medical calls received through the 911 system. Central dispatch serves as the public safety answering point (PSPA) for 911 calls initiated in the city response area. The method of rotation shall be from 0700 Sunday morning to 0700 Sunday morning of the following week. The method of rotation may be changed at any time it is deemed necessary by the city fire chief. 
(b)  When a 911 call is received at the PSAP, and the caller requests a specific EMS provider that holds a current EMS providers permit, the requested provider shall be notified of the call regardless of the rotation. In the event an EMS provider receives a 911 or emergency private call and is unable to respond immediately, the EMS provider shall be responsible for immediately forwarding the call to another provider that holds a current city EMS provider permit. 
(c)  EMS providers will have a maximum response time of seven minutes and fifty-nine seconds (7:59) to all priority one medical calls ninety-five (95) percent of the time. The official time will begin when city fire department is notified of the priority one call and end when the ambulance is on scene with MICU transport capabilities (paramedic on scene). However, if the call has been triaged by an emergency medical dispatcher and meet current EMD guidelines of a non-life threatening medical emergency, the call can be reclassified by the EMS providers dispatch as a priority two call. 
(d)  EMS providers will have a maximum response time of ten minutes fifty-nine seconds (10:59) to all priority two medical calls ninety-five (95) percent of the time. The official time will begin when the city fire department is notified of the call and end when the ambulance is on scene with MICU transport capabilities (paramedic on scene). 
(e)  All response times will be computed on a calendar month basis. 
(f)  The city fire chief shall determine compliance with the 95% requirements on priority one and priority two calls. If a provider is found to be out of compliance with minimum response times specified in this chapter, the provider will be notified of the findings. The EMS provider will immediately take all steps necessary to remedy these problems, including but not limited to, increasing the number of in-service ambulances available. 
(g)  In determining whether a run to a call is exempt from the response time standard, the following factors shall include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Any calls where information on medical need is not immediately available. (This situation exists when an ambulance is not originally dispatched after the PSAP receives the call, but is subsequently requested by on-scene police, fire, or public safety personnel). 
(2)  Ambulances that are unable to proceed due to an intersection blocked by a train or other unforeseeable traffic stoppages. (Ambulances will immediately notify their dispatch and city fire department when an ambulance is blocked by a train and when the train is cleared and travel resumes). 
(3)  In the event of MCIs, the initial responding ambulance will meet required response times. All others shall be accountable to the medical officer on scene for the type of response needed. 
(4)  Any severe weather conditions including dense fog, heavy rain or flooding, snow, or ice, except if inclement weather was predicted sufficiently in advance that levels of preparedness should have been increased and such steps not taken. 
(5)  Any situations where the dispatch center received false or inaccurate information or was unable to obtain adequate response information. 
(6)  Calls for standby at fire service calls. 
(7)  Calls for standby at law enforcement incidents. 
(h)  The EMS provider's senior paramedic on a medical scene shall determine if the patient requires ALS care (EMT-I), or MICU care (EMT-P) for the transport of a patient to an emergency medical facility. This will be the sole responsibility of the EMS provider's senior paramedic and reflect the company's medical director's guidelines via standing protocols or online medical direction. At no time shall the senior paramedic or other EMS personnel delay the transport of sick or injured patients stable or unstable to allow for another ambulance to transport. 
(i)  The incident command system will be used on all mass casualty incidents (MCI). The incident commander will be the most senior firefighter, or police officer on scene. All emergency medical, fire, police, and public safety personnel will report to the incident commander or his/her designee for accountability. At no time will any emergency response personnel enter the scene without notifying the incident commander or his/her designee of their presence. 
(j)  The EMS provider that initially responds to an MCI shall provide a liaison (medical officer) to the incident commander to assist with coordinating EMS response and transport. 
(k)  The medical officer shall not be involved with direct patient care and shall be available to the incident commander at all times. 
(l)  The medical officer shall be responsible for accountability of EMS personnel, number of patients, types of transportation needed, and the status of local emergency medical facilities. The medical officer may delegate responsibilities to other EMS staff on scene, but will remain responsible to the incident commander for EMS operations for that incident. 
(m)  EMS providers shall respond, at minimum, an ALS ambulance priority two to all known structure fires or incidents that could be hazardous to life or health. Central dispatch shall notify the EMS provider on rotation the location, type, and any known response hazards that may exist at the scene of the stand-by. 
(n)  Ambulances that respond to a scene designated as a stand-by, should stage in an area that would enable the EMS personnel to render speedy medical attention and transport if needed. These ambulances shall not stage in any area that would prevent transporting immediately from the scene or interfere with emergency operations. 
(o)  If the EMS provider is unable to respond to a stand-by, the incident commander shall be notified via central dispatch. The EMS provider shall make every effort to supply an ambulance in an expedient manner. 
(p)  EMS providers that respond to a stand-by may at any time request the ambulance be returned to service when it is deemed necessary by the EMS provider. 
(q)  EMS vehicles responding to emergency calls within the city response area shall be operated in accordance with state traffic laws pertaining to emergency vehicles as outlined in chapter 546 of the Texas Transportation Code, as currently defined and subsequently amended. The EMS provider shall ensure all employees know and understand these traffic laws. 
(Ord. No. 04-05, § 1, 8-23-04) 
Sec. 93/4-9. - Vehicle inspections. 
(a)  Every EMS vehicle, which operates in the city response area, shall be made available to the fire chief or his designee for inspection upon request. The EMS provider will be notified of the unit or units to be inspected. There shall be only one (1) ambulance at the fire station being inspected at a time. This unit will be brought to the city fire department for inspection before 1700 the day of request. However, if the request is made after 1300 hours the EMS provider may request to have the inspection the following business day. 
(b)  Every ambulance operated by a permitted EMS provider may also be spot inspected at any time. The EMS vehicle will not be kept out of service for any length of time and shall be returned to service immediately if the ambulance is needed. However, if the ambulance is unsafe or found to be out of compliance with this chapter or any federal or state laws, the ambulance permit will be suspended immediately. (See section 93/4-9(f). 
(c)  If there is reason to believe an ambulance is in violation of state or local rules or regulations, the fire chief or his designee may suspend the ambulance permit. The ambulance will not be allowed to return to service until it has been inspected and meets all state and local rules and regulations. 
(d)  When inspecting an EMS vehicle, it will be taken into consideration that the ambulance has been in service and reasonable usage of supplies will have occurred. No ambulance shall respond to calls of any nature, emergency or transport, within the service area if the supplies are below the EMS provider's protocols minimum. 
(e)  An ambulance permit may be suspended at any time an ambulance fails an inspection. This will not be used as a reason for poor response times. It is the EMS provider's responsibility to maintain the ambulances, equipment, and supplies as set forth by the state, this chapter, and the EMS provider's protocols. 
(f)  Any EMS vehicle that has had its ambulance permit suspended will not be allowed to operate in the city response area until the ambulance has passed re-inspection. When the ambulance has met all requirements of this chapter and all applicable state laws, the ambulance permit will be reinstated and the ambulance may return to service. 
(g)  A record of all revoked or suspended ambulance and or provider's permits, and any incident reports will be kept in the EMS provider's file. This information will be used when considering the renewal of an EMS providers permit and for assessing penalties or fines. 
(Ord. No. 04-05, § 1, 8-23-04) 
Sec. 93/4-10. - Liquidated damages as remedy. 
(a)  Because the city may suffer damages from any violation of this chapter, which damages may be uncertain and difficult to quantify, the EMS providers by accepting the issued permit agree to the following schedule of liquidated damages prior to being permitted: 
(1)  For failure to respond within seven minutes and fifty-nine seconds (7:59) following dispatch for two (2) consecutive months on a minimum of ninety-five (95) percent of priority one calls, the EMS provider shall be assessed a fine of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each percentage point below the ninety-five (95) percent level. However, if an ambulance has an extended response time of more than fifteen (15) minutes, to any priority one call, there can be assessed a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per incident. 
(2)  For failure to respond within ten minutes and fifty nine seconds (10:59) following dispatch for two consecutive months on a minimum of ninety-five (95) percent of priority two calls, the EMS provider shall be assessed a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each percentage point below the ninety-five (95) percent level. 
(3)  For failure to maintain the ambulance in an aseptic manner, minimum levels of staffing, quantity of supplies, appropriate equipment, or any violation or this chapter other than specified violations that have a specific fine affixed, shall be assessed a fine of two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) per incident. 
(b)  Before assessing liquidated damages against any EMS provider written notice will be given. 
(c)  The EMS provider will have ten (10) calendar days from the receipt of notice to appeal the assessment to the city fire chief. 
(d)  The fire chief will meet with the EMS provider to consider the matter and make a decision within thirty (30) calendar days of the appeal. The decision of the fire chief shall be final. 
(e)  When liquidated damages are assessed, the EMS provider shall have ten (10) calendar days from the date of assessment notice or from the date of the fire chief's decision if the assessment is appealed, to pay to the city full amount of damages assessed. 
(f)  The collection of liquidated damages, as a remedy may be in addition to the city taking other action, including action to terminate the EMS providers permit to operate because of the material breach in the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 04-05, § 1, 8-23-04) 
Sec. 93/4-11. - Suspension and termination of permits. 
(a)  The city fire chief or designee shall have the right to suspend an EMS provider's permit to operate in the city service area if the EMS provider is in violation of this chapter and/or creates an imminent danger to the public health or safety. 
(b)  The emergency suspension is effective immediately upon notice to the EMS provider, and will remain in effect until the permit holder is in compliance with all provisions of this chapter and/or the permit holder no longer creates an imminent danger to the public health or safety of the citizens within the city service area. The fire chief or his designee will make the determination when or if the EMS provider has duly satisfied the requirements for the EMS providers permit to be returned to active status. 
(c)  A permit may be terminated if the EMS provider: 
(1)  Fails to operate the ambulance service in such a way that enables the EMS provider to remain in compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the applicable state, and local laws, rules, and regulations. Minor violations of such requirements shall not constitute a material breach except, however, willful and/or repeated violations shall constitute a material breach as determined by the fire chief; 
(2)  Falsifies any information provided in their application, requested data, documents, or during any investigations being conducted by the city; 
(3)  Fails to maintain vehicles and equipment in such a way as to insure the ability of the EMS provider to respond, treat, and transport crews or patients to and/or from medical scenes in a safe expedient manner. Minor violations of such requirements shall not constitute a material breach; however, willful and/or repeated violations shall constitute a material breach. A willful violation may include the failure to correct a minor violation after notice and before responding to any emergency medical call within the response area; 
(4)  Fails to meet response time requirements for more than three (3) months during any 12-month period, as required by this chapter; 
(5)  Fails to pay liquidated damages in a timely manner as provided in this chapter; 
(6)  Fails to transport any person in medically necessary circumstances; 
(7)  The EMS provider or employee of the EMS provider engages in deceptive business practices or illegal activities while using the permitted ambulance for such activity; or 
(8)  The EMS provider fails to maintain valid and/or current registration and inspection stickers. 
(d)  The fire chief shall review any emergency suspensions and decide if the incident should go before the city council for review for termination. If the fire chief finds the permit should be terminated, it will be referred to the city council for review and determination. The determination of the city council findings will be final. 
(e)  If the city council finds an EMS provider in material breach and revokes its permit, such revocation shall be effective immediately. 
(Ord. No. 04-05, § 1, 8-23-04) 
Sec. 93/4-12. - Indemnity. 
(a)  Independent of the requirement to provide insurance, each EMS provider must indemnify, hold harmless and defend the city, it's officers, agents and employees from and against liability for any and all claims, liens, suits, demands, and/or actions for damages injuries to persons (including death), property damage (including loss of use), and expenses, including court costs and attorney's fees and other reasonable costs arising out of the EMS provider's work and/or activities conducted in connection with this chapter, including all causes of action based upon common, constitutional, or statutory law, or based in whole or in part upon the negligent or intentional acts or omissions of the ambulance operator, its officers, agents, employees, subcontractors, licensees, invitees, and other persons. 
(b)  The indemnity does not apply to liability caused solely by the emergency medical assistance rendered by city personnel. 
(c)  In any action based on allegation of joint negligence on the part of the EMS provider and city, each party shall only be responsible for that portion or percentage of any damages awarded which is directly attributable to the negligence of that party. 
(d)  The city and the EMS provider must provide the other prompt and timely notice of any event covered by this chapter which in any way affects or might affect the EMS provider or city, and the city has the right to compromise and defend the same to the extent of its own interests. This indemnity provision is an additional, not exclusive, remedy for the city. 
(Ord. No. 04-05, § 1, 8-23-04) 
Sec. 93/4-13. - Penalty. 
    The provisions of section 93/4-2(a) and section 93/4-5(b) are intended to govern and protect public health. Any person who intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly violates any provisions of section 93/4-2(a) or section 93/4-5(b) shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall upon conviction be assessed a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day any violation of this chapter occurs shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 04-05, § 1, 8-23-04) 
Chapter 10 - FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 86-15, § 1, adopted Apr. 21, 1986, amended Ch. 10 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 10 contained three articles consisting of substantive section 10-1-10-6, 10-16-10-27, 10-57-10-62, which derived from Ord. No. 20, §§ 1-8, adopted Aug. 20, 1953; Ord. No. 309, §§ 1, 2, adopted Feb. 8, 1965; Ord. No. 325, § 1, adopted Sept. 13, 1965, Ord. No. 453, §§ 1-3, adopted Aug. 16, 1971, Ord. No. 563, § 1, adopted May 5, 1975. 
Cross reference- Toxic materials, Ch. 241/2; authority of officers of fire department to direct traffic, § 25-4; driving over fire hose, § 25-96; fire protection standards in mobile home parks, § 26-2(k); buildings, Ch. 28; housing code, Ch. 30. 

ARTICLE I. - GROVES FIRE CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2009-03, § 1, adopted March 2, 2009, repealed and reenacted article I in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, article I pertained to general provisions, and derived from Ord. No. 86-15, § 1, adopted April 21, 1986, and Ord. No. 88-12, § 1, adopted July 11, 1988.  The provisions of this article shall be known as "The Groves Fire Code" and may be cited as such. 

Sec. 10-1. - International Fire Code adopted. 
    There is hereby adopted by the city for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations, a fire code known as the International Fire Code, 2006 Edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc., and referred to, incorporated herein and made a part hereof for all purposes, which shall be controlling in fire protection and prevention, in all buildings within the city, subject to the amendments and deletions set forth in this Code of Ordinances, and which book is on file in the office of the building official. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, § 1, 3-2-09) 
Sec. 10-2. - Amendments to the International Fire Code, 2006 Edition. 
Section 105 Permits. 
Section 105.1.1 Permits Required is hereby amended to read: 
105.1.1 Permits Required is hereby amended by adding new subsections 105.1.1 and 105.3.1. 
Sec. 105.1.1. Who May Obtain a Permit. 
Permits shall be issued only to the following: 
1.  Any fire alarm/fire suppression contractor having a valid State of Texas fire alarm license. 
105.1.2 Contractor's Responsibilities, "Registration" 
It shall be the duty of every contractor who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs for any required fire alarm/fire suppression systems within the City to register his/her company with the City of Groves Inspection Division. 
Sec. 105.1.3.a. Registration of Fire Alarm/Fire Suppression Companies 
Registration required; false representations of registration. 
(a.1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of installing maintaining, altering or repairing any required fire alarm/fire suppression system for which a permit is required by this ordinance, or to in any manner undertake to execute such work, unless such person is the holder of a license as required by this ordinance. 
(a.2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely represent himself as a licensed fire alarm/fire suppression contractor of any class set forth in this ordinance or words of similar import or meaning, on signs, cards, stationery, or by any other manner whatsoever, unless such person is properly licensed within the meaning of this ordinance. 
Sec. 105.1.3.b. Registration; Fees; Issuance. 
Each state licensed fire alarm/fire suppression contractor wishing to register his/her company to do fire alarm/fire suppression work in the City of Groves shall submit the required registration fee, a copy of their state license, and a copy of their general liability insurance certificate to the Inspection Department. 
Registration Renewal Insurance $75.00 $75.00 As required by State Law  
Sec. 105.1.3.c. License required; Issuance deemed registration. 
Upon presentation of the appropriate license from the State of Texas and after applicant has paid to the City the fees prescribed in this ordinance, and furnished a copy of their insurance certificate, if required herein, such applicant shall be considered registered with the City within the meaning of this ordinance. 
Sec. 105.1.3.d. Registration renewal. 
Annual renewal of the City registration shall be accomplished by submitting the renewal fee and, if required, a copy of their renewed liability insurance certificate. 
Sec. 105.1.3.e. License transferability; signing. 
A license registration shall not be transferable and shall be issued to the person examined by the State of Texas and named on the license and known as the holder of the license. 
Sec. 105.1.3.f. Unauthorized use of license. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to lend, rent, or transfer his license or any rights to any other person, and for any person to make use of any such rights which are not actually his own. 
Sec. 105.1.3.g. Fire Alarm/Fire Suppression Contractors office. 
Every fire alarm/fire suppression contractor, if he qualifies as the responsible fire alarm/fire suppression contractor of the company must have and maintain an established place of business and shall either have a person in attendance or have an answering service to receive messages from the City or other persons concerned during regular business hours. A fire alarm/fire suppression contractor can represent and acquire permits for no more that one fire alarm/fire suppression company. 
Sec. 105.3.1. Expiration is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Sec. 105.3.1. Expiration. 
1. If the work described in any fire alarm/fire suppression permit has not begun within six (6) months from the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall expire; it shall be canceled by the building official; and notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected. 
2. If the work described in any fire alarm permit/fire suppression has not been substantially completed within one (1) year of the date of the issuance thereof, said permit shall expire and be canceled by the building official and notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected, together with notice that further work as described in the canceled permit shall not proceed unless and until a new permit has been obtained. 
Sec. 105.5.2. Fee schedule shall be amended to read as follows: 
Sec. 105.5.2. Fee schedule. 
Permit fees. 
Total valuation Fees $1,000.00 and less No fee, unless inspection is required, in which case a $15.00 fee for each inspection shall be charged. $1,001.00 to $50,000.00 $15.00 for the first $1,000.00 plus $5.00 for each additional thousand or fraction thereof, to and including $50,000.00. $50,001.00 to $100,000.00 $260.00 for the first $50,000.00 plus $4.00 for each additional thousand or fraction thereof, to and including $100,000.00. $100,001.00 to $500,000.00 $460.00 for the first $100,000.00 plus $3.00 for each additional thousand or fraction thereof, to and including $500,000.00. $500,001.00 and up $1,660.00 for the first $500,000.00 plus $2.00 for each additional thousand, or fraction thereof.  
Sec. 105.6. Required operation permits is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Sec. 105.6. Required operational permits shall be construed to mean: 
The construction permit issued for alterations/additions. 
The Certificate of occupancy as required by the building code. 
Sec. 109.3. Violation penalties shall be amended to read as follows: 
Sec. 109.3. Violation penalties. 
Penalties. Where work for which a permit is required by this Code is begun prior to obtaining said permit, the fees shall be doubled, plus an additional administrative fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be assessed when the value of the construction work is less than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). If the value of the construction work is two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) or greater, the additional administrative fee assessed shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00). The payment of such double permit fee and the additional administrative fee shall not relieve any person from fully complying with the requirements of this Code in the execution of the work, nor from any other penalties prescribed herein. 
Sec. 310. "Smoking" shall be amended to add sub-section 310.9: 
Sec. 310.9. Possession Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any student of any public school to have in their possession: matches, lighters or any apparatus which produces an open flame or source for ignition. 
Sec. 903. Automatic Sprinkler Systems. 
Sec. 903.2.9. "Group S-2" is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Sec. 903.2.9. Unless required elsewhere in this code, all new buildings constructed, or existing buildings enlarged or occupancy changes "use" shall have an automatic sprinkler system installed throughout all buildings with a Group S-2 fire area in excess of 20,000 square feet. 
Sec. 907. Fire Alarm and Detection Systems. 
Sec. 907.1. "General" is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Sec. 907.1. Unless required elsewhere in this Code, all new buildings constructed, or existing buildings enlarged or occupancy changes "use" shall have an automatic fire alarm system with manual pull boxes installed if the fire area exceeds 2,000 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, § 1, 3-2-09) 
Secs. 10-3-10-9. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ARSON REWARD 

Sec. 10-10. - Established. 
    The mayor of the city is hereby required, authorized, and empowered to offer a reward of not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) payable to the person or persons who shall be responsible for the arrest and conviction of any person committing in the city the crime of arson as the same is now defined by the State Penal Code. 
(Ord. No. 86-15, § 1, 4-21-86) 
Sec. 10-11. - How offered. 
    Whenever the mayor shall be informed that any fire occurring in said city was of an incendiary origin, he shall call for a report on the same by the city fire marshal, and, if the marshal shall report that such fire was caused by the commission of the crime of arson, it shall become the duty of the mayor to offer the reward prescribed in section 10-10, which reward shall be in the form of a proclamation duly issued by the mayor under his official signature and attested by the seal of the city, and which shall be posted in conspicuous places, one of which shall be the city hall in accordance with the regulations of the state insurance department. 
(Ord. No. 86-15, § 1, 4-21-86) 
Sec. 10-12. - Placards. 
    Placards eight (8) inches by twelve (12) inches in size showing the reward offered in section 10-10 shall be placed in wooden frames under glass and posted inside of at least twelve (12) different public buildings within the city. 
(Ord. No. 86-15, § 1, 4-21-86) 
Sec. 10-13. - Payment. 
    Upon information being given by any person causing the arrest and conviction of any person guilty of the specific crime of arson, and upon the final conviction of such persons, the person giving such information shall be entitled to receive the reward offered in section 10-10 from the city. 
(Ord. No. 86-15, § 1, 4-21-86) 
Chapter 101/2 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2007-15, § 1, adopted August 20, 2007, repealed and reenacted chapter 101/2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, chapter 101/2 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 635, Art. I, §§ A-D, Art. 2, Art. 3, §§ A-G, Art. 4, §§ A-D, Art. 5, §§ A-C, Art. 6, § A, adopted September 19, 1977; Ord. No. 781, §§ 1-4, adopted August 16, 1982; Ord. No. 86-11, §§ 1, 2, adopted February 24, 1986, and Ord. No. 87-03, § 1, adopted February 23, 1987. 

ARTICLE I. - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE, METHODS AND DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 101/2-1. - Statutory authorization. 
    The legislature of the state has in the Flood Control Insurance Act, Texas Water Code, Section 16.315, delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. 
    Therefore, the city council does ordain as follows. 
(Ord. No. 2007-15, § 1(Art. I, § A), 8-20-07) 
Sec. 101/2-2. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 2007-15, § 1(Art. I, § B), 8-20-07) 
Sec. 101/2-3. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7)  Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 2007-15, § 1(Art. I, § C), 8-20-07) 
Sec. 101/2-4. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
    In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following methods: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Ord. No. 2007-15, § 1(Art. I, § D, 8-20-07) 
Sec. 101/2-5. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
    Alluvial fan flooding means flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths. 
    Apex means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur. 
    Appurtenant structure means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure 
    Area of future conditions flood hazard means the land area that would be inundated by the one-percent-annual chance (100-year) flood based on future conditions hydrology. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one (1) percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed rate-making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE or V. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Base flood elevation (BFE) the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying flood insurance study (FIS) for zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a one (1) percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. Also called the base flood. 
    Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. 
    Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
    Development means any man-made change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Elevated building means, for insurance purposes, a non-basement building, which has its lowest elevated floor, raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
    Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood elevation study means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study (FIS). See Flood elevation study. 
    Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. See Flooding. 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
    Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
    Flood proofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway. See Regulatory floodway. 
    Functionally dependent use means a use, which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the department of interior) or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the national register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary of interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior; or 
b.  Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved programs. 
    Levee means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
    Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the national flood insurance program regulations. 
    Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Mean sea level means, for purposes of the national flood insurance program, the national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
    New construction means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
    Special flood hazard area. See Area of special flood hazard. 
    Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
    Variance means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. (For full requirements see Section 60.6 of the national flood insurance program regulations.) 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in Section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) [national flood insurance regulations] is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Ord. No. 2007-15, § 1(Art. II), 8-20-07) 
Secs. 101/2-6-101/2-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 101/2-21. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
    This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2007-15, § 1(Art. III, § A), 8-20-07) 
Sec. 101/2-22. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the current scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for the City of Groves, Jefferson County, Texas, dated July 6, 1982, Community No. 485475, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps and/or flood boundary-floodway maps (FIRM and/or FBFM) dated January 6, 1983, Community Panel No. 485475 0005 E," and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2007-15, § 1(Art. III, § B), 8-20-07) 
Sec. 101/2-23. - Establishment of development permit. 
    A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2007-15, § 1(Art. III, § C), 8-20-07) 
Sec. 101/2-24. - Compliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2007-15, § 1(Art. III, § D), 8-20-07) 
Sec. 101/2-25. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2007-15, § 1(Art. III, § E), 8-20-07) 
Sec. 101/2-26. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2007-15, § 1(Art. III, § F), 8-20-07) 
Sec. 101/2-27. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2007-15, § 1(Art. III, § G), 8-20-07) 
Secs. 101/2-28-101/2-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 101/2-51. - Designation of the floodplain administrator. 
    The building official of the city is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (emergency management and assistance-national flood insurance program regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
(Ord. No. 2007-15, § 1(Art. IV, § A), 8-20-07) 
Sec. 101/2-52. - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. 
    Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Review permit application to determine whether to ensure that the proposed building site project, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(3)  Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this chapter. 
(4)  Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required. 
(5)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. 
(6)  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency which is the state commission on environmental quality (TCEQ), prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(7)  Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(8)  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 101/2-22, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of article IV. 
(9)  When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point within the community. 
(10)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, section 65.12, of the national flood insurance program regulations, a community may approve certain development in zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one (1) foot, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by section 65.12. 
(Ord. No. 2007-15, § 1(Art. IV, § B), 8-20-07) 
Sec. 101/2-53. - Permit procedures. 
(a)  Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required: 
(1)  Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; 
(2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed; 
(3)  A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of subsection 101/2-77(2); 
(4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; 
(5)  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with subsection 101/2-52(1); 
(b)  Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the following relevant factors: 
(1)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(2)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(3)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(4)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(5)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(6)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
(7)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
(8)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(9)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use. 
(Ord. No. 2007-15, § 1(Art. IV, § C), 8-20-07) 
Sec. 101/2-54. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The appeal board, as established by the community, shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(c)  Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this chapter. 
(f)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in subsection 101/2-53(b) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half (1/2) acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(g)  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this chapter, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this chapter (section 101/2-3). 
(h)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(i)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(j)  Prerequisites for granting variances: 
(1)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(2)  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
a.  Showing a good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(3)  Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(k)  Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that: 
(1)  The criteria outlined in subsections (a)-(i) are met, and 
(2)  The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(Ord. No. 2007-15, § 1(Art. IV, § D), 8-20-07) 
Secs. 101/2-55-101/2-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 101/2-76. - General standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(1)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(2)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(5)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(6)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and, 
(7)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. No. 2007-15, § 1(Art. V, § A), 8-20-07) 
Sec. 101/2-77. - Specific standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in section 101/2-22, subsection 101/2-52(8), or subsection 101/2-78(c), the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in subsection 101/2-53(a)(1), is satisfied. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator. 
(3)  Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two (2) openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(4)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
b.  Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites: 
1.  Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; 
2.  In a new manufactured home park or subdivision; 
3.  In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or 
4.  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
c.  Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of subsection (4) be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation, or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(5)  Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; 
b.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or 
c.  Meet the permit requirements of subsection 101/2-53(a), and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in subsection (4). A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(Ord. No. 2007-15, § 1(Art. V, § B), 8-20-07) 
Sec. 101/2-78. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with sections 101/2-2, 101/2-3, and 101/2-4. 
(b)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of section 101/2-23, section 101/2-53, and the provisions of article IV. 
(c)  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 101/2-22 or subsection 101/2-52(8). 
(d)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(e)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 2007-15, § 1(Art. V, § C), 8-20-07) 
Sec. 101/2-79. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones). 
    Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 101/2-22, are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified), or 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures; 
a.  Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified), or 
b.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base specified flood depth in an AO Zone, or below the base flood elevation in an AH zone, level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. 
(3)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in section 101/2-53 are satisfied. 
(4)  Require within zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Ord. No. 2007-15, § 1(Art. V, § D), 8-20-07) 
Sec. 101/2-80. - Penalties for non-compliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 2007-15, § 1(Art. V, § F), 8-20-07) 
Chapter 11 - FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Health and sanitation, Ch. 13; toxic materials, Ch. 241/2. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 11-1. - Sale of ice cream, snowcones, etc., from vehicles in residential districts prohibited. 
    No person shall sell or offer for sale ice cream, snowcones or similar products from carts or motor vehicles upon streets within the residential districts of the city as these districts are defined and described in the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 169, § 1, 8-10-59) 
Cross reference- Zoning ordinance, App. A. 
Sec. 11-2. - Sanitary maintenance of premises wherein food is sold. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or carry on any business for the sale of food or food products in any manner, wherein the premises for the operation of said business are not at all times kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
Cross reference- Ratproofing required on premises of food business, § 13-36. 
Secs. 11-3-11-12. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1, Ord. No. 87-10, adopted Mar. 9, 1987, repealed former Art. II, §§ 11-13-11-21, relative to food handlers, which sections contained no historical notation and are presumed adopted with the adoption of this Code. 

Secs. 11-13-11-31. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Food generally, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4465 et seq.; unwholesome food, drink or medicine, art. 706 et seq. 

Sec. 11-32. - Adoption of food service sanitation rules. 
    The City of Groves incorporates herein by reference and hereby adopts all state laws and rules adopted under state law relating to the issuance of permits and inspection of food service establishments, retail food stores, mobile food units and roadside food vendors, including, but not limited to VACS art. 4476-5g and future amendments thereto; and VACS art. 4436b Sec. 2.01 and future amendments thereto. 
(Ord. No. 83-01, § 1, 1-31-83; Ord. No. 89-08, § 1, 8-7-89) 
Sec. 11-33. - County health authority's powers regarding permits, inspections and enforcement. 
    The Jefferson County Health Authority is hereby designated and empowered to be the permitting and inspecting authority for the rules and regulations contained herein and shall have the duty and necessary powers to administer and enforce this article. The county health authority may delegate the permitting and inspecting procedure to the environmental control department. 
(Ord. No. 89-08, § 2, 8-7-89) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 89-08, §§ 2-5, adopted August 7, 1989, was not specifically amendatory of the Code; hence, its inclusion herein as §§ 11-33-11-36 was at the discretion of the editor. Sections 6-8, dealing with severability, repeal of conflicting ordinances, and effective date have been omitted from codification. 
Sec. 11-34. - Permit fees; schedule, exceptions, etc. 
(a)  The city council hereby establishes an annual fee for issuance or renewal of a permit to operate a food service establishment, retail food store, mobile food unit or a roadside food vendor payable by said food provider, set out herein as follows: 
FEE SCHEDULE 
Restaurant (0-20) ..... $ 50.00 
 Restaurant (21-50) ..... 75.00 
 Restaurant (51-75) ..... 100.00 
 Restaurant (75+) ..... 125.00 
 Convenience (no food) ..... 50.00 
 Convenience (food) ..... 100.00 
 Grocery (no food) ..... 100.00 
 Grocery (food) ..... 125.00 
 Takeout food service ..... 50.00 
 Roadside vendors ..... 50.00 
 Second reinspection ..... 50.00 
 Snowcone stands ..... 25.00 
 Day care centers ..... 50.00 
 Bakeries ..... 50.00 
 Markets (fish and meat) ..... 50.00 
 Markets (fish and meat, w/food service) ..... 75.00 
 Temporary permit-3 days (pecan festival) ..... 10.00 
(b)  A permit holder may set up at a temporary location for one (1) day without obtaining an additional permit. 
(c)  A nonprofit organization operating a food service establishment, retail food store, mobile food unit or a roadside food vendor shall be required to obtain a permit under this article but shall not be required to pay a fee. 
(d)  All fees shall be placed in a special fund to offset the costs of inspections and permits. 
(Ord. No. 89-08, § 3, 8-7-89) 
Note- See the editor's note at § 11-33. 
Sec. 11-35. - Appeals procedure. 
(a)  The county health authority may refuse to issue a permit or may suspend or revoke a permit if it is found that the food service establishment, retail food store, mobile food unit or roadside food vendor is not in compliance with state law, rules adopted under state law, or this article. 
(b)  If an establishment is refused a permit for any reason, that establishment may request a review of the findings of the environmental control department with the county health authority within seven (7) days. 
(c)  If the permit is still denied, the city council shall hear and render judgment. 
(d)  The city council shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the county health authority and the enforcement or the administration of this article. 
(e)  Each such food provider shall be inspected at least once annually. 
(f)  Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the city council may appeal such decision to any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(g)  The county health authority shall maintain a record of all actions invoking an appeal. 
(Ord. No. 89-08, § 4, 8-7-89) 
Note- See the editor's note at § 11-33. 
Sec. 11-36. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements shall constitute a Class C misdemeanor and upon conviction hereof, the violators shall be fined not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and in addition thereto, shall pay all costs and expenses incurred in the case. Each day such violations continue shall be considered as a separate offense. 
(b)  Injunctions shall issue to prevent violations or threatened violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 89-08, § 5, 8-7-89) 
Note- See the editor's note at § 11-33. 
Chapter 12 - SOLID WASTE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, adopted April 19, 1999, amended the Code by repealing former ch. 20, §§ 20-1-20-20, in its entirety, and adding a new ch. 20, § 20-1-20-18, as herein set out. Former ch. 20 was entitled "Garbage and Trash," and derived from Ord. No. 328, adopted September 20, 1965; Ord. No. 412, adopted April 14, 1969; Ord. No. 454, adopted August 30, 1971; Ord. No. 650, adopted June 12, 1978; Ord. No. 796, adopted November 8, 1982; Ord. No. 90-05, adopted June 11, 1990; Ord. No. 90-18, adopted November 12, 1990; and Ord. No. 91-03, adopted March 4, 1991. 
Cross reference- Junk and junk dealers, ch. 14; bond required of driller of oil or gas well guaranteeing removal of litter, etc. § 17-21; public utilities, § 27-71 et seq.; toxic materials, ch. 241/2. 
State Law reference- Accumulation and removal of garbage and trash, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477-1, § 4. 

Sec. 12-1. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    Dry kitchen refuse shall mean and include all solids remaining after liquids have been drained off kitchen garbage. 
    Kitchen garbage shall mean and include all dry kitchen refuse, meat, vegetable and fruit refuse, small dead animals and dead fowl. 
    Medical waste shall mean and include a special waste of infectious or pathological waste, microbiological waste, sharps and other materials or supplies used by health care and veterinary facilities. 
    Premises shall mean any business house, business establishment, grocery store, dry goods store, mercantile store, department store, boardinghouses, hotels, tourist camps, apartment houses, hospitals, rooming houses, schools, theaters, barbershops, beauty parlors, filling stations, garages, cafes, restaurants, lumberyards, electric shops, plumbing shops, tailor shops, private residences, vacant lots, and all other places of business or places in said city where garbage, trash or rubbish accumulates. 
    Rubbish shall mean and include all tin cans, bottles, glass, scraps of iron, tin, wire or other metals, and any other articles to which the term "rubbish" is usually applied. 
    Tires shall mean and include vehicular rubber tires of all types and sizes. 
    Trash shall mean and include paper of all kinds, rags, old clothing, paper containers, pieces of wood, boxes, barrels, crates, feathers, and any other articles to which the term "trash" is usually applied. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 4-19-99) 
Sec. 12-2. - Compliance with chapter provisions; penalty. 
    The city solid waste division shall not make collection of kitchen garbage, trash or rubbish or tree limbs where the same is not prepared for collection and placed as designated by the terms of this chapter. Failure to comply with this provision will be an offense and each day's failure to comply will constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 4-19-99) 
Sec. 12-3. - Accumulation, collection, generally. 
    The emptying or disposing of any garbage, trash, refuse or rubbish, or the accumulation of such matters, in any place within the city is hereby prohibited, and no one except the duly authorized agents, permitted by the city clerk to collect commercial accounts, and employees of the city, shall collect garbage and refuse or empty cans containing garbage or refuse substances, or convey or transport garbage or refuse substance on the streets, alleys and public thoroughfares of said city, except as otherwise expressly provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 4-19-99) 
Sec. 12-4. - Duty of persons. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to permit kitchen garbage, dry kitchen refuse, trash or rubbish to accumulate on any premises in the city without suitable provision being made to keep the same collected in receptacles or containers and without collecting the same to be removed and disposed of as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 4-19-99) 
Sec. 12-5. - Duty of owners, occupants of real property. 
    Every person owning, leasing, managing, operating, using or occupying any building, apartment, house, structure, grounds or premises within the city shall keep such building, apartment, house, structure, grounds or premises clean, free and clear of all garbage, kitchen garbage, dry kitchen refuse, trash, rubbish; manure from lots, stables and poultry yards; all wastes, oils and greases of garages and filling stations; and all other articles and accumulations that may cause such premises to become unsanitary or unsightly. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 4-19-99) 
Sec. 12-6. - Containers required. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every person owning, managing, leasing, occupying or operating any premises to obtain from the solid waste division of the city at least one (1) container for the deposit therein of all garbage. The standard container shall be ninety-six (96) gallons in size and will be furnished to each resident who pays a garbage bill. A resident may have a smaller container (64 gallons) if a special request is made through the solid waste division. A resident may have a second container (either 96 gallon or 64 gallon) for a non-refundable fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) and an additional monthly fee of five dollars ($5.00). A third container would cost an additional five dollars ($5.00) per month. Three (3) containers will be the maximum allowed for residential service. 
(b)  Commercial establishments shall be furnished with no more than two (2) containers for the standard fee. These containers shall be two (2) ninety-six (96) gallon, two (2) sixty-four (64) gallon, or a combination of these. Small business owners that have need of only one (1) ninety-six 96 or one (1) sixty-four (64) gallon container shall be charged the residential rate. Establishments requiring a three hundred (300) gallon container or containers and/or a combination of three hundred (300) gallon and ninety-six (96) gallon containers will be evaluated and charged a fee determined by the solid waste division and approved by the city council. 
(c)  Separate containers are not required for small amounts of trash, which may be commingled with garbage in the single container. 
(d)  The gross weight of the containers and the contents therein shall not exceed two hundred (200) pounds and all the contents must fit within the container. The cover of the container must be kept closed. Animal waste and ashes shall be wrapped separately from other refuse in a manner to prevent spillage prior to placing same in the container. 
(e)  Containers shall be placed at a location designated by the city between the hours of 6:00 p.m. on the day prior to collection and 7:00 a.m. on the day of collection. After the containers are emptied, they shall be removed from the designated location by 7:00 a.m. on the day after collection. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 4-19-99; Ord. No. 04-01, § 1, 1-12-04) 
Sec. 12-7. - Same-Maintenance. 
    Garbage and trash containers shall be maintained in sanitary condition and tightly closed. Lime must be used as needed at places where such containers are located to keep down odors and flies. The contents of all receptacles shall be so protected that the wind cannot blow out and scatter same over the streets, alleys and premises of the city. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 4-19-99) 
Sec. 12-8. - Same-Replacement and or repair, assignment, ownership. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every resident or commercial establishment that has a container assigned to them to report any defect in the container. The solid waste division will make the necessary repairs as soon as practical at no charge if the damage is from a defect or normal wear and tear. 
(b)  Damaged containers, caused by neglect or otherwise not considered a defect or normal wear and tear, shall be repaired by the solid waste division and paid for by the person or establishment to which the container is assigned. The solid waste division will make the decision as to the type of damage and the cost of repair, however, in no event shall the cost be greater than the then current cost of a new container. 
(c)  Every container shall have a serial number and each number shall be assigned to a resident or commercial establishment. 
(d)  All containers shall remain the property of the city. Only containers owned by the city will be picked up by the city automated collection trucks. 
(e)  A police report shall be filed when a container is reported stolen. A citizen, the police department, or the solid waste division may report a container stolen. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 4-19-99) 
Sec. 12-9. - Disposition of material unsuitable for containers. 
(a)  Refuse which cannot be put in the containers required by this chapter, such as metal, wood, old furniture, scrap lumber, and other debris, shall be placed, ready for disposal, beside such container, and shall not be longer than four (4) feet nor heavier than one hundred (100) pounds. 
(b)  Construction and demolition debris shall be collected and disposed of at the expense of the owner or the owner's contractor. Small piles of debris may be collected by the city if not related to a project permitted by the building official. However, the collection is limited to fifteen (15) cubic yards (for reference, this would be 9 feet × 9 feet × 5 feet high). Residents who do their own permitted work and not using a contractor, on their homestead and not a rent house, may haul construction and/or demolition debris to the landfill and the city will pay the tipping fee. 
(c)  Mixed piles, (those in which greenwaste is commingled with trash or junk), will be tagged by the city noting that it is a mixed pile and the resident will then be required to segregate the pile and the city will pick it up on the next scheduled collection date. If, at the next scheduled collection date, the pile is still commingled, the city will pick up the pile and charge the resident a special fee on their monthly water, sewer and garbage bill. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 4-19-99; Ord. No. 04-01, § 1, 1-12-04) 
Sec. 12-10. - Collection by city. 
    The city will make, or cause to be made, collections for the removal of kitchen garbage, rubbish, trash and other like materials, from all premises in the city, for which a garbage collection fee is paid, at least once weekly. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 4-19-99; Ord. No. 00-20, § 1, 11-13-00) 
Sec. 12-11. - Collection of garbage, trash and/or rubbish by private persons, firms or corporations-Permit, fee; gross receipts tax; use of gross receipts tax proceeds. 
(a)  An annual permit fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) per truck shall be required of all private persons, firms or corporations collecting garbage, trash and/or rubbish within the city limits. 
(b)  There is hereby levied an annual tax equal to nine (9) percent of the total gross receipts of all persons, firms or corporations collecting garbage, trash and/or rubbish within the city limits, except that material suitable for recycling and picked up in separate containers and delivered for recycling is exempt from said tax. 
(c)  Each person, firm or corporation collecting garbage, trash and/or rubbish within the city limits and using the city streets therefor shall file a report with the director of finance showing the total amount of its gross receipts collected from its customers for such services during each year and shall pay the aforesaid nine (9) percent tax on or before January 15 of the succeeding year. 
(d)  Upon reasonable notice, each such person, firm or corporation shall make its books and records available to the director of finance to enable him/her to determine the correctness of any report of its gross receipts for the year filed with the city as required by this section. 
(e)  If any person, firm or corporation shall fail or refuse to timely file an annual report showing its gross receipts, then its permit shall be automatically revoked and terminated; unless for good cause the city council shall extend such time for filing. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 4-19-99) 
Sec. 12-12. - Collection, disposition or certain items and greenwaste from trees, shrubs and similar products. 
(a)  Heavy dead animals and other materials such as brick, broken concrete, ashes, sand, gravel, automobile frames and other heavy bulky material, and manure from cow lots, horse stables, poultry yards and waste oils from garages or filling stations, tires and medical waste, and greenwaste from trimmings from trees, shrubs and similar products, shall be collected and disposed of at the expense of the owner or person responsible for or controlling the same under the direction of the designated city official. 
(b)  Any person, firm or corporation removing or trimming trees, shrubbery or similar products on premises within the city limits in exchange for fees or other considerations shall obtain a miscellaneous permit and post a performance bond in the amount of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) on a form approved by the city, prior to commencing any trimming and/or removal. A separate permit shall be required for each premise. The permit application shall contain pertinent information, including but not limited to, the name and address of the owner or person in charge of the premises, the name and address of the contractor, and the address or location of the work to be performed and completed. No fee shall be required for the issuance of the permit. 
(c)  Any person, firm or corporation who trims trees, shrubbery or similar products on premises within the city limits in exchange for fees or other considerations shall, before the expiration of five (5) days after the accumulation begins, remove and dispose all such tree limbs and other trimmings from such premises. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation who trims trees, shrubbery or similar products on premises within the city limits in exchange for fees or other considerations to transport such material to a site other than the property from which the material was generated, unless the site has been authorized by the city council. The city shall not collect any material from locations other than the property at which the material was generated or authorized by the city council. 
(e)  The provisions of section 12-11 pertaining to franchise regulations shall not apply to a person, firm or corporation who removes tree trimmings from premises within the city limits as required by section 12-12. 
(f)  The provisions herein requiring a permit and bond shall not apply to any franchise holder or entity authorized by state law to conduct operations on city premises or rights-of-way. 
(g)  Nothing herein shall limit a property owner from removing or trimming trees, shrubbery or similar products on their own premises within the city and such material on the owner's premises shall be collected by the city as provided by ordinance. 
(h)  The above provisions are intended to govern and protect public health and safety. Any person, firm or corporation who intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly violates any duty or responsibility imposed by section 12-12 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall on conviction be fined in accordance with the general penalty provisions of section 1-5 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 4-19-99; Ord. No. 04-01, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 04-03, § 1, 6-28-04) 
Sec. 12-13. - Disposal in any street, alley or sidewalk, or on premises of another, and burning prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place or dispose of any kitchen garbage, dry kitchen refuse, trash or rubbish in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place within the city, or on the premises of another, without the consent of the other party. Every owner or operator of any premises shall keep the alleys, streets, sidewalks, and such other public places abutting such premises, free and clear of all such garbage, trash and rubbish. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any items except in an incinerator constructed in accordance with the requirements of the codes approved by the city council, and/or permitted by the city fire department. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 4-19-99) 
Sec. 12-14. - Meddling, tampering with garbage prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to meddle or tamper with any garbage container, or any trash or rubbish receptacle, or with any garbage, trash or rubbish, or to in any manner pilfer with such containers or receptacles or with such garbage, trash or rubbish, or to scatter the contents thereof in any street, alley, sidewalk or premises in the city. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 4-19-99) 
Sec. 12-15. - Littering prohibited-Generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, cast or deposit upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or any yard or premises, public or private, any filth of any kind, or cans, paper, trash, paper containers, rubbish, bottles or any other form of litter or waste matter. 
(b)  In the event a person or persons litter a vacant lot, the owner of said property may file a complaint with the police department and the solid waste unit of the public works department will pick up the litter if it is on the city right-of-way. The city will not enter upon the property to remove the litter. 
(c)  In the event that trash is found to be blocking drainage a service fee ranging from thirty-five dollars ($35.00) to two hundred dollars ($200.00) will be charged to the owner of the property when it becomes necessary to clear a ditch of trash and/or debris to prevent possible flooding. The fee shall be based upon the amount of work performed by the city. 
(d)  Should a property owner request the removal of trash from an area not designated to have trash pick-up, the city may remove that trash for a fee. Such service shall be provided at the discretion of the public works director and depending upon the existing workload. The fee shall be based upon the amount of work performed by the city. This provision shall not apply to the accumulation of trash due to work performed by contractors and/or individuals or companies hired by the property owners. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 4-19-99; Ord. No. 00-20, § 2, 11-13-00) 
Sec. 12-16. - Same-Duty of business owners, occupants. 
(a)  Generally. The owner or occupant of any store or other place of business situated within the city shall exercise reasonable diligence at all times to keep his premises clean of wastepaper, wrapping paper, paper napkins, cartons, package containers, and other used or waste materials thrown or left on said premises by its customers, and to take reasonable measures to prevent same from drifting or blowing to adjoining premises. 
(b)  Receptacles. Receptacles of sufficient size and number shall be placed on the premises accessible to the customers of such business where the above referred to articles of waste may be disposed of. 
(c)  Signs. Each business establishment shall place upon its premises in a conspicuous place or places in close proximity to the receptacle or receptacles above referred to, a sign or signs which shall convey to its customers a request that they use such receptacles for the disposal of waste material. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 4-19-99) 
Sec. 12-17. - Same-Duty of business customer. 
    It shall be unlawful for any customer going upon the business premises of another to in any manner dispose of wastepaper, wrapping paper, paper napkins, cartons, package containers, and other used or waste materials except in receptacles provided for such purposes. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 4-19-99) 
Sec. 12-18. - Prohibiting the scavenging of recyclable materials from residential areas within the corporate limits. 
(a)  No person or persons, other than the current resident of the property on which the items are placed, or an authorized carrier, shall remove, pick up, or transfer recyclable materials left at curbside in any residential subdivision, or at curbside at any single-family residence. Materials left at curbside in either specifically marked recovery containers or any other type of container are to be picked up by a designated carrier for the purpose of removal of recyclable materials. Materials referred to, and to be left at curbside in specifically marked containers, will include recyclable materials included in the city's recycling program. 
(b)  Each removal of an item or items from a residential subdivision residence location or a single-family residence location shall constitute a separate violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 4-19-99) 
Chapter 13 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Animals and fowl, Ch. 5; food and food handlers, Ch. 11; garbage and trash, Ch. 12; sewers, Ch. 27 et seq.; toxic materials, Ch. 241/2 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 13-1-13-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - INSANITARY, UNSIGHTLY, ETC., CONDITIONS ON PRIVATE PREMISES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city to prohibit conditions described in this article, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4436. 

Sec. 13-11. - Prohibited conditions designated-Stagnant water. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of any lot or other premises in the city to allow or permit holes or places where water may accumulate and become stagnant to be or remain on such lot or premises or to allow or permit the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or to permit the same to remain thereon. 
Cross reference- Excavations generally, § 22-22 et seq. 
Sec. 13-12. - Same-Accumulation of carrion, filth, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of any lot, building, house, establishment or premises in the city to allow or permit any carrion, filth or any other impure or unwholesome matter of any kind to accumulate or remain thereon. 
Cross reference- Garbage and trash generally, Ch. 12. 
Sec. 13-13. - Same-Growth or accumulation of weeds, fallen trees and/or tree limbs, rubbish, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any lot or premises in the city to allow or permit weeds or grass over twelve (12) inches in height, fallen trees and/or tree limbs, rubbish, brush, or any other unsightly, objectionable, or unsanitary matter of whatever nature to accumulate or remain on such lot or premises. 
(b)  Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. 
(c)  Upon a second conviction for violation of this section, the defendant shall be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00), nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 177, § 1, 10-26-59; Ord. No. 2007-11, § 1, 5-14-07; Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1, 8-26-13) 
Sec. 13-14. - Notice to owner to remedy or remove condition-Generally. 
    Whenever any condition described in this article is found to exist on any premises within the city, the owner of such premises shall be notified by the city, in writing, to correct, remedy or remove the condition within ten (10) days after such notice and it shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with such notice. 
(Ord. No. 177, § 3, 10-26-59) 
State Law reference- Notice to remove insanitary, unsightly, etc., conditions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4436. 
Sec. 13-15. - Same-How given. 
    The notice provided for in section 13-14 shall be served personally on the owner to whom it is directed or shall be given by certified letter, return receipt requested, addressed to such owner at his last known mailing address. In the event that personal service cannot be made and the owner's address is unknown, such notice shall be given by publication at least two (2) times within ten (10) consecutive days in a newspaper of general circulation published within the city. 
(Ord. No. 177, § 3, 10-26-59; Ord. No. 2007-11, § 2, 5-14-07) 
Sec. 13-16. - Correction or removal of conditions by city-Generally. 
    Should the recipient of any such notice as above provided fail, neglect or refuse to comply with the requirements of such notice within said period of ten (10) days, the city, by virtue of the power conferred upon it by its Charter and the provisions of Article 4436, Revised Civil States of Texas, shall have the power to enter in and upon said premises and perform all work, acts, or things necessary to be done in compliance with the requirements of said notice, and incur all necessary expenses in connection therewith; the city shall further cause any recurrence of such violations as set forth in the original notice to be corrected for a period of six (6) months thereafter, without the necessity of further notice; and all of such work and expenses incurred in connection therewith shall be done on the account of and at the cost of the owner of any such premises, and is declared to be a personal charge against any such owner, and a lien upon said property as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 177, § 3, 10-26-59; Ord. No. 711, § 1, 7-21-80) 
Editor's note- Section 3 of Ord. No. 711, adopted July 21, 1980, provides that penalty for violation of this section shall be the same as provided in § 13-13 of the Code of Ordinances. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to correct or remove conditions described in this article, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4436. 
Sec. 13-17. - Same-Filing of statement of expenses incurred. 
    Whenever any work is done or improvements are made by the city under the provisions of section 13-16, the mayor or health officer, on behalf of the city, shall file a statement of the expenses incurred thereby with the county clerk. Such statement shall give the amount of such expenses and the date or dates on which the work was done or the improvements were made. 
(Ord. No. 177, § 4, 10-26-59) 
Sec. 13-18. - Same-Lien for and collection of expenses. 
    After the statement provided for in section 13-17 is filed, the city shall have a privilege lien on the lot or real estate upon which the work was done or improvement made, to secure the expenses thereof. Such lien shall be second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements, and the amount thereof shall bear interest at the rate of ten (10) per cent per annum from the date the statement was filed. For any such expenditures and interest, suit may be instituted and recovery and foreclosure of the lien may be had in the name of the city and the statement of expenses made in accord with section 13-17, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended for such work or improvements. 
(Ord. No. 177, § 4, 10-26-59) 
State Law reference- Similar state law, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4436. 
Secs. 13-19-13-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RAT CONTROL 

Sec. 13-29. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article the following definitions shall apply: 
    Business buildings shall mean any structure, whether public or private, that is adapted for occupancy, for transaction of business, for rendering of professional service, for amusement, for the display, sale or storage of goods, wares, or merchandise, or for the performance of work or labor, including hotels, apartment buildings, tenement houses, rooming houses, office buildings, public buildings, stores, theaters, markets, restaurants, grain elevators, abattoirs, warehouses, workshops, factories, and all outhouses, sheds, barns and other structures on premises used for business purposes. 
    Health officer shall mean the superintendent, commissioner or director of health or his duly authorized representative. 
    Occupant shall mean the individual, partnership, or corporation that uses or occupies any business building or part or fraction thereof, whether the actual owner or tenant. In the case of vacant business buildings or vacant portions thereof, the owner, agent, or custodian shall have the responsibility as occupant. 
    Owner shall mean the actual owner, agent, or custodian of the business building, whether individual, partnership, or corporation. The lessee shall be construed as the "owner" for the purpose of this article when business building agreements hold the lessee responsible for maintenance and repairs. 
    Rat eradication shall mean the elimination or extermination of rats within buildings by any or all of the accepted measures, such as: Poisoning, fumigation, trapping, clubbing, etc. 
    Rat harborage shall mean any condition which provides shelter or protection for rats, thus favoring their multiplication and continued existence in, under, or outside of any structure. 
    Ratproofing shall mean a form of construction to prevent the ingress of rats into business buildings from the exterior or from one business building or establishment to another. It consists essentially of treatment with material, impervious to rat gnawing, all actual or potential openings in exterior walls, ground or first floors, basements, roofs and foundations, that may be reached by rats from the ground by climbing or burrowing. 
Cross reference- General definitions and rules of construction, § 1-3. 
Sec. 13-30. - Ratproofing of business buildings-Required. 
    All business buildings in the city shall be ratproofed, freed of rats, and maintained in a ratproof and ratfree condition to the satisfaction of the health officer. 
Sec. 13-31. - Same-Notice to, compliance by owner. 
    Upon receipt of written notice and/or order from the health officer, the owner of any business building specified therein shall take immediate measures for ratproofing the building, and that unless said work and improvements have been completed by the owner in the time specified in the written notice, in no event to be less than fifteen (15) days, or within the time to which a written extension may have been granted by the health officer, then the owner shall be deemed guilty of an offense under the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 13-32. - Same-Notice to, compliance by occupant. 
    Whenever the health officer notifies the occupant or occupants of a business building in writing that there is evidence of rat infestation of the building, said occupant or occupants shall immediately institute rat eradication measures and shall continuously maintain such measures in a satisfactory manner until the premises is declared by the health officer to be free of rat infestation. Unless said measures are undertaken within five (5) days after receipt of notice, it shall be construed as a violation of the provisions of this article and occupant shall be held responsible therefor. 
Sec. 13-33. - Same-Maintenance. 
    The owners of all ratproofed business buildings are required to maintain the premises in a ratproofed condition and to repair all breaks or leaks that may occur in the ratproofing without a specific order of the health officer. 
Sec. 13-34. - Same-Closure of occupied buildings. 
    Whenever conditions inside or under any occupied business buildings within the city provide extensive harborage for rats in the opinion of the health officer, the health officer is empowered, after due notification in accordance with section 13-31, to close such business buildings until such time as the conditions are abated by ratproofing and harborage removal including, if necessary, the installation of suitable concrete floors in basements or replacement of wooden first or ground floors with concrete or other major repairs necessary to facilitate rat eradication. 
Sec. 13-35. - Same-Condemnation of unoccupied buildings. 
    Whenever conditions inside or under any unoccupied business buildings provide extensive harborage for rats in the opinion of the health officer, the health officer is empowered to require compliance with the provisions of section 13-31, above and, in the event that said conditions are not corrected in a period of sixty (60) days, or within the time to which a written extension may have been granted by the health officer, the health officer is empowered to institute condemnation and destruction proceedings. 
Sec. 13-36. - Where foodstuffs stored, kept, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy any new or existing business buildings wherein foodstuffs are to be stored, kept, handled, sold, held or offered for sale without complying with the provisions of this article; unless the provisions of this section are complied with, no city license or permit to conduct or carry on any business mentioned above will be issued. 
Cross reference- Food and food establishments, Ch. 11. 
Sec. 13-37. - Storage of food, feed. 
    All food and feed within the city for feeding chickens, cows, pigs, horses, and other animals shall be stored in ratfree and ratproof containers, compartments, or rooms unless stored in a ratproof building. 
Sec. 13-38. - Inspections. 
    The health officer is empowered to make unannounced inspections of the interior and exterior of business buildings to determine full compliance with this article, and the health officer shall make periodic inspections at intervals of not more than forty-five (45) days of all ratproofed buildings to determine evidence of rat infestation and the existence of new breaks or leaks in their ratproofing and, when any evidence of it is found indicating the presence of rats or openings through which rats may again enter business buildings, the health officer shall serve the owners or occupants with notice and/or orders to abate the conditions found. 
Sec. 13-39. - Restoration of ratproofing following repair, reconstruction, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful under the provisions of this article for the occupant, owner, contractor, public utility company, plumber, or any other person to remove and fail to restore in like condition the ratproofing from any business building for any purpose. It shall further be unlawful for any person or agent to make any new openings that are not closed or sealed against the entrance of rats. 
Sec. 13-40. - Storage of lumber, boxes, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit to accumulate on any premises, improved or vacant, or on any open lot or alley in the city, any lumber, boxes, barrels, bottles, cans, containers or similar materials that may be permitted to remain thereon unless same shall be placed on open racks that are elevated not less than eighteen (18) inches above the ground, and evenly piled or stacked. 
Chapter 14 - JUNK AND JUNK DEALERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Automobile wreckers, ch. 6; pawnbrokers, ch. 18; toxic materials, ch. 241/2. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
    Unless it appears from the context that a different meaning is intended, the following words, as used in this chapter, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section: 
    Junk. The word "junk" shall mean and include scrap iron, tin, brass, copper, lead and zinc, and all metallic substances, secondhand watches, knives, guns, cameras, jewelry, fishing equipment and similar items, handled, purchased, received or offered for sale by dealers in junk, and shall mean and include secondhand plumbing and electric fixtures, wires, globes, brass pipe, lead pipe and pipe of other metals, melted metals of any kind, such parts of machinery or machines that may be identified as such, any fixtures pertaining to a residence, business house or house of any kind, automobile accessories, including horns, hub caps, prestolite tanks, tires and all detached and detachable parts of any automobile, motorcycle, bicycle or motor vehicle of any kind, or any vehicle of any kind, boats, boat trailers, travel trailers or parts thereof that are worn out, worthless, deteriorated, or obsolete, and unusable in their existing condition, hydrants, faucets, lawn hose, lawn sprinklers, gas fixtures, fittings and appliances, garden tools, mechanical tools of every description, harness, rags, rubber, rope, bottles and utensils of every description. The enumeration of the articles above shall not be held to exclude other articles that may be reasonably included under the general definition of "junk", when given its usual trade meaning. 
    Junk dealer. The term "junk dealer" shall mean and include any person primarily engaged in collecting, handling, buying or selling any of the articles defined as "junk". 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 1, 5-2-05) 
Cross reference- General definitions and rules of construction, § 1-3. 
Sec. 14-2. - Accumulation prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate, store or possess any junk up on any premises owned by him or under his control within the city, or to allow or permit the same to be accumulated, stored or possessed thereon. 
Sec. 14-3. - Junk dealers, yards prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to do business as a junk dealer within the city, or to operate or conduct a junk yard within the city. 
Sec. 14-4. - Exceptions. 
    [The prohibitions of this chapter shall apply] except for the purchase of aluminum cans as permitted by the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 88-06, § 1, 5-2-88) 
Secs. 14-5-14-36. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - JUNKED VEHICLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2009-05, § 1, adopted March 2, 2009, repealed and reenacted article II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, article II pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 99-09, § 1, adopted July 12, 1999. 

Sec. 14-37. - Short title. 
    The provisions of this article shall be known as and may be cited as the junked vehicle regulations of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § 1, 3-2-09) 
Sec. 14-38. - Definitions. 
(a)  For the purposes of this article, "junked vehicle" means any motor vehicle, as defined in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.071, that is self-propelled and: 
(1)  Does not have lawfully attached to it: 
a.  An unexpired license plate; or 
b.  A valid motor vehicle inspection certificate; and 
(2)  Is: 
a.  Wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or 
b.  Inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than: 
1.  Seventy-two (72) consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or 
2.  Thirty (30) consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property. 
(b)  "Classic/special interest vehicle" shall mean a passenger car, truck, motorcycle, travel trailer, or light commercial motor vehicle that is of any age and having a manufacturers rated carrying capacity of one ton or less. These vehicles shall be fully registered like any other vehicle and be capable of being operated on any roadway. 
(c)  "Antique vehicle" shall mean any car, truck, or motorcycle in which the frame, body and motor are twenty-five (25) or more years old and are a collector's item. These vehicles shall be fully registered like any other vehicle and be capable of being operated on any roadway. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § 1, 3-2-09) 
Sec. 14-39. - Exceptions to article provisions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to a vehicle or vehicle part: 
(1)  That is completely enclosed in a building in a lawful manner and is not visible from the street or other public or private property, or 
(2)  That is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard, or that is an antique or special interest vehicle stored by a motor vehicle collector on the collector's property. If the vehicle or part and the outdoor storage area, if any, are: 
a.  Maintained in an orderly manner; 
b.  Not a health hazard; and 
c.  Screened from ordinary public view by appropriate means, including a fence, rapidly growing trees, or shrubbery. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § 1, 3-2-09) 
Sec. 14-40. - Junked vehicles declared to be a public nuisance. 
    A junked vehicle, including a part of a junked vehicle, which is visible from a public place or public right-of-way: 
(1)  Is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the public; 
(2)  Tends to reduce the value of private property; 
(3)  Invites vandalism; 
(4)  Creates a fire hazard; 
(5)  Is an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors; 
(6)  Produces urban blight adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of municipalities; and 
(7)  Is a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § 1, 3-2-09) 
Sec. 14-41. - Offense. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person maintains a public nuisance described by section 14-40. 
(b)  An offense under this section is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(c)  The court shall order abatement and removal of the nuisance on conviction. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § 1, 3-2-09) 
Sec. 14-42. - Authority to abate nuisance; procedures. 
    The city, pursuant to the authority of V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.074, hereby adopts procedures that conform to state law for the abatement and removal from private or public property or a public right-of-way of a junked vehicle or part of a junked vehicle as a public nuisance. 
(1)  Procedures for abatement and removal of a public nuisance, as herein defined, are to be administered by the building official of the city or his duly authorized agent. Whenever any such public nuisance exists within the city in violation of the provisions of this article, the building official, or his duly authorized agent, shall give notice of the nuisance in accordance with section 14-43. 
(2)  A public hearing is required before removal of the public nuisance if requested by a person for whom notice is required under section 14-43. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of section 14-44. 
(3)  Additional notice shall be provided by the wrecker service or garage keeper that performs the removal of the junked motor vehicle identifying the vehicle or part of the vehicle which notice shall be given to the state department of transportation not later than the fifth day after the date of removal. On receipt of said notice of removal, the department shall immediately cancel the certificate of title issued for the vehicle. 
(4)  The municipal court of the city may issue necessary orders to enforce the procedures of this article. 
(5)  The building official, or his duly authorized agent, may enter private property to examine a public nuisance, to obtain information to identify the nuisance, and to remove or direct the removal of the nuisance. 
(6)  The relocation of a junk motor vehicle that is a public nuisance to another location within the city after a notice for the abatement and the removal of the public nuisance has commenced has no effect on the proceeding if the junk motor vehicle constitutes a public nuisance at the new location. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § 1, 3-2-09) 
Sec. 14-43. - Notice. 
(a)  Notice for the abatement and removal of a public nuisance under this article must provide for not less than ten (10) days' notice of the nature of the nuisance and must be sent by certified mail with a five-day return requested to: 
(1)  The last known registered owner of the nuisance; 
(2)  Any lien holder of record; and 
(3)  The owner or occupant of the property on which the nuisance is located if the nuisance is on private property; or 
(4)  If the nuisance is located on a public right-of-way, the property adjacent to the right-of-way. 
(b)  The notice must state: 
(1)  The nature of such nuisance; 
(2)  That the nuisance must be abated and removed not later than the tenth day after the day on which the notice was mailed; and 
(3)  Any request for a hearing must be made before that ten-day period expires. 
(c)  If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the nuisance is unknown, notice may be placed on the nuisance or, if the owner is located, hand delivered. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § 1, 3-2-09) 
Sec. 14-44. - Hearing. 
(a)  The city council shall conduct hearings under the procedures adopted under this article. 
(b)  If a hearing is requested by a person for whom notice is required under subsection 14-43(a)(3), the hearing shall be held not earlier than the eleventh day after the date of the service of the notice. 
(c)  At the hearing, the junked motor vehicle is presumed, unless demonstrated otherwise by the owner, to be inoperable. 
(d)  If the information is available at the location of the nuisance, a resolution or order requiring removal of the nuisance must include the vehicle's: 
(1)  Description; 
(2)  Vehicle identification number; and 
(3)  License plate number. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § 1, 3-2-09) 
Sec. 14-45. - Junked vehicle disposal. 
(a)  A junked vehicle, including a part of a junked vehicle, may be removed to a scrap yard, a motor vehicle demolisher, or a suitable site operated by a municipality or county. 
(b)  A municipality or county may operate a disposal site if its governing body determines that commercial disposition of junked vehicles is not available or is inadequate. A municipality or county may: 
(1)  Finally dispose of a junked vehicle or vehicle part; or 
(2)  Transfer it to another disposal site if the disposal is scrap or salvage only. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § 1, 3-2-09) 
Chapter 15 - BUSINESS REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - PAWNSHOPS AND PAWNBROKERS 

Sec. 15-1. - Electronic recordkeeping required. 
(a)  Any and all pawnshops and pawnbrokers doing business within the city shall, beginning on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, register with LeadsOnline at www.leadsonline.com and shall upload, on at least a daily basis, all information relating to personal property purchased, received or otherwise acquired by such pawnshop or pawnbroker to the database maintained by LeadsOnline. 
(b)  There shall be no direct cost to the pawnshop or pawnbroker associated with registration with LeadsOnline or with the uploading of the information required by this section, other than the cost of computers and internet service. 
(c)  All costs charged for the use of the LeadsOnline service shall be borne by the police department of the city from its current budget. 
(d)  (1)  It shall be a defense to compliance with this section if the pawnshop or pawnbroker is able to prove that a power failure or a computer system malfunction prohibited timely entry of the required data into LeadsOnline and the pawnshop or pawnbroker promptly uploaded the required data within twenty-four (24) hours of computer system restoration. 
(2)  Should a pawnshop or pawnbroker fail to maintain an operable computer system so as to prohibit the pawnshop or pawnbroker from complying with this section, then the pawnshop or pawnbroker may be cited for failure to comply with this section. 
(e)  The failure of any pawnshop or pawnbroker to strictly comply with the provisions of this section shall be deemed a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, § 1, 7-18-11) 
Secs. 15-2-15-30. - Reserved. 
Chapter 16 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Adoption of state penal laws. 
    Any act, the commission of which constitutes a misdemeanor under the laws of the state, other than offenses covered by the state penal code or preempted to the state by other laws, is prohibited within the city, and if committed within the city, is hereby declared to be an offense; provided, however, that the penalty therefor shall not exceed the penalty prescribed in section 1-5 of this Code or the penalty prescribed by state law, whichever is less. 
(Ord. No. 87-11, § 1, 3-9-87) 
Secs. 16-2-16-9. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 87-11, § 5, adopted Mar. 9, 1987 repealed §§ 16-2-16-9, 16-12, 16-17-16-21, 16-23, 16-24, 16-26, 16-27, 16-29 and 16-30, providing for various offenses. The sections contained no historical notations and are presumed adopted with the adoption of this Code, except § 16-23, which derived from Ord. No. 296, § 1, adopted June 29, 1964, and § 16-27, which derived from §§ 3 and 4 of Ord. No. 296. 
Sec. 16-10. - Dangerous weapons-Discharge. 
    Any person who discharges an air rifle or air pistol of any description, by whatever name known that by means of compressed air, compressed gas, springs, or any other means is capable of discharging shots, pellets, or any solid object at a velocity in excess of three hundred (300) feet per second, or discharges any cannon cracker, or torpedo on or across any public square, street, or alley of the city or within one hundred (100) yards of any business house within the city shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). A "cannon cracker" is any combustible package more than two (2) inches long and more than one (1) inch through. 
(Ord. No. 87-11, § 2, 3-9-87) 
State Law reference- Similar state law, V.T.C.A., Penal Code §§ 42.01(a)(9)-(11). 
Sec. 16-11. - Same-Carrying. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a law enforcement officer or other person authorized by the city marshal, to carry a loaded shotgun or rifle, target or other gun of any character, or any other dangerous weapon, other than handguns, illegal knives or clubs (which are prohibited by the V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 46.02), within the city. 
(Ord. No. 87-11, § 3, 3-9-87) 
State Law reference- Unlawful carrying arms, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 46.02. 
Sec. 16-12. - Reserved. 
Note- See the editor's note to §§ 16-2-16-9. 
Sec. 16-13. - Electric fences. 
(a)  Residential locations. 
(1)  Electric fences are prohibited in residential neighborhoods. 
(2)  Exception: Electric fences supplied by line, solar or battery-power commonly used to prohibit animals from crawling under privacy or chain link fences, installed six (6) inches or less from the bottom of fence and approved by Underwriters Laboratory (UL) are permitted. 
(b)  Commercial locations. Electric fences permitted subject to the following: 
(1)  Electric fences supplied by line, solar or battery-power approved by Underwriters Laboratory (UL). 
(2)  The electric fence shall be no taller than ten (10) feet. 
(3)  The electric fence shall be completely surrounded by a non-electric fence or wall with a height not to exceed eight (8) feet. 
(4)  The surrounding non-electric fence or wall shall be separated from the electric fence by at least six (6) inches at the closest point between the electric fence and the non-electric surrounding fence or wall. 
(5)  The electric fence is identified as such with signage, not less than one (1) square foot in area, placed at least every seventy-five (75) feet. 
(6)  Any property protected by an electrically charged fence shall provide outside the perimeter of the fence, an emergency shut-off switch for fire or police access. The marking and location of fire and police access shall be approved by the fire chief and city marshal. 
(7)  Minimum separation of any building exit or discharge shall be no less than five (5) feet. 
(8)  An electric fence may not be constructed within twenty-five (25) feet of a lot or tract of land used for residential purposes. If a residential use is within twenty-five (25) feet of a proposed fence, the property owner or the authorized agent may file a request for a variance with the building official for consideration by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 79, §§ 1, 2, 11-7-55; Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 3-11-13) 
Sec. 16-14. - Same-Evidence. 
    In any prosecution under the provisions of section 16-13, testimony that the fence was under the control of the defendant or situated on defendant's premises and that any person or animal received an electric shock by coming into contact with such fence shall be deemed prima facie evidence that such defendant caused such fence to be charged with a current of electricity. 
(Ord. No. 79, § 3, 11-7-55) 
Sec. 16-15. - False name and address-Giving to officers prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person when giving a written promise to appear, or given a written notice by any police officer to appear before the municipal court of the city to answer for an offense against any law of this state, sections of this Code or any ordinances of the city, to give an assumed or fictitious name or a false place of residence or address, or any other than his true name and the true place of his residence or address, upon the request of such officer. 
Sec. 16-16. - Same-Giving to hospital officials. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person when receiving inpatient or out-patient aid or services at the hospital or whenever otherwise being treated or being under the care or custody of any person while in the hospital to give an assumed or fictitious name or a false place of residence or address, or any other than his true name and the true place of his residence or address to any one requesting such information. 
Secs. 16-17-16-21. - Reserved. 
Note- See the editor's note to §§ 16-2-16-9. 
Sec. 16-22. - Display of nudity. 
    No store, retail outlet or food store may display books, magazines or pamphlets containing pictures of nude men or women where such material is accessible to minors. 
(Ord. No. 87-11, § 4, 3-9-87) 
State Law reference- Indecent publications and exposures, Vernon's Ann. P.C. § 21.08. 
Secs. 16-23, 16-24. - Reserved. 
Note- See the editor's note to §§ 16-2-16-9. 
Sec. 16-25. - Peeping toms prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to window peep, spy upon or eavesdrop at or on any private residence in the city, or upon any hotel, tourist court, apartment or trailer house, whether such private residence, hotel, tourist court, apartment or trailer house is occupied by people, or not; and it shall be no defense that such window peeper, eavesdropper or spyer was not trespassing upon private property at the time of such window peeping, eavesdropping and spying. Any person deemed guilty of a violation of the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Ord. No. 296, § 5, 6-29-64) 
Secs. 16-26, 16-27. - Reserved. 
Note- See the editor's note to §§ 16-2-16-9. 
Sec. 16-28. - Throwing articles from windows, cars. 
    Any person who shall, within the city, throw or cause to be thrown, any water or other liquid or any other article from the upper story or stories of any house or building or from any vehicle upon any street, alley or sidewalk, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
Secs. 16-29, 16-30. - Reserved. 
Note- See the editor's note to §§ 16-2-16-9. 
Sec. 16-31. - Water towers, poles, similar structures; climbing. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, not employed to do so, to climb or ascend any water tower, windmill tower, telephone, telegraph, electric light or any other publicly or privately owned pole in the city. 
Sec. 16-32. - Solicitation to acquire a prohibited substance prohibited. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, unless the context of their usage clearly indicates another meaning: 
    Controlled substance shall have the meaning ascribed to it by V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 481.002(5), or any amendments thereto. 
    Controlled substance analogue shall have the meaning ascribed to it by V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 481.002(6) or any amendments thereto. 
    Dangerous drug shall have the meaning ascribed to it by V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 483.001(2), or any amendments thereto. 
    Prohibited substance shall mean a controlled substance, controlled substance analogue, dangerous drug, volatile chemical, or any combination thereof. 
    Volatile chemical shall mean any of the chemicals, or an isomer of any of the chemicals, listed in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 484.002, or any amendments thereto. 
(b)  Offenses. 
(1)  A person commits an offense if, with intent to acquire a prohibited substance, he requests, commands or attempts to induce another to sell, donate or otherwise transfer or deliver a prohibited substance to the person. 
(2)  It is no defense to prosecution under this section that: 
a.  No monetary or other consideration was tendered to the person solicited; or 
b.  That the person solicited was unable or unwilling to transfer or deliver a prohibited substance. 
(3)  It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution under this section that: 
a.  The solicitation is made in furtherance of a transaction which would not constitute a violation of any applicable law; or 
b.  The solicitation is made by a peace officer or federal law enforcement officer in the lawful discharge of his duties or by a law enforcement agent acting in the lawful discharge of an official duty. 
(4)  Violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable, upon conviction, by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), nor more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). However, any conduct prescribed hereunder which also constitutes an offense under state law shall not be prosecuted under this section, but shall be prosecuted pursuant to and punishable as provided by the applicable state law. An offense under this section is not a lesser included offense under V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code chs. 481, 483 or 484. 
(Ord. No. 99-02, §§ 1, 2, 1-25-99) 
Secs. 16-33-16-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NOISES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 507, adopted July 2, 1973, amended this Code, but did not specify the manner of codification, hence inclusion herein of §§ 1-5 as Art. II, §§ 16-51-16-55 was at the discretion of the editors. 

Sec. 16-51. - Noises-Interfering with enjoyment of property or public peace and comfort. 
    No person shall hereafter make or cause to be made any loud and raucous noise in the city which is offensive to the ordinary sensibilities of the inhabitants of the city, which noise renders the enjoyment of life or property uncomfortable or interferes with public peace and comfort. 
(Ord. No. 507, § 1, 7-2-73) 
Sec. 16-52. - Same-Certain acts prohibited. 
    The following acts, among others, are declared to create loud and raucous noises, as defined in section 16-51 hereof, and shall be deemed a violation of this article, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)  The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, streetcar or other vehicle, except as a danger signal, as required by state law. 
(2)  The playing of any radio, phonograph, or musical instrument in such a manner, or with such volume as to disturb the peace, quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any dwelling, apartment, hotel or other type of residence. 
(3)  The keeping of any animal or fowl which emits or makes a loud and raucous noise. 
(4)  The use of any automobile, motorcycle, streetcar or vehicle so out of repair or so loaded, which emits or creates loud grating, grinding or rattling noise. 
(5)  The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of danger. 
(6)  The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any stationary steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, lawnmower engine, or motor boat engine, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively and efficiently prevent loud noises. 
(7)  The discharge into the open air of the exhaust from any motor vehicle except through a muffler, or other device, which will effectively and efficiently prevent loud and raucous noises. 
(8)  The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of any building in or adjacent to a residential area other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., except in the case of urgent necessity in the interest of public safety, for which a permit shall be obtained from the director of public works of the city. 
(9)  The creation of any loud and raucous noise on any street adjacent to any school or court which is in session or adjacent to any hospital; provided, that conspicuous signs are located in such streets indicating that schools, hospitals and courts are adjacent thereto. 
(10)  The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs the quiet and peace of the neighborhood. 
(11)  The use of any drum or other instrument or sound amplifying equipment for the purpose of attracting attention by the creation of noise, to any performance, show, sale or display of merchandise as to attract customers to any place of business. 
(12)  The use of mechanical loudspeakers or sound amplifiers on trucks or other moving vehicles for the purpose of advertising any show, sale or display of merchandise. 
(13)  The creation of any loud and raucous noise caused by the repair to motor vehicles at any private residence other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
(14)  Use of "engine braking", "exhaust blowdown", and/or "compression release" braking. 
a.  Prohibited. It shall be impermissible to stop or slow a vehicle upon any street by use of "engine braking", "exhaust blowdown", and/or "compression release" braking unless circumstances on the roadway or with traffic create a situation where such usage is necessary to avoid an accident. 
b.  Exception. The determination of whether or not the usage of "engine braking", "exhaust blowdown", and/or "compression release" braking was necessary, reasonable and prudent under the then present conditions and circumstances shall be determined by any city police officer observing such usage. 
(Ord. No. 507, § 2, 7-2-73; Ord. No. 2007-22, § 1, 11-12-07) 
Sec. 16-53. - Use of bell, siren, compression or exhaust whistle on vehicles. 
    No vehicles shall be equipped with and no person shall use upon a vehicle any bell, siren, compression or exhaust whistle, except that vehicles operated in the performance of duty by law enforcement officers, fire department and ambulances may attach and use a bell, siren, compression or exhaust whistle. 
(Ord. No. 507, § 3, 7-2-73) 
Sec. 16-54. - Loudspeakers and amplifiers; noncommercial use. 
    Any person who operates or causes to be operated upon the public sidewalks, streets, alleys, or highways of the city, any mechanical loudspeaker or sound amplifier, in a stationary position or mounted on or attached to a vehicle for the purpose of dissemination of noncommercial information, shall comply with the following limitations and requirements: 
(1)  Such loudspeaker or sound amplifier shall be limited in operation to times between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon and between the hours of 2:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday only. 
(2)  Such loudspeaker or sound amplifier shall not emit loud and raucous noises so as to interfere with the enjoyment of life or property or to interfere with public peace and comfort. 
(3)  Such vehicle and mechanical loudspeaker or sound amplifier shall be operated so as not to cause traffic congestion or congregation of crowds on the public streets, alleys or highways. 
(4)  Such vehicle shall continuously move at a speed of not less than ten (10) miles per hour at all times when sound is being emitted from the loudspeaker or sound amplifier. Such sound shall be discontinued when such vehicle is stopped for traffic control devices. 
(5)  Such loudspeaker or sound amplifier shall not be operated within three hundred (300) feet of any hospital or school. 
(Ord. No. 507, § 4, 7-2-73) 
Sec. 16-54.1. - Operation of amplifiers in skating rink restricted. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person operating a skating rink under the provisions of this article to operate a mechanical speaker or amplifier between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on weekdays, or between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. or after 11:00 p.m. on Sundays. 
(Ord. No. 87-14, § 2, 3-9-87) 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. No. 87-14, adopted Mar. 9, 1987, amended this section by transferring it from its former location in Art. VI, Ch. 21 and renumbering the former § 21-131 as § 16-54.1. 
Sec. 16-55. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined in any sum not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Ord. No. 507, § 5, 7-2-73) 
ARTICLE III. - CULPABILITY 

Sec. 16-56. - Requirement of culpability. 
    In each instance in which a criminal offense is established in this Code of Ordinances, and any amendments thereto, a culpable mental state is required as an element of such offense. For purposes of this section, a culpable mental state shall be one of those established by V.T.C.A., Penal Code art. 6.02, and any amendments thereto. 
(Ord. No. 83-14, § 1, 8-15-83) 
Secs. 16-57-16-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CURFEW FOR MINORS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, adopted Jan. 17, 2011, amended art. IV in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. IV, §§ 16-71-16-76, pertained to similar material and derived from: Ord. No. 94-11, §§ 1-4, adopted Sept. 26, 1994; Ord. No. 99-01, §§ 1-4, adopted Jan. 25, 1999; Ord. No. 01-16, §§ 1-4, adopted Dec. 17, 2001; Ord. No. 05-01, § 1, adopted Jan. 10, 2004; and Ord. No. 2008-04, § 1, adopted Jan. 21, 2008. 

Sec. 16-71. - Definitions. 
(a)  "City" means the city limits of Groves, Texas. 
(b)  "Curfew hours for minors" means: 
Sunday 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. 
Monday 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. 
Tuesday 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. 
Wednesday 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. 
Thursday 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. 
Friday 12:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.; or 
Saturday 12:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. 
(c)  "Emergency" means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life, or a serious medical condition of sudden onset. 
(d)  "Minor" shall mean any person under seventeen (17) years of age. 
(e)  "Parent" shall mean a person who is the natural or adoptive parent of a minor. As used herein, "parent" shall also include a court appointed guardian or other person eighteen (18) years of age or older, authorized by the parent, by a court order, or by the court appointed guardian to have the care and custody of a minor. 
(f)  "Guardian" shall mean any person to whom custody of a minor has been given by a court order. 
(g)  "Emergency" shall include, but not be limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or obtaining immediate medical care for another person. 
(h)  "Public place" means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, apartment houses, office, buildings, transport facilities, shops, shopping malls, and shall include parking facilities adjacent to the same. 
(i)  "Establishment" means any privately-owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment, such as theaters and game rooms. 
(j)  "Operator" means any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation. 
(k)  "Remain" means to linger or stay; or to fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises. 
(l)  "Serious bodily injury" means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
(m)  "Intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal negligence" has the meaning(s) provided in the Texas Penal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 1-17-11; Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, 1-26-15; Ord. No. 2017-02, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 16-72. - Offenses. 
(a)  A minor who has reached the age of ten (10) years commits an offense if he or she intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal negligence remains in or upon any public place, or remains in any motor vehicle operating or parked therein or thereon, or remains on the premises of any establishment within the City of Groves during curfew hours for minors. 
(b)  A parent or guardian having legal care and custody of a minor commits an offense if he or she intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal negligence permits, or by insufficient control, allows a minor to remain in or upon any public place, or to remain in any motor vehicle operating or parked therein or thereon, or to remain on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours for minors. 
(c)  The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment commits an offense if he or she intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal negligence allows a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours for minors. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 1-17-11; Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, 1-26-15; Ord. No. 2017-02, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 16-73. - Defenses. 
(a)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 16-72 that the minor was: 
(1)  Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian; 
(2)  Accompanied by an adult authorized by a parent or guardian; 
(3)  On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop; and the minor has in his or her possession a writing signed by the parent containing the following information: the name, signature, address and telephone of the parent/guardian authorizing the errand, the telephone number where the parent/guardian may be reached during the errand, the name of the minor, a brief description of the errand, the minor's destination(s) and the time period the minor is authorized to be engaged in the errand; 
(4)  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
(5)  Engaged in employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop; 
(6)  Engaged in, participating in or traveling to or from any event, function or activity for which application of section 16-72 would contravene his rights protected by the Texas or United States Constitutions; 
(7)  Involved in an emergency; 
(8)  On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police department about the minor's presence; 
(9)  Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the City of Groves, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, as well as going to or returning home from the same, without any detour or stop; 
(10)  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; 
(11)  Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with V.T.C.A., Family Code ch. 31; 
(12)  Engaged in lawful volunteer or charity work at a recognized charity institution or is going to or coming from such activity without detour or stop. 
(b)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection 16-72(c) that the owner, operator, or employee if an establishment promptly notified the police department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 1-17-11; Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, 1-26-15; Ord. No. 2017-02, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 16-74. - School age minors to be in school. 
(a)  Compulsory school age minor to be in attendance at school; parental duties imposed. 
(1)  No minor between the ages of six (6) and sixteen (16), inclusive, other than a minor who has been suspended or expelled from school, or who attends a home school or private school which is not in session at the time, shall be at any public place within the city except in attendance at school between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. during any official school day when school is in session. 
(2)  Each parent or legal guardian of a minor between the ages of six (6) and sixteen (16), inclusive, shall have a duty to prohibit the minor from acting contrary to subsection 16-74(a)(1). 
(b)  Children expelled or suspended from school, or being home schooled, to remain under supervision; parental duties imposed. If a minor between the ages of six (6) and sixteen (16), inclusive, is suspended or expelled from school, then each parent or guardian of the minor shall have the following duties for the duration of the suspension or expulsion: 
(1)  The duty to personally supervise the minor, or to arrange for a responsible adult to supervise the minor, at the times that the minor would have been required to be in attendance at school under subsection (a)(1) above, had he or she not been suspended or expelled; and 
(2)  The duty to prohibit the minor from being at any public place at the times that the minor would have been required to be in attendance at school under subsection (a)(1) above, had he or she not been suspended or expelled. 
(c)  No minor between the ages of ten (10) and sixteen (16), inclusive, that has been suspended or expelled from school shall be in any public place at the times that he or she would have been required to be in attendance at school under subsection (a)(1) above, had he or she not been suspended or expelled. 
(d)  Any minor who has reached the age of ten (10) years or parent or guardian of a minor who intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal negligence violates any provision of section 16-74 commits an offense and, upon conviction, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, which shall be punishable as provided in section 16-76. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 1-17-11; Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, 1-26-15; Ord. No. 2017-02, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 16-75. - Defenses to prosecution under subsections 16-74(a) and (b). 
(a)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsections 16-74(a) and (b) that: 
(1)  The minor is suspended or expelled from school and is accompanied by a parent or guardian or responsible adult selected by a parent or guardian to supervise the minor; 
(2)  The minor attends a home school or private school, which is not in session at the time he or she is apprehended; 
(3)  The minor has been authorized by virtue of his or her regular school schedule to be off of the school campus at the time the minor is found to be at any place within the city away from the school; 
(4)  The minor has written proof from school authorities excusing him or her from attending school at that particular time; 
(5)  The minor is attending an official school activity off-campus; or 
(6)  The minor is engaged in any event or circumstance provided as a defense in subsections 16-73(a)(3), (4), (6), (7), (10) or (11) above. 
(b)  It is a defense under subsection 16-74(c) that the minor is engaged in any event or circumstance provided as a defense in subsections 16-73(a)(3), (4), (6), (7), (10) or (11) above. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 1-17-11; Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, 1-26-15; Ord. No. 2017-02, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Sec. 16-76. - Penalties. 
(a)  A person who violates any provision of section 16-72 or section 16-74 commits a Class C misdemeanor offense which, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(b)  A person who violates a provision of this article is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed, continued, or permitted. 
(c)  When required by V.T.C.A., Family Code § 51.08, as amended, the municipal court shall waive original jurisdiction over a minor who violates this article and shall refer the minor to juvenile court. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 1-17-11; Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, 1-26-15; Ord. No. 2017-02, § 1, 2-6-17) 
Secs. 16-77-16-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RESIDENCE RESTRICTIONS ON REGISTERED SEX OFFENDERS 

Sec. 16-80. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this article, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Child means an individual younger than seventeen (17) years of age. 
    Day-care facility includes a "child-care institution", a "day-care center" and or a "group day-care home", as those terms are defined by V.T.C.A., Human Resources Code § 42.002. 
    Park means any land, including improvements to the land, that is administered, operated, or managed by the city for the use of the general public as a recreational area. 
    Permanent residence means a place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for fourteen (14) or more consecutive days. 
    School means a private or public elementary or secondary school. 
    Sex offender means an individual who has been convicted of or placed on deferred adjudication for a sexual offense involving a child for which the individual is required to register as a sex offender under V.T.C.A., Code of Criminal Procedure ch. 62. 
    Temporary residence means a place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for a period of fourteen (14) or more days in the aggregate, during any calendar year and which is not the persons permanent address, or a place where the person routinely abides, resides, or lodges for a period of four (4) or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month, and which is not the person's permanent residence. 
(Ord. No. 06-11, § 1, 6-12-06) 
Sec. 16-81. - Offenses. 
(a)  It is an offense for a sex offender to establish a permanent residence or a temporary residence within one thousand (1,000) feet of the real property comprising a school, day-care facility, or park. 
(b)  The distance of one thousand (1,000) feet shall be measured on a straight line from the closest boundary line of the sex offender's residence to the closest boundary line of the school, day-care facility, or park. 
(Ord. No. 06-11, § 1, 6-12-06) 
Sec. 16-82. - Exceptions. 
    A person does not commit and offense under section 16-81 if the person: 
(1)  Is required to serve a sentence at a jail, prison, juvenile facility, or other correctional institution located within one thousand (1,000) feet of the real property comprising a school, day-care facility, or park; 
(2)  Has established and continues to maintain the residence prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived; 
(3)  Has established and continues to maintain the residence prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and, subsequently, a school, day-care facility, or park, is constructed or located within one thousand (1,000) feet of the sex offender's residence; 
(4)  Is under eighteen (18) years of age or a ward under a guardianship, who resides with a parent or guardian; 
(5)  Has been exempted by a court order from registration as a sex offender under V.T.C.A., Code of Criminal Procedure ch. 62; or 
(6)  Has had the offense for which the sex offender registration was required, reversed on appeal or pardoned. 
(Ord. No. 06-11, § 1, 6-12-06) 
Sec. 16-83. - Penalties. 
    Any person who violates this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to the provisions of section 1-5 of the City Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 06-11, § 1, 6-12-06) 
Secs. 16-84-16-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - POSSESSION, SALE OR INGESTION OF CERTAIN SUBSTANCES 

Sec. 16-90. - Offenses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use, possess, purchase, sell, publicly display for sale or attempt to sell, give, or barter any one (1) or more of the following substances within the city limits of the City of Groves, Texas: 
(1)  Salvia divinorum or Salvinorum A; all parts of the plant presently classified botanically as salvia divinorum, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, any extract from any part of such plant, and every compound, manufacture, salts derivative, mixture, or preparation of such plant, its seeds or extracts; 
(2)  (6aR, 10aR)-9-(hyydroxmethyl)-6, 6dimethyl-3-(methyloctan-2-yl)-6a, 7, 10, 10a-tetrahydrobenzo[c]chromen-1-ol, commonly known as HU-210; 
(3)  1-Pentyl-3-(1_naphthoyl)indole, commonly known as JWH-018 Spice or K2; 
(4)  1-Butyl-3-(1_napthoyl)indole, commonly known as JWH-073; 
(5)  N-benzylpiperazine, commonly known as BZP; 
(6)  1-(3-[trifluoromethylphenyl]) piperazine, commonly known as TFMPP; 
(7)  Any other synthetic cannabinoid; 
(8)  Methylenedioxypyrovalerone, commonly known as MDPV; 
(9)  3,4-Methylenedioxymethcathinone, commonly known as Methy lone; 
(10)  4-Methylmethcathinone, commonly known as Mephedr one; 
(11)  4-Methoxymethcathinone; 
(12)  4-Fluoromethcathinone; 
(13)  3-Fluoromethcathinone; 
(14)  Pyrovalerone derivatives; or 
(15)  Any similar substances to the above which, when inhaled, or otherwise ingested, may produce intoxication, stupefaction, giddiness, paralysis, irrational behavior, or in any manner, changes, distorts, or disturbs the auditory, visual, or mental process, and the product or substance has no other apparent legitimate purpose for consumers. 
(b)  Illegal products include the products marketed under the following commercial names: Blaze, Dascents, Diablo, Fire 'N Ice, Genie, K-2, K-2 Summit, K-2 Sex, KO Knock-Out 2, Mojo, Pandora Potpourri, Pep Spice, Sage, Salvia Divinorum, Sense, Silver, Skunk, Solar Flare, Spice, Spice Cannabinoid, Spice Diamond, Spice Gold, Spicy Green, Yucatan Fire, and Zohai. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person, knowingly, to breathe, inhale, drink or otherwise ingest, any compound, liquid or chemical listed within this article, or a similar substance, for the purpose of inducing a condition of intoxication, stupefaction, giddiness, paralysis, irrational behavior, or in any manner, changing, distorting or disturbing the auditory, visual or mental process. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 2, 5-9-11) 
Sec. 16-91. - Exceptions. 
    It is not a violation of this article if a person was acting under the supervision of an authorized law enforcement officer to enforce or ensure compliance with this article. This article does not apply to any person who commits any act described in this article pursuant to the direction or prescription of a licensed physician or dentist licensed by the State of Texas to direct or prescribe such act. This article likewise does not apply to the inhalation of anesthesia for a medical or dental purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 2, 5-9-11) 
Sec. 16-92. - Penalties. 
    Any person who violates this article shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor and be subject to a fine of up to two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) upon conviction in municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 2, 5-9-11) 
Secs. 16-93-16-115. - Reserved. 
Chapter 17 - OIL AND GAS WELLS, PIPELINE, ETC.[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Fire protection and prevention, Ch. 10; toxic materials, Ch. 241/2. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 17-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    Lease shall mean any tract of land subject to an oil, gas and mineral lease or other oil and gas development contract, or any unit composed of several tracts and leases but operated as one lease, and any tract of land in which the minerals are owned by an operator or someone holding under it or him, but which, due to the fee royalty ownership is developed and operated as a separate tract. 
    Permittee shall mean the person to whom is issued a permit for the drilling and operation of a well under this chapter, and his or its administrators, executors, heirs, successors and assigns. 
    Well shall mean any hole or holes, bore or bores, to any sand, formation, strata or depth for the purpose of producing and recovering any oil, gas, liquid hydrocarbon, or any of them. 
    All technical or oil and gas industry words or phrases used herein and not specifically defined herein shall have that meaning customarily attributable thereto by prudent operators in the oil and gas industry. 
(Ord. No. 151, § 1, 1-6-59) 
Cross reference- General definitions and rules of construction, § 1-3. 
Sec. 17-2. - Violation of state or federal laws or regulations. 
    Any violation of the laws of the state or any rules, regulations or requirements of any state or federal regulatory body having jurisdiction in reference to drilling, completing, equipping, operating, producing, maintaining, or abandoning an oil or gas well or related appurtenances, equipment or facilities, or in reference to fire walls, fire protection, blowout protection, safety protection, or convenience of persons or property, shall also be a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 151, § 29, 1-6-59) 
Sec. 17-3. - Oil and gas inspector appointed; duties. 
    The city council shall appoint an oil and gas inspector, who shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 151, § 9, 1-6-59) 
Secs. 17-4-17-13. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DRILLING PERMIT 

Sec. 17-14. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person acting either for himself or acting as agent, employee, independent contractor, or servant of any other person, to commence to drill, or to operate, any well within the city, or to work upon or assist in any way in the prosecution or operation of any such well, without a permit for the drilling and operation of such well having first been issued by the authority of the city council in accordance with the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 151, § 2, 1-6-59) 
Sec. 17-15. - Application; filing fee; contents. 
    Every application for a permit to drill and operate a well shall be in writing, signed by the applicant or by some person duly authorized to sign same on his behalf, and it shall be filed with the city clerk and be accompanied with a filing fee of six hundred dollars ($600.00) in cash. No application shall request a permit to drill and operate but one well. The application shall include full information, including the following: 
(a)  Date of application; 
(b)  Name of the applicant; 
(c)  Address of the applicant; 
(d)  Proposed site of the well, including 
(1)  Name of the fee owner; 
(2)  Name of the lease owner; 
(3)  Brief description of the land; 
(e)  Type of derrick to be used; 
(f)  Proposed depth of the well (which shall not be deeper than 15,000 feet). 
(Ord. No. 192, § 1, 3-14-60) 
Sec. 17-16. - Determination of compliance. 
    The city council, within twenty (20) days after the filing of the application for a permit to drill and operate a well, shall determine whether or not said application complies in all respects with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 151, § 6, 1-6-59) 
Sec. 17-17. - Refusal. 
    If the permit for the well be refused by the city council, or if the applicant notifies the city council in writing that he does not elect to accept the permit as tendered and wishes to withdraw his application, or if the bond of the applicant be not approved and the applicant notifies the city council in writing that he wishes to withdraw his application, the cash deposit which accompanied the application as a filing fee shall be returned to the applicant, except that there shall be retained therefrom by the city one hundred dollars ($100.00) as a processing fee. 
(Ord. No. 151, § 6, 1-6-59) 
Sec. 17-18. - Bond-Condition precedent to operations. 
    In the event a permit is issued by the city council for the drilling and operation of a well, no actual drilling operations shall be commenced until the permittee shall file with the city clerk a bond executed by a reliable insurance company authorized to do business in the state, as surety, with permittee as principal, running to the city for the benefit of the city and all persons concerned, conditioned that the permittee will comply with the terms and conditions of this chapter in the drilling and operation of the well. 
(Ord. No. 151, § 8, 1-6-59) 
Sec. 17-19. - Same-Amount; reduction after well completed. 
(a)  The permittee's bond shall be in a principal amount as determined by the city council but not less than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00). 
(b)  If after completion of the well permittee has complied with all of the provisions of this chapter, such as removing the derrick, clearing the premises, etc., he may apply to the city council to have said bond reduced to a sum of not less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for the remainder of the time said well produces without reworking. 
(c)  During reworking operations, the amount of the bond shall be increased to the original amount. 
(Ord. No. 151, § 8, 1-6-59) 
Sec. 17-20. - Same-Effective date; time period. 
    The permittee's bond shall become effective on or before the date the same is filed with the city clerk. Said bond shall remain in force and effect for a period of at least six (6) months subsequent to the expiration of the term of the permit issued. 
(Ord. No. 151, § 8, 1-6-59) 
Sec. 17-21. - Same-Conditions. 
    The permittee's bond shall be conditioned as follows: 
(a)  That permittee will promptly pay all fines, penalties and other assessments imposed upon him by reason of his breach of any of the conditions imposed by the provisions of this chapter; 
(b)  That permittee will promptly restore to their former condition any streets, sidewalks and other public property of the city which may be disturbed or damaged in the drilling or producing operations or in connection therewith; 
(c)  That permittee will promptly clear all premises of all litter, trash, waste, and other substances used, allowed, or occurring in the drilling or producing operations; 
(d)  That permittee, after abandonment of drilling operations, will promptly grade, level and restore the property to as nearly the same as possible surface conditions as existed when operations for the drilling of the well or wells were first commenced; 
(e)  That permittee will indemnify and hold the city harmless from any and all liability growing out of or attributable to the granting of such permit. 
(Ord. No. 151, § 8, 1-6-59) 
Sec. 17-22. - Same-Insufficiency, new bond may be required. 
    If at any time the city council shall deem any permittee's bond to be insufficient for any reason, it may require the permittee to file a new bond. 
(Ord. No. 151, § 8, 1-6-59) 
Sec. 17-23. - Insurance-Condition precedent to operations. 
    In addition to the bond required by section 17-18, the permittee shall carry a policy or policies of standard comprehensive public liability insurance covering bodily injuries and property damage, naming the permittee and the city; in an insurance company authorized to do business within the state. No drilling operations shall begin until the permittee has filed a certificate thereof in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 192, § 4, 3-14-60) 
Sec. 17-24. - Same-Amount; reduction after well completed. 
(a)  Permittee's public liability insurance policy or policies shall be in an aggregate amount to be determined by the city council but shall provide for the following minimum coverages: 
(1)  Bodily injuries $100,000.00, one person; $300,000.00, one accident. 
(2)  Property damage $200,000.00. 
(b)  If, after completion of a well, permittee has complied with all of the provisions of this chapter, such as removing the derrick, clearing the premises, etc., he may apply to have said insurance policies reduced for the remainder of the time said well produces without reworking, as follows: 
(1)  Bodily injuries $50,000.00, one person; $100,000.00, one accident. 
(2)  Property damage $50,000.00. 
    Said reduction shall be granted at the discretion of the city council. 
(c)  During reworking operations the amount of the insurance policy or policies shall be in an amount to be determined by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 192, § 4, 3-14-60) 
Sec. 17-25. - Same-Filing; approval. 
    The permittee shall file certificates of insurance with the city clerk. Such certificates of insurance shall be subject to the written approval of the city manager, who shall act thereon within ten (10) days from the date of such filing. 
(Ord. No. 192, § 4, 3-14-60) 
Sec. 17-26. - Same-Effect of cancellation. 
    Permittee's insurance policy or policies shall not be cancelled without written notice to the city clerk at least ten (10) days prior to the effective date of such cancellation. In the event of such cancellation, the permit granted shall terminate and permittee's rights to operate under said permit shall cease until permittee files additional insurance in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 192, § 4, 3-14-60) 
Sec. 17-27. - Issuance. 
    Upon determination that the application for permit complies with the provisions of this chapter, the city council shall fix the amount of the principal of the bond and insurance provided for in sections 17-18 and 17-23, and shall issue a permit for the drilling and operation of the well applied for. Said permit, in duplicate originals, shall be signed by the city manager and, prior to delivery to the permittee, shall be signed by the permittee (with one original to be retained by the city and one by the permittee). When so signed, said permit shall constitute the permittee's drilling and operating license and the contractual obligation of the permittee to comply with the terms of such permit, and such bond, and this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 151, § 6, 1-6-59) 
Sec. 17-28. - Contents. 
    Each permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall: 
(a)  By reference have incorporated therein all the provisions of this chapter with the same force and effect as if this chapter were copied verbatim in said permit; 
(b)  Specify the well location with particularity to lot number, block number, name of addition or subdivision, or other available correct legal description; 
(c)  Contain and specify that the term of such permit shall be for a period of one year from the date of the permit and as long thereafter as the permittee is engaged in drilling operations with no cessations of such operations for more than ninety (90) days, or oil or gas is produced in commercial quantities from the well drilled pursuant to such permit, provided that if at any time after discovery of oil or gas the production thereof in commercial quantities shall cease, the term shall not terminate if the permittee commences additional reworking operations within ninety (90) days thereafter, and if they result in the production of oil or gas, so long thereafter as oil or gas is produced in commercial quantities from said well; 
(d)  Contain and specify such conditions as are by this chapter authorized; 
(e)  Specify the total depth to which the well may be drilled, not exceeding the projected depth; and, 
(f)  Contain and specify that no actual operations shall be commenced until the permittee shall file and have approved an indemnity bond in the designated principal amount as so determined by the city council and conditioned as specified in section 17-18. 
(Ord. No. 151, § 6, 1-6-59) 
Sec. 17-29. - Transferability. 
    A permit issued under this chapter is transferable, provided that transferee complies with the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 192, § 2, 3-14-60) 
Sec. 17-30. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  Grounds. In the event that the permittee shall violate any provision of any permit or bond issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, or any applicable provision of this Code, state law or city ordinance, rule or regulation, the city council may revoke or suspend such permit. 
(b)  Procedure. Such action of suspension or revocation may be taken by the city council at any regular or special session or meeting thereof, provided that ten (10) days notice has been given to the permittee that revocation is to be considered at such meeting. 
(c)  Reissuance. The permittee may thereafter make application to the city council for a reissuance of such permit, and the action of the city council thereon shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 151, § 31, 1-6-59) 
Sec. 17-31. - Termination. 
    A permit issued by the city council under the provisions of this chapter shall terminate and become inoperative without any action on the part of the city unless within six (6) months from the date of issuance actual drilling of the well shall have commenced. The cessation for ninety (90) days of the drilling operations or the cessation of the production of oil or gas from the well after production shall have commenced shall operate to terminate and cancel the permit, and the well shall be considered as abandoned for all purposes of this chapter, and it shall be unlawful thereafter to continue the operation or drilling of such well without the issuance of another permit. 
(Ord. No. 192, § 3, 3-14-60) 
Sec. 17-32. - Supplemental permit for deeper drilling-Required. 
    It shall be unlawful to drill any well which has either been completed as a producer or abandoned as a dry hole to a depth greater than that reached in the prior drilling operations unless and until the permittee has obtained a supplemental permit therefor. 
(Ord. No. 192, § 6, 3-14-60) 
Sec. 17-33. - Same-Application. 
    The permittee shall file with the city clerk an application for a supplemental permit for deeper drilling, which application shall specify: 
(1)  The condition of the well and the casing therein at the time said application is filed. 
(2)  The depth to which further drilling is proposed, not to exceed in any event a total true vertical depth from the surface in excess of fifteen thousand (15,000) feet. 
(3)  The casing program proposed for such deepening operations. 
(4)  Evidence of adequate current tests showing that the casing strings in said well currently pass the same tests as are required by the provisions of this chapter for the drilling of the original well. 
(Ord. No. 192, § 6, 3-14-60) 
Sec. 17-34. - Same-Determination. 
    The city council shall review the application for a supplemental permit for deeper drilling and shall determine to its satisfaction whether or not such operations may be accomplished with the same degree of safety as existed in the drilling of the original well. 
(Ord. No. 192, § 6, 3-14-60) 
Sec. 17-35. - Same-Issuance. 
    The city council, in its own discretion and consistent with its findings as to safety and without additional filing fee, may issue to the permittee a supplemental permit authorizing the deepening and operation of the well, up to the depth specified in the application therefor, but not exceeding a total true vertical depth from the surface in excess of fifteen thousand (15,000) feet. 
(Ord. No. 192, § 6, 3-14-60) 
Secs. 17-36-17-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OPERATION REGULATIONS 

Sec. 17-46. - Watchman required. 
    The permittee shall keep a watchman on duty on the premises at all times from the start of erection of a derrick, mast, or gin-pole until the well is abandoned and plugged or completed as a producer and enclosed with a fence; provided, however, that it shall not be necessary to keep an extra watchman on duty when other workmen of permittee are on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 151, § 12, 1-6-59) 
Sec. 17-47. - Sanitary maintenance of premises. 
    The premises shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, free from rubbish of every character, to the satisfaction of the health officer, at all times drilling operations or reworking operations are being conducted, and as long thereafter as oil and/or gas is being produced therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 151, § 22, 1-6-59) 
Sec. 17-48. - Permit to block street required; drilling in street prohibited. 
    No well shall be drilled and no permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled at any location which is within any of the streets or alleys of the city. No street or alley shall be blocked or encumbered or closed in by any drilling or production operation except by special permit by order of the city council, and then only temporarily. 
(Ord. No. 151, § 3, 1-6-59) 
Sec. 17-49. - Proximity of well to buildings, residences. 
    No well or any appurtenances thereto shall be drilled or placed and no permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled or any appurtenances thereto to be placed at any location which is nearer than one thousand (1,000) feet to any residence or commercial building without the written permission of the owner or owners thereof. 
(Ord. No. 151, § 4, 1-6-59; Ord. No. 2011-03, § 1, 4-25-11) 
Sec. 17-50. - Maximum depth limits. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drill a well within the city limits to a true vertical depth in excess of fifteen thousand (15,000) feet; and no drilling and operating permit shall be granted for any well to a true vertical depth in excess of fifteen thousand (15,000) feet. 
(Ord. No. 192, § 5, 3-14-60) 
Sec. 17-51. - Derrick and rig. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate, in connection with the drilling or reworking of any well within the city limits, any wooden derrick or any steam-powered rig, and all engines shall be equipped with adequate mufflers approved by the oil and gas inspector. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to permit any drilling rig or derrick to remain on the premises or drilling site for a period longer than sixty (60) days after completion or abandonment of the well. 
(Ord. No. 151, § 12, 1-6-59) 
Sec. 17-52. - Pits. 
    Either earthen or steel slush pits shall be permitted in connection with the drilling operation. In the event a steel pit is used, said pit and its contents shall be removed from the premises and the drilling site within thirty (30) days after completion of the well. In the event an earthen slush pit is used, same shall be filled and leveled within one hundred and twenty (120) days after the completion of the well. 
(Ord. No. 151, § 13, 1-6-59) 
Sec. 17-53. - Casing-Quality; cold water test required. 
    All casing, including surface protection and production strings, shall be either seamless steel or equivalent quality oil well casing. Each production string of casing must comply with at least the following minimum internal pressure yield strength, computed in accordance with A.P.I. standards, to wit: 
Depth of String (in feet) Internal Pressure Rating (in pounds per square inch) 7" Casing 0-3,400 2,720 3,400-4,400 3,740 4,400-5,850 4,360 5,850-7,650 6,340 7,650-9,450 7,240 9,450-11,300 8,160 51/2" Casing 0-4,400 3,110 4,400-5,600 4,270 5,600-6,900 4,810 6,900-8,000 5,320 8,000-10,005 7,740  
    Each joint and length of each particular casing string shall have prior to setting unconditionally passed a complete cold water test. 
(Ord. No. 151, § 14, 1-6-59) 
Sec. 17-54. - Same-Setting and cementing. 
    Surface casing shall be properly set to a minimum depth of eight hundred (800) feet. The surface casing shall be cemented by the pump and plug method with sufficient cement to completely fill all of the annular space behind such casing to the surface of the ground. The production string shall be cemented by the pump and plug method with sufficient cement to completely fill all the annular space behind the production string to at least six hundred (600) feet above the highest oil and/or gas bearing horizon. In the event a protection string of casing shall be required by the provisions of this chapter, the protection string shall be cemented by the pump and plug method with sufficient cement to completely fill all the annular space behind the protection string to at least six hundred (600) feet above the highest oil and/or gas bearing horizon. 
(Ord. No. 151, § 15, 1-6-59) 
Sec. 17-55. - Valves, blowout preventers. 
    The surface casing when set shall be equipped with at least one master valve, and the protection casing when set shall be equipped with at least one master valve and one fluid-operated ram type blowout preventer. The production casing during completion operations and workover operations shall be equipped with at least one master valve and at least one fluid-operated ram type blowout preventer. On each well drilled a valve cock or kelly cock shall be installed on the kelly used. Each blowout preventer shall test six thousand (6,000) pounds and its mechanical operation shall be tested at least once every eight (8) hour period, and all control equipment shall be in good working condition and order at all times. 
(Ord. No. 151, § 16, 1-6-59) 
Sec. 17-56. - Drilling fluid. 
    Mud shall be used as the drilling fluid after the setting of surface casing. Prior to the time the well reaches a total depth of five thousand (5,000) feet or the depth of the first known or encountered oil or gas bearing horizon, whichever is the lesser depth, the weight of the mud laden drilling fluid shall be maintained at all times at not less than ten (10) pounds per gallon. After the well reaches a total depth of five thousand (5,000) feet or the depth of the first known or encountered oil or gas bearing horizon, whichever is the lesser depth, the weight of the mud laden drilling fluid shall be maintained at all times at such weight as will provide a hydrostatic head of not less than five hundred (500) pounds per square inch in excess of the formation pressure. In reworking a well, a drilling fluid shall be maintained at all times at such weight as will provide a hydrostatic head of not less than five hundred (500) pounds per square inch in excess of the formation pressure. 
(Ord. No. 151, § 17, 1-6-59) 
Sec. 17-57. - Drill stem tests. 
    It shall be unlawful to take and to complete any drill stem test except during daylight hours, and then only if the well effluent during the test is produced through an adequate oil and gas separator to storage tanks and if the effluent remaining in the drill pipe at the time the tool is closed is flushed to the surface by circulating drilling fluid down the annulus and up the drill pipe. 
(Ord. No. 151, § 18, 1-6-59) 
Sec. 17-58. - Tubing. 
    All tubing used in any well shall be seamless steel tubing having not less than a minimum internal pressure yield strength of five thousand two hundred and eighty (5,280) pounds per square inch if used in connection with a well completion at a depth not exceeding seven thousand (7,000) feet, or less than a minimum internal pressure yield strength of seven thousand two hundred and sixty (7,260) pounds per square inch if used in connection with a well completion at a depth in excess of seven thousand (7,000) feet. 
(Ord. No. 151, § 19, 1-6-59) 
Sec. 17-59. - Bradenhead. 
    Each well drilled within the city limits shall be equipped with a bradenhead with a working pressure of not less than three thousand (3,000) pounds per square inch. Bradenheads shall not be welded. The bradenhead installed on the surface casing shall be set above ground level and shall be equipped with fittings having a working pressure rating of not less than three thousand (3,000) pounds per square inch. The bradenhead pressure shall be checked at least once each calendar month and if pressure is found to exist, proper remedial measures shall be immediately taken to eliminate the source and the existence of the pressure. 
(Ord. No. 151, § 20, 1-6-59) 
Sec. 17-60. - Christmas tree, well head connections. 
(a)  The Christmas tree, all well head connections, and all piping and fittings connecting the well head to an oil gas separator shall have minimum working pressures and minimum test pressures according to depth of well as follows: 
Depth of well Minimum working pressure (in pounds per square inch) Minimum test pressure (in pounds per square inch) Above 4,000 feet 2,000 4,000 4,001 to 7,000 feet 3,000 6,000 below 7,000 feet 5,000 10,000  
(b)  In the event the surface shut-in pressure of any well exceeds two thousand (2,000) pounds per square inch, the flow wing of the Christmas tree shall be equipped with an automatic closing safety valve in addition to the regular control valves. 
(Ord. No. 151, § 21, 1-6-59) 
Sec. 17-61. - Motive power. 
    Motive power for all operations after completion of drilling operations shall be electrically or properly muffled gas, gasoline or diesel engines. 
(Ord. No. 151, § 23, 1-6-59) 
Sec. 17-62. - Mufflers. 
    Gas, gasoline or diesel engines used as motive power for operations after completion of drilling operations shall be properly muffled. Mufflers so used must be approved by the oil and gas inspector prior to their use. 
(Ord. No. 151, § 23, 1-6-59) 
Sec. 17-63. - Storage tanks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use, construct or operate in connection with any producing well any crude oil storage tanks except to the extent of two (2) steel tanks for oil storage. Such two (2) steel tanks for oil storage shall have a capacity of not exceeding five hundred (500) barrels each and shall be so constructed and maintained as to be vapor tight. Each such steel tank shall be surrounded by an earthen fire wall at such distance from either tank that the space between tank and fire wall is sufficient to hold and retain at least one and one-half (11/2) times the maximum capacity of such tank. 
(Ord. No. 151, § 24, 1-6-59) 
Sec. 17-64. - Oil gas separators. 
    A permittee may use, construct and operate a steel conventional separator, and such other steel tanks and appurtenances as are necessary for treating oil. Each of such facilities shall be so constructed and maintained as to be vapor tight. Each oil gas separator shall be equipped with both a regulation pressure relief safety valve and a bursting head. 
(Ord. No. 151, § 24, 1-6-59) 
Sec. 17-65. - Fence. 
    Any person who completes any well as a producer shall have the obligation to enclose said well, together with its surface facilities and storage tanks, by a substantial smooth net wire fence sufficiently high and properly built so as to ordinarily keep persons and animals out of the enclosure. All gates thereto to be kept locked when the permittee or his employees are not within the enclosure. It is provided, however, that in noncongested areas the oil and gas inspector, in his discretion, may waive the requirement of any fence or may designate the type of fence to be erected. 
(Ord. No. 151, § 25, 1-6-59) 
Sec. 17-66. - Venting and flaring of gas. 
    No person engaged in drilling or operating any well shall permit gas to escape or to be vented into the air unless said gas be flared and burned. All gas flared or burned from a torch, pipe, or any other burning device must be done in such manner so as not to constitute a fire hazard to any property. The location of the torch, pipe, or other burning device, and the construction, the maintenance, and the operation thereof, shall at all times comply in full with such regulations as may from time to time be issued by the oil and gas inspector. 
(Ord. No. 151, § 26, 1-6-59) 
Sec. 17-67. - Abandonment and plugging. 
    Whenever any well is abandoned it shall be the obligation of the permittee and the operator of the well to set a two hundred (200) foot cement plug in the bottom of the surface casing thereof, with the bottom of the plug one hundred (100) feet below the surface casing section and the top of the plug one hundred (100) feet above the surface casing section, and to set a fifty (50) foot cement plug in the top of the surface casing. No surface or conductor string of casing may be pulled or removed from a well. During initial abandonment operations it will be the obligation of the permittee and the operator of the well to flood the well with mud-laden fluid weighing not less than ten (10) pounds per gallon, and the well will be kept filled to the top with said mud-laden fluid at all time. Mud-laden fluid of such specifications will be left in the well bore below and between cement plugs. Any additional provisions or precautionary measures prescribed by the state or the railroad commission of the state in connection with the abandonment and plugging of a well shall be complied with by the permittee. 
(Ord. No. 151, § 27, 1-6-59) 
Sec. 17-68. - Disposal of salt water or other impurities. 
    Permittee shall make adequate provisions for the disposal of all salt water or other impurities which he may bring to the surface, such disposal to be made in such manner as to not contaminate the water supply, present or prospective, or to injure surface vegetation. 
(Ord. No. 151, § 28, 1-6-59) 
Secs. 17-69-17-78. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV - GEOPHYSICAL/SEISMIC TESTING 

Sec. 17-79. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any exploration activities within the city for oil, gas, and/or other materials by the use of explosives and/or vibrating machines without first obtaining a permit therefor from the city. 
(Ord. No. 147, § 1, 11-24-58; Ord. No. 00-11, § 1, 9-18-00) 
Sec. 17-80. - Permit application; fee procedure. 
    Application for a permit hereunder shall be made with the director of public works. Such application shall contain the name of the applicant, address of the applicant, type of explosives or other geophysical methods of mineral exploration to be used, and the purposes therefore, the location and use with a map attached designating the points of use. A non-refundable permit fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for processing the application and preparing the permit, plus seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per square mile of area within the city in which testing operations will be conducted under the permit, shall accompany each such application. On receipt of such application by the director of public works or person acting in such capacity, a report shall be compiled as to the compliance of such application with the provisions of this article. Such report and the application shall then be submitted to the city council with the recommendations of the director of public works or the person charged with such responsibility. No permit shall be issued except by the approval of the city council. In addition, applicant shall be required to pay a fee for the use of public streets and rights-of-way, based upon a per footage cost as determined by the director of public works. Such fee shall be paid to the city within thirty (30) days of applicant's receipt of invoice. 
(Ord. No. 149, § 2, 11-24-58; Ord. No. 00-11, § 1, 9-18-00) 
Sec. 17-81. - General. 
(a)  All geophysical operations shall be limited to the areas determined by city council and depicted on the map kept in the director of public work's office. A copy of such map shall be attached to any permit issued by the city. If, during the course of operations, any line or lines must be relocated to maintain compliance with the terms and conditions set forth herein or to ensure the safety of the general population, applicant shall notify the director of public works or his designee within three (3) business days of such relocation. 
(b)  The term of a permit issued under this article shall be for one (1) year beginning on the date of delivery of the permit to applicant. Work shall be completed within one hundred twenty (120) consecutive calendar days, beginning on the date of commencement of operations, not the date of the permit. The date of commencement of operations shall occur upon commencement of actual geophysical/seismic testing operations, and shall not include surveying or other site preparation conducted prior to such date. Once operations have commenced, in the event applicant rendered unable, wholly or in part, by force majeure, to complete operations within that one hundred twenty (120) consecutive calendar days, then the time for completion shall be extended for the period of time such operations are affected by such force majeure, but not for any longer period. As soon as reasonably possible after the occurrence of the force majeure, applicant shall give the city written notice and full particulars of such force majeure. Such cause, as far as possible, shall be remedied with all reasonable diligence. The term "force majeure," as used herein, shall mean acts of God, acts of the public enemy, orders of any kind of the government of the United States or the state or any civil or military authority other than the city, insurrections, riots, epidemics, landslides, lightning, earthquakes, fires, hurricanes, storms, floods, washouts, droughts, arrests, civil disturbances, explosions, breakage or accidents to machinery, pipelines or canals, and by other inability, similar to those enumerated herein, which are not within the control of applicant and which applicant could not have avoided by the exercise of due diligence and care. 
(c)  Applicant shall be responsible for and shall settle all reasonable and legitimate claims, demands, and causes of actions relating to property or persons arising out of or as a result of applicant's operations under this permit and shall handle all such claims in an expedient manner. 
(d)  Applicant shall employ a third party engineer (specializing in seismology), to be approved by the city, who shall be on the job site during the entire period of testing to mitigate any potential damage to public or private property. 
(e)  Applicant shall obtain written permission from property owners before entering upon or crossing their property. 
(f)  Applicant shall notify each owner, resident and/or business located within two hundred fifty (250) feet of its planned energy source operations. Applicant will offer to provide and will provide if requested, to such owner, resident and/or business, in writing, the name of applicant's insurance carrier, the types and amount of insurance covering its proposed operations, the name and telephone number of an individual to contact in case of a claim for personal injury or property damage, and the procedure for obtaining a copy of applicant's certificate of insurance. 
(g)  Applicant shall place newspaper advertisements in both the official newspaper of the city and a second daily newspaper in general circulation in the county of not less than three (3) inches by four (4) inches explaining the work to be performed, the location of the proposed work, and a toll-free telephone number where residents may call for more information. The toll-free telephone number provided by applicant shall be answered at all times work is ongoing in the city and an answering machine shall be installed to receive off-hour calls. 
(h)  Applicant shall engineer all source locations (explosive charge size and depth, and vibrator source sweep frequency and drive levels or other geophysical sources) so that no structure, water well, or underground hazardous waste storage/disposal site shall be subject to any peak particle velocity greater than eight-tenths (0.8) inch per second. The applicant shall conduct all the necessary engineering tests locally and provide all reports to the city in an appropriate format for evaluation. 
(i)  Using industry standard equipment and techniques, a third party seismology technician shall monitor and record, during operations, all pertinent locations to ensure that no structure, water well, susceptible underground utilities or underground hazardous waste storage/disposal site is subject to a peak particle velocity greater than eight-tenths (0.8) inches per second. If peak particle velocity is greater than eight-tenths (0.8) inches per second, a third party seismology technician shall notify the director of public works and cease all operations until corrections are made. Applicant shall maintain all documentation of monitoring activities for a period of at least two (2) years and make said documentation available upon request for inspection by the city. 
(j)  Applicant shall obtain water well, underground hazardous waste storage/disposal sites, and water sewer, oil, gas and chemical pipeline location maps and conduct all engineering calculations necessary to confirm that all operations meet standards established by the governing engineering codes and criteria. Information obtained by applicant shall be used by the surveying teams and operations manager to ensure compliance with the terms and conditions of this permit and that safe operating distances are maintained. If requested by applicant, the city shall make available for inspection and copying, maps, if any, prepared by or on behalf of the city that indicate subsurface structures or facilities; provided, however applicant's reliance on any information furnished by the city, its agents, representatives, and employees, whether written or verbal, shall be at the sole risk of applicant and the following disclaimer shall be placed on and shall apply to any and all such information: 
APPLICANT ACKNOWLEDGES THAT THE CITY HAS NOT MADE ANY INDEPENDENT INVESTIGATION OR VERIFICATION OF INFORMATION REGARDING SUBSURFACE STRUCTURES AND FACILITIES FURNISHED TO APPLICANT AND MAKES NO REPRESENTATION OR WARRANTIES AS TO THE ACCURACY OR COMPLETENESS OF SUCH INFORMATION. APPLICANT EXPRESSLY ACKNOWLEDGES THAT THE CITY MAKES NO WARRANTY OR REPRESENTATION, EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED, OR ARISING BY OPERATION OF LAW, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, ANY WARRANTY OF FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR USE OR PURPOSE OF SUCH SUBSURFACE INFORMATION. 
(k)  All city owned structures, including but not limited to susceptible underground utilities (water mains, sewer mains, etc.) shall have pre- and post-damage inspections. 
(Ord. No. 149, § 2, 11-24-58; Ord. No. 91-19, § 1, 9-16-91; Ord. No. 00-11, § 1, 9-18-00) 
Sec. 17-82. - Hours of operation. 
    Energy source testing may be conducted from 8:00 a.m. until 5:00 p.m. (or until sunset, whichever first occurs), local time, on Monday through Friday, and from 10:00 a.m. until 8:00 p.m. (or until sunset, whichever first occurs) local time, on Saturday, and 1:00 p.m. until 7:00 p.m. (or until sunset, whichever first occurs) local time, on Sundays. 
(Ord. No. 149, § 2, 11-24-58; Ord. No. 00-11, § 1, 9-18-00) 
Sec. 17-83. - Lands, streets, rights-of-way, and easements. 
(a)  Applicant shall restore any lands or rights-of-way used in its operations to original condition, free of damage, including ruts or any injury to vegetation. Any costs incurred by the city for restoration will be reimbursed to the city at full costs by applicant. Such costs shall be reimbursed to the city within thirty (30) days of applicant's receipt of invoice. 
(b)  Applicant shall ensure that its operations will not interfere with the free and safe flow of traffic. When operations are immediately adjacent to the pavement, all equipment shall be parked and/or operated in one lane of traffic. 
(c)  Applicant shall notify the director of public works of any equipment to be operated on city streets that will exceed the maximum load limit of fifty-two thousand (52,000) pounds and obtain any special permitting required. 
(d)  Cables placed on the pavement within rights-of-way must be arranged so they do not create a hazardous condition or rumble strip effect. All cables must be securely anchored to the roadway with materials that will not damage and/or puncture the pavement. Nails, spikes, and similar materials used for anchors shall not be placed inside the pavement edge. 
(e)  Operations under the permit shall be barred when the director of public works determines that the ground conditions are such that operations would cause extensive rutting in the rights-of-way or easements. In addition, operations will be barred when ground conditions would cause the tracking of mud, gravel, rock, or debris onto the roadway surface of any right-of-way or other city improvements. In the event that mud, gravel, rock, or debris is inadvertently tracked onto roadways in a way that creates a safety hazard or potential for damage to vehicles, the operator shall immediately cease operations and clean the roadway of all mud, gravel, rock or debris. The time for completion of operations, as specified in section 17-81, shall be extended by one (1) day for each full day operations are barred under the provisions of this paragraph. 
(f)  Each vibroseis crew shall be accompanied by a certified police officer provided by applicant while testing on city streets and rights-of-way or otherwise impeding the flow-of traffic (e.g., blocked lanes). 
(g)  Applicant shall furnish adequate signs, barricades, flares, flagmen, etc., as necessary, to protect the traveling public. 
(Ord. No. 00-11, § 1, 9-18-00) 
Sec. 17-84. - Testing. 
(a)  Applicant shall furnish to the city's director of public works, or designee, a schedule of each week's test plans. 
(b)  Initial notification of pending work and the availability of pre- and post-test inspections of all adjacent structures shall be provided to all property owners and/or residents a minimum of ten (10) working days prior to working in their respective areas. Applicant shall notify each owner, resident and/or business located within two hundred fifty (250) feet of its planned operations twenty-four (24) to forty-eight (48) hours prior to performing the actual work. Prior to performing the actual work, applicant shall offer, in writing to each owner, resident and/or business within one hundred twenty-five (125) feet of any vibroseis operation, and shall provide, if requested, pre- and post-damage inspections for all structures, including appropriate testing and lab test for water wells. Applicant shall maintain records of such inspections for a period of two (2) years and shall make such records available, in whole or in part, upon request by the city. 
(c)  All vibroseis operations shall be conducted a minimum distance of twenty-five feet (25) from any structure. 
(d)  Applicant shall maintain, for a period of two (2) years, and make available upon request to the city, the daily log of vibroseis tests showing date, location, drive level, operator, and all other related information which includes seismic and pre- and post-test survey. 
(e)  Prior to performing the actual work, applicant shall offer, in writing to the owners or agents of all structures, water wells, and underground hazardous waste storage/disposal sites within five hundred (500) feet of charge source locations, and shall provide, if requested, pre- and post-inspections for all structures, including appropriate testing and lab test for water wells. Applicant shall maintain records of such inspections for a period of two (2) years and shall make such records available for inspection upon request by the city. 
(f)  No charge tests shall be detonated within six hundred (600) feet of any structure, water well, or underground hazardous waste storage/disposal site; provided, however, charge testing may be conducted within six hundred (600) feet, but not less than three hundred (300) feet, of a structure, water well, or underground hazardous waste storage/disposal site if, prior to commencement of operations, applicant secures and files with the city a signed authorization from the owner or agent of such structure, water well, or underground hazardous waste storage/disposal site consenting to such testing and releasing the city from all future claims resulting from such operations. Applicant will provide multiple monitoring of any charge testing within six hundred (600) feet of any occupied structure. 
(g)  Applicant shall furnish to the city a copy of the daily log for all Charge tests showing the date, location, charge, depth, employee, and any other pertinent information related to each test, on a weekly basis (i.e., submit Monday through Friday logs on the following Monday). 
(h)  Explosives shall be transported in constantly attended Type-three magazines as defined by section 1902.4.7 of the 1994 Standard Fire Prevention Code. All vehicles transporting explosives will be placarded according to Regulation of Hazardous Materials 49 C.F.R. Only the necessary amount of explosives for each day's operations, during such period as the permit is in effect, shall be transported within the city at any given time. No explosives shall be stored within the corporate city limits, unless approved by the city's fire marshal. If such storage is approved, explosives must be stored in a locked and secure, constantly attended type-two magazine, as defined by section 1902.4.6 of the 1994 Standard Fire Prevention Code, at a single, isolated, and sparsely populated location. 
(i)  Applicant shall notify the city's director of public works, or designee, within three (3) business days of any deviation from these permit requirements. 
(Ord. No. 149, § 3, 11-24-58; Ord. No. 00-11, § 1, 9-18-00) 
Sec. 17-85. - Bond, insurance, and indemnity. 
(a)  The applicant shall submit to the city a performance bond in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) from a surety authorized to do business in the state. The performance bond shall be valid for a period of one (1) year from the date that permit is issued. The bond shall provide, but not be limited to, the following condition: there shall be recoverable by the city, jointly and severally from the principal and surety any and all damages, loss or costs suffered by the city in connection with applicant's geophysical operations within the city. The bond shall contain the following endorsement: "It is hereby understood and agreed that this bond may not be canceled by the surety company until sixty (60) days after receipt by the city, by registered mail or written notice, of such intent to cancel or not to renew." The rights reserved to the city with respect to the bond are in addition to all other rights of the city and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to such bond shall affect any other rights of the city. 
(b)  Prior to conducting any operations hereunder, applicant and/or its contractors shall furnish a certificate of insurance to the city showing the city as an "additional insured" with respect to operations conducted within the city and showing liability insurance coverage covering commercial, personal injury, general, and pollution liability in amounts not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per person, three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) per occurrence, and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) property damage. 
(c)  Applicant hereby agrees to protect, indemnify, defend and hold the city, its officers, employees, agents, and representatives harmless from and against all claims, demands, and causes of action of every kind and character for injury to, or death of, any person or persons, damages, liabilities, losses, and/or expenses, occurring or in any way incident to, arising out of, or in connection with its or its contractors', agents', or representatives' operations under this permit, including attorneys' fees, and any other costs and expenses incurred by the city in defending against any such claims, demands, and causes of action. 
(d)  Within thirty (30) days of receipt of same, applicant shall notify the city, in writing, of each claim for injuries to, or death or, persons or damages or losses to property occurring or in any way incident to, arising out of, or in connection with its or its contractors', agents', or representatives' operations conducted under this permit. At the city's discretion, the city may conduct an independent investigation, monitor, and review the processing of any such claim to ensure that such claim is handled as required herein. 
(e)  Any permit granted hereunder may be revoked upon breach of any term or condition contained herein. 
(f)  Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, any permit granted hereunder shall not be effective unless and until a copy of the permit, signed by an authorized officer of applicant, the performance bond, and the certificates of insurance have been filed with the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 00-11, § 1, 9-18-00) 
Secs. 17-86-17-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PIPELINES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 93-14, §§ 1-19, adopted Aug. 16, 1993, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, its inclusion herein as Art. V, §§ 17-91-17-109 was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 17-91. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms, shall have the meanings herein described to them. 
    Adjustment. The horizontal or vertical repositioning of a permitted or unpermitted pipeline due to reasons unrelated to pipeline operations. 
    Gas leak. Any accidental release of hydrocarbons or other hazardous materials which are a gas or vapor in the pipeline. 
    Interstate pipeline. A pipeline used in the transportation of a liquid, natural gas, flammable gas or a gas which is toxic or corrosive, which are subject to the jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission under the Natural Gas Pipeline Safety Act, except that it shall not include any pipeline within a state which transports gas from an interstate gas pipeline to a direct-sales customer within such state purchasing gas for its own consumption. Also a pipeline used in the transportation of hazardous liquids in interstate or foreign commerce which are subject to the Hazardous Liquid Pipeline Safety Act of 1979, as amended. 
    Intrastate pipeline. Pipelines which are not interstate pipelines. 
    Hazardous material. Any substance, whether solid, liquid or gas, which is classified as hazardous by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or Texas Water Commission, or any other state or federal agency. 
    Liquid leak. Any accidental release of hydrocarbons or any other chemicals, or hazardous material, excluding water, which are a liquid in the pipeline. 
    MSDS. Material safety data sheet. 
    Owner or operator. The individual, partnership, corporation or other entity that operates the pipeline. As used herein, one term is always inclusive of the other unless otherwise specified. 
    Pipeline. Any pipe used in the transportation of gaseous or liquid hydrocarbons or any other chemicals, excepting pipelines located within any oil refining or petrochemical plant. 
    Repair. Restoration or replacement of any broken, leaking or defective part of a permitted or unpermitted pipeline, or any work involving excavation or boring for replacement of any portion of the corrosion protection system. 
    Replacement. Any new pipeline or section of a pipeline replacing any old pipeline or section of pipeline which was previously permitted and is being removed from service. Replacement must occur in the same easement as the line being removed from service, and shall not include any change in size of line. Replacement of any pipeline or section of pipeline not previously permitted shall fall under the new pipeline permit requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, § 1, 8-16-93) 
Sec. 17-92. - permit required. 
    No new pipeline shall be installed and thereafter maintained within the city until a public meeting has been held on an application for a pipeline permit, and a permit has been granted by the city council, pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, § 3, 8-16-93) 
Sec. 17-93. - Application-New pipeline. 
    Prior to any preparation for or the beginning of any work for the construction of a new pipeline within the city an application for a permit, in the form described herein, must be filed with the city engineer. 
    If the proposed pipeline location and route are not acceptable to the city engineer, or other permit requirements are not met, the applicant may resubmit the permit application based on a revised location or route meeting the criteria of this article, or furnishing of items that meet the permit application requirements. 
    If said application or revised application, as the case be, is acceptable to the city engineer, and meets all permit requirements, the city engineer shall so advise the city council which shall consider said application at their first available regularly scheduled meeting date. Following said meeting the city shall either approve or deny the permit. If the issuance of a permit is denied, the city shall explain in writing to the applicant the reasons for denying the permit. 
(1)  Intrastate pipelines or interstate pipelines. All permit applications submitted pursuant to this article shall include the following: 
a.  The name, business address and telephone number of the applicant and of the pipeline owner in cases where the applicant is the operator but not the owner; 
b.  The name, titles and telephone numbers of the following persons: 
1.  The person preparing the application; 
2.  The person designated as the principal contact for information; and, 
3.  The person or firm which will operate the pipeline if other than the applicant; 
c.  The origin and destination of the pipeline; 
d.  The material to be transported through the pipeline, together with an MSDS sheet; 
e.  The maximum allowable operating pressure on the pipeline as determined according to the applicable U.S. Department of Transportation or Texas Railroad Commission procedure; 
f.  The normal pressure and temperature at which the pipeline is to be operated; 
g.  Engineering plans, drawings and/or maps with summarized specifications showing the horizontal and vertical location of the pipeline so that the conflict with and the impact upon the existing and future development can be determined; 
h.  Complete and detailed cross sections for all public street, right-of-way and easement crossings; 
i.  The design criteria under which the pipeline will be constructed; 
j.  An affidavit, on a form to be provided by the city, to the effect that the pipeline will be constructed, operated and maintained in accordance with the lawful requirements of this article; 
k.  A hold-harmless agreement on a form to be provided by the city; 
l.  Bond and liability insurance policy as set forth in section 17-97; 
m.  The required permit fee as set forth in section 17-107. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, § 3, 8-16-93) 
Sec. 17-94. - Replacement, adjustment or repair of an existing pipeline. 
    A prior administrative permit must be secured from the city engineer after notification to city council, in each of the following instances; 
(1)  Any replacement, adjustment or repair of a permitted intrastate pipeline or a permitted interstate pipeline within the city, or the adjustment or repair of any pipeline not previously permitted within the city. The application shall be accompanied by: 
a.  Original permit number, if any; 
b.  Complete description of work to be done; 
c.  An affidavit on a form to be furnished by the city that the work to be done is designed and shall be constructed, operated and maintained in accordance with the standards required by this article; 
d.  A permit fee as prescribed by section 17-107; 
e.  A bond in the minimum amount prescribed by section 17-97 shall be provided for any construction or installation within a public street, alley, right-of-way or other public way or easement; 
f.  Certificate of existing liability insurance or a new insurance certificate as prescribed in section 17-97. 
(2)  Replacement of any pipeline not previously permitted shall fall under the new pipeline permit requirements of this article. 
(3)  In the case of emergency repairs, a prior administrative permit shall not be required; however, telephone notification to the city shall be made immediately. A written affidavit certifying to the emergency repairs shall be furnished to the city engineer within twenty (20) days of the emergency together with all the items required in the case of an application for prior administrative permit excepting a bond. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, § 4, 8-16-93) 
Sec. 17-95. - Notice; transfer of ownership, lease or assignment. 
    Notice of proposed transfer of ownership, lease or assignment of any pipeline must be given by the owner to the city engineer in each instance of the transfer of ownership, lease or assignment of an existing pipeline within the city. Said notice shall include: 
(1)  If previously permitted: 
a.  Original permit number; 
b.  Material(s) to be transported through the pipeline, pressure and temperature, and an MSDS sheet; 
c.  An affidavit from the new owner, lessee or assignee on a form to be provided by the city that the pipeline will comply with the standards and permit required by this article; 
d.  A fee from the new owner, lessee or assignee as prescribed by section 17-107 to cover the administrative costs in enforcing this article; 
e.  Hold-harmless agreement from the new owner, lessee or assignee on a form to be provided by the city as prescribed by section 17-97; 
f.  Certificate of existing liability insurance or a new insurance certificate from the new owner, lessee or assignee as prescribed in section 17-97. 
(2)  If not previously permitted: 
a.  Origin and destination of the pipeline; 
b.  Material(s) to be transported through the pipeline, pressure and temperature, and an MSDS sheet to be furnished to fire department; 
c.  Engineering drawings of the location and alignment of the pipeline; 
d.  An affidavit from the new owner, lessee or assignee on a form to be provided by the city that the pipeline will comply with the standards required by this article; 
e.  A fee from the new owner, lessee or assignee as prescribed by section 17-107 to cover the administrative costs in enforcing this article; 
f.  Hold-harmless agreement from the new owner, lessee or assignee on a form to be Provided by the city as prescribed by section 17-97; 
g.  Certificate of existing liability insurance or a new insurance certificate from the new owner, lessee or assignee as prescribed in section 17-107. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, § 5, 8-16-93) 
Sec. 17-96. - Location. 
    The city council, upon the recommendation of the city engineer must approve the location of a new pipeline before a permit is issued. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, § 6, 8-16-93) 
Sec. 17-97. - Liability protection. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation making an application for any permit under this article, which shall include a pipeline within, under, across, or along a public street, alley or other public way or easement, shall, as a condition precedent to the granting of the permit, execute a hold-harmless agreement, on a city form approved by the city attorney, indemnifying the city for any liability arising out of or connected with the granting of the permit or any construction or operating pursuant thereto as it pertains to a public street, alley, or other public way or easement except for the negligence of the city. In addition, the applicant shall furnish a bond (excepting the case of a permit under section 17-95 where further construction or installation is not involved) on a city form and with corporate surety satisfactory to the city, in an amount of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) for each location involving the crossing of all or a part of a public street, alley, way or easement, and ten dollars ($10.00) per linear foot of line within the public street, alley, way or easement in cases other than a crossing; provided, that an aggregate total bond shall not be required in excess of forty-five thousand dollars ($45,000.00) regardless of the number of crossings or linear feet of line within a public street, alley, way or easement. The bond shall inure to the benefit of the city and any person who may suffer a loss or injury as a result of the applicant's operations under his permit as it pertains to a public street, alley, or other public way or easement during the period until completion of installation of the line or lines is approved in writing by the city engineer. Applicant shall further maintain at all times during the life of the permit comprehensive public general liability insurance for bodily injury and property damage, including explosion, collapse and underground hazard coverage, in the minimum combined single limit amount of three million dollars ($3,000,000.00). 
(b)  A certificate of insurance on a form to be provided by the city specifying the above required coverage with an insurance company having acceptable insurance rating shall be furnished to the city engineer prior to the issuance of any permit. The certificate of insurance shall provide that at least fifteen (15) days prior written-notice of the termination of insurance or any modification of insurance shall be given to the city. No self-insurance is acceptable. 
(c)  Any bond provided pursuant to the ordinance prior to this amendment may be terminated upon completion of the installation of the pipelines to which it relates upon the written certification of completion by the city engineer, and provided that permittee shall maintain liability insurance as required under paragraphs (a) and (b) hereof. The termination of a bond shall not affect any claim, damage, injury or cause of action arising thereon prior to the date of termination. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, § 1, 8-16-93) 
Sec. 17-98. - Minimum standards and specifications. 
    All new pipelines, replacement of pipelines or repairs to pipelines within the city shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the latest approved minimum standards established by the U.S. Department of Transportation or the Texas Railroad Commission, whichever is applicable, and any special requirements established as a condition of permit approval by the city. 
    The operation and maintenance of all pipelines, including, without limitation, existing pipelines, within the city shall conform to the standards established by the U.S. Department of Transportation or the Texas Railroad Commission, whichever is applicable. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, § 8, 8-16-93) 
Sec. 17-99. - Application to existing pipelines. 
    The owner or operator of any existing pipeline within the city shall furnish the city engineer with the following: 
(1)  Schematic drawings showing the location of each pipeline; 
(2)  A description of the materials transported, their source and their destination, and MSDS sheet on materials to be transported; 
(3)  The normal and maximum operating pressures and normal operating temperatures on the line; 
(4)  The name, title and telephone number of the person(s) responsible for the operation of the pipeline(s); 
(5)  The name, title and telephone number of at least three (3) persons to be contacted in case of an emergency; 
(6)  An affidavit that the each pipeline complies with the applicable standards required by this article; 
(7)  Certificate of current insurance in the amount required by section 17-97; 
(8)  An affidavit as to whether the pipeline is an interstate or intrastate pipeline as defined in section 17-91; 
(9)  Test pressure and inspection data required by the U.S. Department of Transportation. 
    This information shall be furnished within ninety (90) days following the effective date of this article. It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation or other entity to operate and maintain a pipeline in the city after the expiration of said ninety (90) days unless or until the information enumerated above has been provided to the city engineer. This information shall further be furnished on each anniversary date of the original permit issued under section 17-93 or on each anniversary date of the information provided under this section. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, § 9, 8-16-93) 
Sec. 17-100. - Markers to indicate location. 
    The owner or operator of any pipeline within the city shall place and maintain line markers as close as practical over each pipeline at each crossing of a public street, utility easement, railroad, navigable waterway, or drainage canal. The markers shall be of permanent type construction of metal or concrete or any other materials which will insure adequate strength, stiffness, visibility and durability, and shall contain a permanent label identifying the pipeline owner or operator, telephone number and type of product in the line. Products may be broadly classified as crude oil, products, natural gas or light hydrocarbons. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, § 10, 8-16-93) 
Sec. 17-101. - Hazardous material spill, discharge or release. 
(a)  Telephone notification required: 
(1)  The operator or owner of any pipeline, or any employee thereof, who discovers any spill, discharge, or release of any flammable and/or combustible liquid, hazardous material, or other chemical, which is unlawful (federal, state, or local) into, on, or at any place or receptacle not designed to receive same, or which produces a risk to the health, safety or welfare of the public shall immediately notify by telephone the city fire and police departments. 
(2)  This notification shall include the following information: 
a.  Name and address of operator. 
b.  Name and telephone number of the reporter. 
c.  Location of the spill, discharge or release. 
d.  Type and amount of material released, if known. 
e.  Any other significant information. 
f.  Assessment of danger to the public. 
(b)  Survey of facilities. It shall be the responsibility of the owner and/or operator of any pipeline to cooperate with the city in any scheduled survey of said facilities by the fire chief and any other city official or party deemed necessary. Said survey shall not relieve the owner and/or operator of their independent responsibility for meeting the standards or requirements of any applicable laws or regulations, nor shall the survey be construed to create any duty, assume any responsibility for or constitute any representation as to the condition of the facility for the owner, operator or third party. 
(c)  Response plan. Upon notification of a hazardous material spill, discharge, or release, the City of Groves fire and police departments will implement the response plan which will be developed to provide proper notification to all city departments and to coordinate all activities and to direct the activities necessary to control, eliminate and restore normal conditions to the area. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, § 11, 8-16-93) 
Sec. 17-102. - Required leak reports; all pipelines. 
    All persons, firms, or companies operating pipelines within the city limits shall file within five (5) days of the discovery of any leak as defined in section 17-91, a written leak report with the city engineer, who shall immediately inform the city council of the leak report. The report shall provide at a minimum the information required on the most current Department of Transportation or Texas Railroad Commission leak report form. Upon request said companies shall make available for inspection the following: 
(1)  Operating procedure and maintenance plan; 
(2)  Emergency plan; 
(3)  Construction records and test report. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, § 12, 8-16-93) 
Sec. 17-103. - Pipeline permitting, testing and inspection. 
    The city engineer is hereby, given the powers required to perform the duties necessary to carry out the intent of this article, including but not limited to the following duties: 
(1)  Develop, receive and process pipeline permit applications; 
(2)  Receive and review all required reporting outlined in section 17-99, section 17-101 and section 17-102; 
(3)  Enforce this article; and, 
(4)  Implement a reasonable program for the inspection of pipelines to ensure that new pipelines are constructed and existing pipelines within the city are constructed, maintained and operated in accordance with standards required by this article; 
(5)  Pipeline testing. Before conducting any test on a pipeline, the owner shall provide the director of public works and engineering and the fire department in writing, the reason for conducting the test and date the test is to be performed. The owner shall also provide written notification to the city engineer when testing is completed, including a listing of any repairs made during the testing and inspection of the pipeline. 
    It shall be the duty of pipeline owners and operators to cooperate with the city in these inspections. These inspections shall not relieve the owners or operators of their independent responsibility for meeting the standards required by this section nor shall the inspections be construed to create any duty, assume any responsibility for or constitute any representation as to the condition of the pipelines for the-benefit of the owner, operator, or third parties. Owners or operators, as appropriate, shall be liable to the city for any inspection fee in accordance with section 17-107. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, § 13, 8-16-93) 
Sec. 17-104. - Penalty; revocation of permit, nuisance; individual's responsibility. 
(a)  Except as otherwise specified, any person, firm, corporation, or agent, who shall violate or fail or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of this article, or of any permit issued hereunder, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof in violation of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this article is committed or continues constitutes a separate offense, and upon conviction shall be punished as provided by section 1-5(a)(1)(maximum penalty: two thousand dollars ($2,000.00)) of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Groves. In addition, the city may at its option revoke any permit granted hereunder and order the cessation of operation of any pipeline or pipeline system constructed or maintained pursuant to the permit. Prior to the revocation of any permit, the city council shall set a time and place for hearing on revocation. The city clerk shall be directed to give written notice to the holder of the permit by certified mail at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date set for the hearing. The following shall be grounds for revocation of permit by city council; 
(1)  That the permit was obtained by fraud or misrepresentation. 
(2)  That the owner or operator of the pipeline has violated the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The city council further finds, determines and ordains that the operation of any pipeline in violation of any of the provisions of this article constitutes a condition which imperils and threatens the public health, safety and welfare, which interferes with and endangers the reasonable and peaceful use of public and private property, and which is a nuisance and shall be subject to all of the remedies at law or in equity. 
(c)  Each permit shall specify, and each permittee, by its written acceptance thereof, shall agree that permittee shall be liable to the city for the city's reasonable attorney fees, expert witness fees, other direct expenses and court costs' in any legal proceedings resulting in a finding of any violation of its permit. 
(d)  Individual's responsibility: 
(1)  A person or individual is criminally responsible, under this article for conduct that he performs in the name of or on behalf of a corporation or association to the same extent as if the conduct were performed in his own name or behalf. 
(2)  An agent having primary responsibility for the discharge of a duty to act imposed by this article on a corporation or association is criminally responsible for omission to discharge the duty to the same extent as if the duty were imposed by this article directly on him. 
(3)  If a person or individual is convicted of conduct constituting an offense performed in the name of or on behalf of a corporation or association, he is subject to the penalty authorized by this article for an individual convicted of the offense. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, § 15, 8-16-93) 
Sec. 17-105. - Southern Union Gas Company-Exemption of distribution system. 
    This article shall not apply to the distribution system of the Southern Union Gas Company for furnishing natural gas service within the city pursuant to franchise. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, § 15, 8-16-93) 
Sec. 17-106. - Effect of other laws. 
    The provisions of this article shall be subject to any federal and state legislation, rules, or regulations presently or hereafter enacted or adopted to the extent that said laws and regulations preempt or supersede the authority of the city with respect to this article or provision hereof. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, § 16, 8-16-93) 
Sec. 17-107. - Fees. 
    The fees for permits and inspections of pipelines are fixed and established for the respective purposes at the following charges: ;$; 
(1)  New pipeline installation permit fee or non-permitted pipeline replacement permit fee ..... $500.00 
(2)  Administrative permit fee (replacement, adjustment or repair of permitted pipeline or adjustment or repair of nonpermitted pipelines ..... 100.00 
(3)  Transfer of ownership, lease or assignment ..... 100.00 
(4)  Annual records maintenance fee (per pipeline) ..... 100.00 ; 
(Ord. No. 93-14, § 17, 8-16-93) 
Sec. 17-108. - Abandonment and removal from service. 
    If any pipeline is no longer used for its intended purpose, it shall be purged with nitrogen, filled water mixed with corrosion inhibitor, and capped at appropriate locations, or shall be handled as otherwise required by U.S. Department of Transportation or Texas Railroad Commission regulations. 
    If any pipeline has remained out of service for more than five (5) consecutive years, as evidenced by annual reports provided by the owner, said pipeline shall be rendered inoperable by the owner in such a manner, as approved by the city engineer, to prevent its further use. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, § 18, 8-16-93) 
Sec. 17-109. - Relocation of pipelines. 
    In the event the city or its duly authorized representative shall elect to alter, construct, or change the grade of any street, alley, or other public way, any person, firm or corporation subject to the terms of this article, upon reasonable notice by the city, shall remove, relay, and relocate its pipelines, poles, wires, cables, underground conduit, manholes, and other fixtures at its own expense. 
(Ord. No. 93-14, § 19, 8-16-93) 
Chapter 18 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 05-03, §§ 1-6, adopted May 2, 2005, did not specifically amend the Code. Hence, its inclusion herein as chapter 18, sections 18-1-18-6, was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 18-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide rules and regulations for the use of and conduct in the parks and recreation areas of the city. 
(Ord. No. 05-03, § 1, 5-2-05) 
Sec. 18-2. - Definition. 
    Park is defined as any property owned by the city which is used for recreational purposes, or public property used by the city for recreational purposes. 
(Ord. No. 05-03, § 2, 5-2-05) 
Sec. 18-3. - Uses and prohibited acts. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to: 
(1)  Mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or remove any buildings, tables, benches, fireplaces, grills, light poles, fountains, trees, playground equipment, public utilities or parts, or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards, whether temporary or permanent, monuments, flagpoles, stakes, posts, fences or other boundary markers, or other structures or equipment, facilities, or park property, or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal. 
(2)  Carry or discharge firearms of any description, slingshots, shoot arrows, discharge fireworks, firecrackers, rockets or any other types of fireworks, or anything containing the substance of any explosive or inflammatory nature. 
(3)  Attach any rope or cable or other contrivance to any tree, fence, railing, bridge, bench, or other structure. 
(4)  Take into, carry through or put into any park, any rubbish, refuse, garbage or other material. Such refuse and rubbish shall be deposited in receptacles so provided. Where receptacles are not provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(5)  Do or perform any unlawful act, make or incite any disturbance or contention. 
(6)  Engage in threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent language or engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to breach the public peace. 
(7)  Drive any vehicle on any area except the park roads or parking areas or such other areas as may on occasion be specifically designated as temporary areas. 
(8)  Leave a vehicle standing or parked in an established parking area or elsewhere in the park during hours when the park area is closed. 
(9)  Kindle, build, maintain or use a fire except in places provided for such purposes. Any fire shall be continuously under the care and direction of a competent person from the time it is kindled until the time it is extinguished. No person shall throw away or discard any lighted match, cigar, cigarette, tobacco, paper or other materials within or against any building, vehicle, or under any tree or underbrush. 
(Ord. No. 05-03, § 3, 5-2-05) 
Sec. 18-4. - Hours of use established. 
    With the exception of certain designated facilities such as supervised recreational centers, well illuminated baseball fields, basketball and tennis courts, and designated walking tracks, public parks within the corporate limits of the city shall be closed for public use during the hours between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. to discourage misuse of those parks, including loitering, littering, vandalism, nuisances, or other criminal acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, organization, firm or corporation to violate the provisions of this article unless otherwise excepted by special action of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 05-03, § 4, 5-2-05) 
Sec. 18-5. - Signs. 
    Signs stating park hours shall be posted prominently in each park. 
(Ord. No. 05-03, § 5, 5-2-05) 
Sec. 18-6. - Behavior. 
(a)  Loitering and boisterousness. No person in a park shall sleep, or protractedly lounge on the seats or benches or areas engaged in loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent language, or engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to a breach of the public peace. 
(b)  Sound-producing devices. No person shall use, operate or allow to be used or operated any device for the reproducing or augmentation of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet or comfort of persons in a city park. The operation of any such sound-reproducing or augmentation device in such manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of one hundred (100) or more feet from the source of the sound shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. For the sound to be "plainly audible," words or phrases need not be distinguishable and bass reverberations are sufficient. This prohibition shall not apply to city-sponsored entertainment events in parks. 
(Ord. No. 05-03, § 6, 5-2-05) 
Chapter 19 - PEDDLERS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Advertising, ch. 3; shouting of peddlers as unreasonable and prohibited noise, § 16-52. 

Sec. 19-1. - Definition. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the word "peddler" shall mean and include any person who shall go from house to house or from place to place in the city soliciting, selling or taking orders for or offering for sale or to take orders for any goods, wares, merchandise, services, photographs, newspapers, magazines, or subscriptions to newspapers or magazines. The word "peddler" shall also include all peddlers as they may be otherwise defined and all solicitors, hawkers, canvassers, itinerant or transient merchants or vendors of goods, wares, merchandise or services as the same may commonly be defined by state law or elsewhere. 
(Ord. No. 35, §§ 2, 4, 3-25-54) 
Sec. 19-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 1, Ord. No. 87-12, adopted Mar. 9, 1987, repealed § 19-2, relative to refusal of peddlers to leave when requested, which provisions derived from Ord. No. 296, § 2, adopted June 29, 1964, and Ord. No. 393, § 2(6), adopted Aug. 19, 1968. 
Sec. 19-3. - Exception to chapter provisions. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to sales made to dealers by commercial travelers or sales agents in the usual course of business, to sales made under authority and by order of law, or to vendors of farm or dairy products, except retail sales of ice cream in any form by peddlers. 
(Ord. No. 35, § 6, 3-25-54) 
Cross reference- Sale of ice cream, snow cones, etc., from vehicles in residential districts prohibited, § 11-1. 
Sec. 19-4. - Compliance with provisions prerequisite to engaging in business. 
    All peddlers must comply with the provisions of this chapter at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to going in or upon any private residence within the city for the purpose of engaging in business as a peddler. 
(Ord. No. 393, § 2(7), 8-19-68) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 393, § 2(7) amended § 19-4 by deleting the last words reading "unless requested or invited to do so by the owner or owners, occupant or occupants thereof". 
Sec. 19-5. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as a peddler within the city without first having applied for and obtained a license so to do from the city marshal, or the designee of the city marshal. 
(Ord. No. 35, § 2, 3-25-54; Ord. No. 2014-08, § 1, 10-20-14) 
Sec. 19-6. - Application for license. 
    Any person desiring a license to engage in business as a peddler within the city shall make written application to the city, which such application shall show and contain the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  The name and address of the person, if any, that the applicant represents; 
(3)  The kind of goods or services offered for sale; 
(4)  Whether the applicant, upon any sale or order, shall demand, accept, or receive payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery; 
(5)  The period of time such applicant wishes to engage in such business within the city; 
(6)  Whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony, and if so, the complete circumstances thereof; 
(7)  The last five (5) cities wherein the applicant has worked before coming to the city; 
(8)  Any applicant who has heretofore been issued a license to engage in business as a peddler within the city and who has violated the terms and provisions of the permit and/or the ordinances of the city or the laws of the State of Texas relating to the permit may be denied a license by the city. 
(Ord. No. 35, § 3, 3-25-54; Ord. No. 393, § 2 (8), 8-19-68) 
Sec. 19-7. - Fingerprints, photographs to accompany application for license. 
    At the time of making application for the license required under this chapter, the applicant shall submit to and be fingerprinted and photographed by the city marshal and such fingerprints and photographs shall be kept as a permanent record in his office. 
Sec. 19-8. - No license fee. 
    There shall be no license fee for any license issued under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 35, § 5, 3-25-54; Ord. No. 2014-08, § 1, 10-20-14) 
Sec. 19-9. - Bond required. 
    Before any license shall be issued under the provisions of this chapter, the applicant therefor shall furnish a bond in the penal sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) to the city signed by the applicant and signed as surety by some surety company authorized to do business in the state, conditioned upon the final delivery of goods, wares, merchandise, services, photographs, magazines and newspapers in accordance with the terms of any order obtained prior to delivery and also conditioned to indemnify any and all purchasers or customers for any and all defects in material or workmanship that may exist in the article sold by the principal on said bond, at the time of delivery, and that may be discovered by such purchaser or customer within thirty (30) days after delivery. Such bond shall be for the use and benefit of all persons that may make any purchase or give any order to the principal on such bond, or to any agent or employee of the principal. 
    Only one (1) bond shall be required of each applicant, even though such applicant shall have one (1) or more agents or employees; provided such bond shall be made to cover the activities of all of such agents or employees. 
(Ord. No. 35, § 7, 3-25-54) 
Sec. 19-10. - Issuance, contents. 
    No license shall be issued under the provisions of this chapter until the applicant therefor shall have complied with all the provisions and requirements of this chapter. 
    Such license, when issued, shall be signed by the city marshal, or the designee of the city marshal, shall be dated as of the date of its issuance, and shall state the duration or term of such license on the face thereof. Any license not dated and signed as herein required, or which was issued in violation of this section, shall be void. 
(Ord. No. 2014-08, § 1, 10-20-14) 
Sec. 19-11. - Duration of license. 
    Every license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be valid for the period of time stated therein, but in no event shall any such license be issued for a period of time in excess of one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. 35, § 5, 3-25-54) 
Sec. 19-12. - Hours of operation. 
    Any peddler to whom a license is issued under the provisions of this chapter may engage in the business of peddling between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. The business of peddling between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. is hereby expressly prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 132, § 1, 2-24-58; Ord. No. 2014-08, § 1, 10-20-14) 
Sec. 19-13. - Display of license. 
    Every peddler licensed under the provisions of this chapter and doing business within the city shall display his license upon the request of any person, and failure so to display such license shall be deemed a misdemeanor. 
Chapter 20 - POLICE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- City marshal, Art. XIXA. 
Cross reference- Authority of electrical inspector to arrest, § 29-24. 

Sec. 20-1. - Arrest without warrant. 
    Arrests, without warrant, may be made by the city marshal or any other police officer of the city when offenses against the laws, sections of this Code, or ordinances are committed in their presence, or where persons are found in suspicious places, and under circumstances which reasonably show that such persons have been guilty of some felony or breach of the peace, or threatened or about to commit some offense against the law. 
(Ord. No. 135, § 1, 4-7-58) 
State Law reference- Arrest without warrant, Vernon's Ann. C.C.P., art. 14.01 et seq. 
Sec. 20-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 1, Ord. No. 87-13, adopted Mar. 9, 1987, repealed § 20-2, relative to refusal to aid an officer, which section contained no historical notation and is presumed adopted with the adoption of this Code. 
Sec. 20-3. - Cash bail-Acceptance authorized; forfeiture. 
    The city marshal, assistant city marshal or any other officer is authorized to receive from any person arrested for violation of any section of this Code, city ordinance, or any state law of which the municipal court has jurisdiction, cash bails for the appearance of such persons before the municipal court. If such person voluntarily signs a written agreement in which he agrees to make appearance in such court by or upon the date therein named, then in the event of failure of such person to make such appearance, his bail may be forfeited by the municipal court to the city by an order of judgment of the court, entered upon its minutes, without service of notice or citation of any kind upon him. Such written agreement shall also authorize such officer, in the event of such person's failure to appear on said date, to plead guilty for him and apply said cash bail to the payment of the fine and cost which may be assessed against him. 
(Ord. No. 87-13, § 2, 3-9-87) 
State Law reference- Bail and recognizances, authority to require or take, forfeiture in misdemeanors, Vernon's C.C.P. arts. 23.14, 44.42, 44.43; payable in money, art. 43.02; taking by arresting officer, art. 23.14; right to bail, art. 1.07, Vernon's Ann. Tex. Const., art. I, § 11. 
Sec. 20-4. - Same-Amount. 
    The judge of the municipal court shall set the amount of any cash bail set under the provisions of section 20-3. 
(Ord. No. 87-13, § 2, 3-9-87) 
Sec. 20-5. - Same-Receipt. 
    When a cash bail is tendered and accepted, the officer accepting the same shall issue a special cash bail receipt therefor to the person tendering such cash bail, a copy of which to remain in the cash bail receipt book. When a cash bail is returned to the person who deposited it, a receipt shall be taken therefor. The same procedure shall apply where the person who deposited the money is present and orders such cash bail to be applied on the payment of any fine and costs assessed against him. When such person fails to make his appearance and the officer pleads guilty for him, such officer shall apply so much of the cash bail as may be necessary for the satisfaction of such fine and costs, and the balance shall be returned to the defendant. In the event such cash bail is forfeited, then the entire sum shall be paid to the proper officer of the city. 
Chapter 21 - PUBLIC AMUSEMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- The use of any drums, loudspeaker or other attention getting device as unreasonable and prohibited noise, § 16-52; approved electrical wiring methods for fairs, exhibitions, etc., § 29-114. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 21-1. - Bond or liability insurance required for amusement rides. 
    No person shall conduct, operate, manage or sponsor any ferris wheel, merry-go-round or other amusement ride operated for hire, or for the purpose of promoting or advertising any trade or business, without first filing with the city clerk a bond or certificate of liability insurance, in the amount of at least two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00), indemnifying the public against damages sustained by reason of the operation of such ride. Such bond or certificate of insurance shall be subject to approval by the city attorney. This section shall apply to all persons, whether or not a license is required by any other provision of this chapter. 
Secs. 21-2-21-11. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CARNIVALS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 21-12-21-16. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 21-17. - Exemptions from division. 
    This division shall not apply to any show or exhibition supported and managed entirely by local operators for charitable and benevolent purposes, and not for individual or personal profit to those managing and operating the same, regardless of whether such local show or exhibition shall have some of the features of a carnival in connection with the same, nor shall it apply to ferris wheels, merry-go-rounds, rides and similar amusement devices sponsored by local merchants, service clubs or other organizations and not operated in connection with any show or exhibition, provided however, that any person operating any such show or exhibition shall be required to obtain a permit as provided in this article without paying the required fee, and shall obtain liability insurance as required in section 21-1. 
Sec. 21-18. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to show or exhibit any carnival within the city limits without first obtaining a license so to do from the city council. 
    Any person showing or exhibiting, or in any manner connected with or taking part in the showing or exhibiting of a carnival within the city limits without first applying for and obtaining such license shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
Sec. 21-19. - Application generally. 
    Any person desiring to conduct or show a carnival within the city limits shall make application for a license to the city council and file the same with the city clerk not less than two (2) weeks prior to the time when it is desired to show or exhibit such carnival. Such application shall give the name and permanent address of the owner of the carnival, and if the carnival is owned by a company or corporation, the application shall show such fact and shall also show the name of the manager or other officer in charge of the carnival. In any event, the application shall show the person in active charge and control of showing and exhibiting the carnival. The application shall further give a list of all shows, rides, booths and other businesses and attractions operated in connection with the carnival, listing same by name and with a description of each show or attraction. 
    Such applicant shall also submit with the application, in the form of affidavits and statements, evidence as to the solvency and responsibility of the owner of the carnival, and as to the kind and character of shows and attractions exhibited by the carnival. In making such application, the person making same shall also state, at the end of the application, that he agrees to conduct the carnival and each and all shows, attractions and exhibits therein in a decent, orderly and law-abiding manner. 
Sec. 21-20. - Action on application. 
    After an application is filed under this division, the city clerk shall refer the same to the city council for action, and if the city council is convinced from the evidence submitted that the owner of the carnival is solvent and that he has in the past, and proposes to while showing in the city, conducted the carnival in a decent, law-abiding and orderly manner, the city council shall approve the application. 
Sec. 21-21. - Fee. 
    As a condition and requirement to the licensing of a carnival to show in the city, the applicant for such license shall pay to the city clerk a license fee in the sum of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
Sec. 21-22. - Issuance. 
    Upon approval of an application for a license under this division by the city council and payment of the fee prescribed by section 21-21, the city clerk shall issue a license to the applicant to show and exhibit the carnival in the city. Such license shall not issue, however, unless the applicant complies with section 21-1, if applicable. 
Sec. 21-23. - Term. 
    A license issued under this division shall cover one appearance in the city and shall be good only for as many days as the carnival remains continuously in the city, and a new license shall be required each time the carnival returns to the city. 
Sec. 21-24. - Permitted operations under license. 
    Any person obtaining a license to show and exhibit a carnival within the city limits shall have the right to show, maintain and operate only such shows, rides, booths and other attractions as shall be under the direct charge and supervision of the owner or operator of the carnival, and it shall not be lawful for any person to show or exhibit in connection with the carnival any show, attraction or concession of any kind or character independent of the carnival ownership and management, the license granted to such carnival covering and permitting only such shows, attractions and concessions as are owned and operated by the person applying for the license. 
Secs. 21-25-21-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COIN-OPERATED MACHINES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 92-04, § 1, adopted July 6, 1992, repealed § 21-35 and §§ 21-38-21-40 in conformance with state law. 
Cross reference- Solicitations for coins to operate musical instruments or devices, § 4-18; abusive language generally, § 16-3; gambling prohibited, § 16-17 et seq. 
State Law reference- Occupation tax, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 8814. 

Sec. 21-35. - Reserved. 
Sec. 21-36. - Occupation tax levied. 
    Every person who owns, controls, exhibits, displays, or who permits to be exhibited or displayed in this city any coin-operated machines, shall pay, and there is hereby levied on every coin-operated machine, except such as are exempted, an annual occupation tax of one-fourth (1/4) the tax charged and collected by the state. 
    Provided that nothing herein shall prevent the operator of such machines from paying the tax levied in this section for the account of the owner, but the payment of such tax by such operator or other person shall not relieve the owner from the responsibility of complying with all provisions of the state law governing coin-operated machines. 
(Ord. No. 92-04, § 2, 7-6-92) 
Sec. 21-37. - Payment of tax; receipt to be attached to machine. 
(a)  The occupation tax levied hereby shall be paid to the city clerk who shall issue an occupation tax receipt. 
(b)  The occupation tax receipt shall be attached to the coin-operated machine mentioned in the receipt and shall bear the serial number of the particular machine. 
(c)  It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to operate, exhibit or display any coin-operated machine in the city without having attached thereto an occupation tax receipt and no occupation tax receipt issued for a certain coin-operated machine shall be transferred to any other machine. 
(Ord. No. 92-04, § 3, 7-6-92) 
Secs. 21-38-21-40. - Reserved. 
Sec. 21-41. - Skill or pleasure coin-operated machines; license or permit required for each specific location; proximity to schools, churches and hospitals. 
(a)  No skill or pleasure coin-operated machine shall be permitted in the city without first obtaining a license or permit therefor. 
(b)  Such license or permit shall be issued by the city clerk for a specific location. 
(c)  After the issuance of a license or permit by the city clerk for a skill or pleasure coin-operated machine to be located at a specific location, such machine shall not be moved to another location in the city, without first obtaining another license or permit for the specific location to which such machine is to be moved or placed. 
(d)  No music, skill or pleasure coin-operated machine shall be permitted within three hundred (300) feet of a church, school, or hospital. The measurement of the distance between the place of business where such coin-operated machines are placed and the church, school, or hospital shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door, and in a direct line across intersections. 
(Ord. No. 764, § 1, 1-18-82; Ord. No. 92-04, § 4, 7-6-92) 
Sec. 21-42. - License as consent to entry. 
    Acceptance of a license or registration certificate issued under the Coin-Operated Services Law or this article constitutes consent by the licensee or registration certificate holder that the comptroller or any peace officer may freely enter upon the licensed business premises during normal business hours for purpose of ensuring compliance with the Coin-Operated Services Law or this article. 
(Ord. No. 92-04, § 5, 7-6-92) 
State Law reference- License as consent to entry, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 8814, § 18. 
Secs. 21-43-21-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 01-03, § 1, adopted April 9, 2001, repealed divisions 1 and 2, sections 22-52-22-59 and 22-65-22-73, in their entirety. Former divisions 1 and 2 pertained to general provisions and dance hall licenses, respectively. Ord. No. 01-12, § 1, adopted Sept. 24, 2001, repealed division 3, sections 21-79-21-82, in its entirety. Former division 3 pertained to dance permits. 

DIVISION 1. - RESERVED 

Secs. 21-52-21-64. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED 

Secs. 21-65-21-78. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RESERVED 

Secs. 21-79-21-92. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - POOLROOMS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 21-93. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    Billiard table. Any table surrounded by a ledge or cushion with or without pockets upon which balls are impelled by a stick or cue. 
    Licensee. Any person holding a poolroom license issued under the provisions of this article. 
    Poolroom. Any place or establishment which is required by state law to pay an occupation tax to the state for owning and operating one or more billiard tables. 
(Ord. No. 286, § 1, 2-10-64) 
Sec. 21-94. - Hours of operation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a poolroom between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 o'clock a.m. on weekdays and between 1:00 o'clock a.m. and 1:00 o'clock p.m. on Sundays. 
Sec. 21-95. - Narcotics. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale or to use any narcotic drug within any poolroom. 
Sec. 21-96. - Location restriction. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate and maintain a poolroom at any location within the city within five hundred (500) feet of any property line on which a school or church is located. 
(Ord. No. 286, § 2, 2-10-64) 
Sec. 21-97. - Maintenance of premises. 
    The licensee shall maintain quiet and good order upon and within the premises of any poolroom operated by him within the city, and shall maintain such premises in a clean and sanitary condition at all times. 
(Ord. No. 286, § 9(a), 2-10-64) 
Sec. 21-98. - Loitering. 
    It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any person to loiter in or about any poolroom operated by him within the city. 
(Ord. No. 286, § 9(a), 2-10-64) 
Sec. 21-99. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 1, Ord. No. 87-14, adopted Mar, 9, 1987, repealed § 21-99, prohibiting gambling on poolroom premises, which section derived from Ord. No. 286, § 9(b), adopted Feb. 10, 1964. 
Sec. 21-100. - Presence of intoxicated persons. 
    It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any intoxicated person to enter or remain on the premises of any poolroom operated by him within the city. 
(Ord. No. 286, § 9(c), 2-10-64) 
Cross reference- Drunkenness generally, § 4-10. 
Secs. 21-101-21-105. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 21-106. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a poolroom in the city without first obtaining a license therefor from the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 286, § 3, 2-10-64) 
Sec. 21-107. - When license not required. 
    The license required by the provisions of this division shall not be required for poolrooms owned and operated by religious, charitable, fraternal, veterans or educational organizations, unless operated for profit. However, all other provisions of this article shall apply to such poolrooms. 
(Ord. No. 286, § 11, 2-10-64) 
Sec. 21-108. - Application-Generally. 
    Each person desiring to operate a poolroom in the city shall make an application in writing on forms provided by the city requesting a license for such poolroom. Each application for a license shall be verified under oath and filed with the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 286, § 4, 2-10-64) 
Sec. 21-109. - Same-Contents. 
    Each application for a license to operate a poolroom shall contain the following information: 
(a)  The name, age, sex, race, marital status, address and telephone number of applicant; provided, however, if the applicant is a firm or corporation, such information of each officer and director thereof and each person owning, directly or indirectly, ten per cent (10%) or more of such firm or corporation. 
(b)  Location of the proposed poolroom. 
(c)  Number of persons to be employed by applicant, if any, and the nature of such employment. 
(d)  Number of tables to be placed in the room. 
(e)  Whether the applicant or any officer or director thereof, has ever been charged with or convicted of a felony involving moral turpitude, any violation of the liquor laws, or any offense involving lewd or indecent conduct or narcotics, or any other misdemeanor, other than traffic violations, and full information concerning the conviction. 
(f)  A statement that any violations of state law, this Code or city ordinances which may occur at such establishment will be reported promptly to the police department. 
(g)  A statement that no person will be allowed to work or perform duties at such establishment who has been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude, or any offense involving immoral acts, lewd or indecent conduct, or narcotics. 
(Ord. No. 286, § 4, 2-10-64) 
Sec. 21-110. - Making false statement. 
    It shall be unlawful for any applicant for a license under the provisions of this division to make any false statement while making application therefor. 
Sec. 21-111. - Fee. 
    The fee to be charged and collected for any license issued under the provisions of this division shall be one-half (1/2) the fee charged by state law. 
(Ord. No. 286, § 7, 2-10-64) 
State Law reference- Occupation tax on pool halls, V.A.T.S. Tax.-Gen., art. 19.01(10). 
Sec. 21-112. - Bond required. 
    Every application for a license required by the provisions of this division shall be accompanied by a bond, approved as to form by the city attorney, executed by a bonding or surety company authorized to do business in the state, in the penal sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), conditioned upon the payment by the licensee of any and all final judgment for injury or damage resulting to persons or property arising out of the operation or maintenance of the poolroom covered by such bond. Such bond shall run to the city for the benefit of any person who may claim redress for property damage resulting from the operation or maintenance of such poolroom. Such bond shall remain in full force and effect for the full period of time for which the license is effective. A liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state, conforming to the requirements of this section, may be permitted in lieu of a bond. 
(Ord. No. 286, § 5, 2-10-64) 
Sec. 21-113. - Conditions of issuance. 
    The city manager shall, within thirty (30) days after receipt of an application for a license required by the provisions of this division, issue such license after investigation and upon finding of the following facts: 
(a)  That the city marshal has determined that the applicant, and all persons named in the application are all of good moral character and are capable of operating the proposed business in a manner consistent with the public safety and good morals; 
(b)  That the applicant or any persons named in the application are not delinquent in the payment of taxes or other obligations due the city; 
(c)  That the required bond or insurance policy has been provided; 
(d)  That all applicable provisions of this Code, state law and city ordinances, rules or regulations have been met. 
(Ord. No. 286, § 6, 2-10-64) 
Sec. 21-114. - Duration. 
    Every license issued under the provisions of this division shall expire twelve (12) months after the date of issuance of the same. 
(Ord. No. 286, § 8, 2-10-64) 
Sec. 21-115. - Suspension; revocation-Grounds. 
    Each license issued under the provisions of this division may be suspended or revoked by the city manager upon his finding that the licensee has: 
(a)  Violated any applicable provision of this Code, state law or city ordinance, rule or regulation; 
(b)  Violated any provision of this Code, state law or city ordinance, rule or regulation regarding alcoholic beverages; or 
(c)  Operated or conducted his poolroom so as to constitute a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 286, § 10, 2-10-64) 
Sec. 21-116. - Display. 
    All licenses issued under the provisions of this division shall be prominently displayed by the licensee at the poolroom. 
Sec. 21-117. - Inspections. 
    Any poolroom within the city shall be subject to inspection by members of the health department and the police department at any time. 
Secs. 21-118-21-127. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RESERVED 

Secs. 21-128-21-131. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 1, Ord. No. 87-14, adopted Mar. 9, 1987, repealed §§ 21-128-21-130, pertaining to locations, building permits and building code relative to skating rinks, which provisions derived from Ord. No. 300, §§ 1, 3, 4, adopted Sept. 1, 1964. Section 2, Ord. No. 87-14, amended § 21-131, restricting skating rink operation of amplifiers, by transferring the section to Ch. 16 of this Code and renumbering the section as § 16-54.1. 
Chapter 22 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Streets and sidewalks, Art. XIV. 
Cross reference- Bond required of driller of gas or oil well guaranteeing restoration of damaged streets and sidewalks, § 17-21; blocking of street or alley by oil or gas drilling or production operation, § 17-48; use of streets for taxicab stands purposes, § 24-6; application of traffic provisions to workmen and equipment, § 25-9; removal of glass, nails, other injurious material from street, § 25-16; utilities, Ch. 27; minimum clearance of electrical signs above sidewalks, § 29-138; installation of electrical sign supports on public property, § 29-139; enclosure of high voltage electrical conductors, § 29-143. 
State Law reference- General authority of city relative to streets and sidewalks, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St., art. 1175, §§ (16-18). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Adoption of state law relative to street improvements. 
    The provisions of Chapter 106, 40th Legislature, the first called session, Acts of 1927, commonly known as Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes, article 1105b, as amended, are hereby adopted by the city as controlling the establishment, construction and repair of street improvements within the city. 
Sec. 22-2. - Obstruction of drainage ditches. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place dirt, trash, broken concrete, bricks, rubbish, or any other obstruction in any drainage ditch within the city without written permission therefor from the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 90, § 1, 5-21-56) 
Sec. 22-3. - Access driveways to highways; state regulations adopted. 
    The booklet, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, entitled "Regulations for Access Driveways to State Highways" dated September 23, 1953, as amended in September 1960, and published by the Texas Highway Department in accordance with Minute Order No. 34719, is hereby adopted by the city for the public safety and protection of the citizens of the city. 
Sec. 22-4. - Approval of plans and specifications. 
    All street and alley improvements within the city shall be constructed only in accordance with plans and specifications as approved by the city manager or by the director of public works. 
Sec. 22-5. - Preparation of plans and specifications. 
    Prior to the beginning of construction of any street or alley improvements within the city, plans and specifications and estimates of cost shall be prepared by the city manager or by the director of public works. 
Sec. 22-6. - Street numbers for buildings. 
    All buildings fronting on any street or alley in the city shall be numbered in some conspicuous place, by the owner thereof, according to the map made by the director of public works for such purpose and on file in his office, all odd numbers being on one side of the street and all even numbers on the other. 
    Any person desiring to have a number put on his buildings shall first apply to the director of public works for the proper number, and any person failing or refusing to put the proper number on his building or putting the wrong number thereon, or failing or refusing to comply with any other requirement of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
Sec. 22-7. - Obstruction of public ways prohibited-By individuals. 
    A person shall not stop or stand in the way so as to in any manner obstruct the use of the sidewalks, streets, or any other public place in the city by loafing, lounging or standing in or upon the same. 
Sec. 22-8. - Same-Exception. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place any materials, boxes, or other objects whatsoever in or upon any street, alley right-of-way or sidewalk in the city without first obtaining the written permission of the director of public works. If written permission is obtained, then it shall be unlawful to remove the material so placed without first obtaining the written permission of the director of public works to remove the same. 
Sec. 22-9. - Interference, obstruction of public improvements prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or obstruct any public improvements authorized by the city council, the mayor or the director of public works by means of threats, coercion, duress, or any other method whatsoever, either directly or indirectly. Any person who shall be deemed guilty of violating the provision of this section shall be fined as provided in section 1-5. 
Sec. 22-10. - Manner of work; cleanliness of premises. 
    All work done or performed under the provisions of this chapter shall be done or performed in a good, workmanlike manner. Such work shall not be accepted or approved by the city until the premises thereof has been cleaned and cleared of all debris, trash and rubbish which may have accumulated during such work. 
Sec. 22-11. - Change of street, sidewalk grade or line. 
    The city reserves the right, when putting down street pavement, either by original construction or reconstruction, to change, or alter the lines and/or grades of such street and/or the sidewalks when in the opinion of the city council such change is necessary for the proper improvement, surfacing, pavement, or drainage of said street, without liability on the part of the city by reason of said change. 
    In the event that a sidewalk, the line or grade of which is changed, is in good condition and does not, in the opinion of the city council require entire reconstruction, the owner or owners thereof shall be given notice to break said sidewalks back to a point fixed by the city's director of public works, and to remove the broken portion and reconstruct said portion on the line and grade determined by the city's director of public works, at the cost of the said abutting owner. This shall be required upon order of the council thereof in the same manner as required for the construction, reconstruction, repairing or regrading of sidewalks. 
Sec. 22-12. - Permit to lay sidewalks and driveways. 
(a)  No sidewalk or driveway shall be laid by any property owner in the city on any street right-of-way without first obtaining a permit therefor from the director of public works. Application for said driveway and/or sidewalk permit shall be made on an application form to be provided by the office of the director of public works, and there shall be no fee for issuance of said permit. 
(b)  Driveways must be constructed so as not to end more than one (1) foot from the existing street surface unless otherwise specified by the city, the city will furnish and install material for the area between the street surface and driveway as stated on the permit. 
(Ord. No. 95-07, § 1, 7-31-95) 
Secs. 22-13-22-21. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EXCAVATIONS 

Sec. 22-22. - Definition. 
    For the purposes of this article, the word "borrow pit" shall mean the pit, hole or depression created by any excavation of dirt, sand, stone or other earth material. 
(Ord. No. 364, § 1, 2-20-67) 
Sec. 22-23. - Exceptions to article provisions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not be applicable to excavation for swimming pools or for foundation purposes where a building permit has been properly applied for and granted in accordance with the building code; provided, however, that if the construction for which a building permit had been granted should be abandoned or delayed for a period longer than one hundred eighty (180) days, any pit excavated shall be required to conform to the provisions of sections 22-31-22-35. 
    The provisions of this article also shall not be applicable to excavation of drainage ditches, canals, or similar facilities. 
(Ord. No. 364, § 3, 2-20-67) 
Sec. 22-24. - When declared nuisance. 
    Any excavation made within the city in violation of the provisions of this article shall be declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 364, § 2, 2-20-67) 
Sec. 22-25. - Permit required. 
    No person shall dig, excavate, remove, or cause to be dug, excavated, or removed, any dirt, clay, rock or other material below the surface of the ground without having first obtained an excavation permit therefor in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 364, § 2, 2-20-67) 
Sec. 22-26. - Application for permit. 
    Each application for an excavation permit shall be in writing, on a form provided for that purpose by the public works director, stating the purpose of the proposed owner's use of the land upon which the excavation is to be done and the names of all owners of land lying within one hundred (100) feet of the proposed excavation, and shall be accompanied by an accurate drawing showing the location of the proposed excavation, and the dimensions of the borrow pit to be created thereby. 
(Ord. No. 364, § 4, 2-20-67) 
Sec. 22-27. - Permit fee. 
    Each application for a permit required by the provisions of this article shall be accompanied by a permit fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00); which fee shall be refunded to the applicant if the permit is not granted. Such permit fee shall not be required of any governmental agency, entity, or instrumentality but all other provisions of this article shall remain applicable to such bodies. 
(Ord. No. 364, § 4, 2-20-67) 
Sec. 22-28. - Issuance of permit. 
    Upon proper application, the public works director shall issue an excavation permit if he is satisfied, from competent evidence presented to him as he may require, that the proposed excavation is consistent with the public health, safety and welfare and that the provisions of this article will be met. 
(Ord. No. 364, § 8, 2-20-67) 
Sec. 22-29. - Appeal from denial of permit. 
    If an application for excavation permit is denied by the public works director, the applicant may within ten (10) days appeal such denial to the city council. The city council shall set a public hearing, which shall be held not later than thirty (30) days after presentation of the appeal to the city council. Following such hearing, the city council may either affirm, overrule, or modify the decision of the public works director and such decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 364, § 9, 2-20-64) 
Sec. 22-30. - Areas where permitted. 
    Borrow pit excavations shall be permitted within the city in only those areas so indicated on the official "Borrow Pit Excavations Map" on file in the office of the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 364 § 8, 2-20-67) 
Sec. 22-31. - Proximity to adjoining property. 
    No excavation shall be made within ten (10) feet of any property line without the express written consent of the owner of the adjacent property. 
(Ord. No. 364, § 5, 2-20-67) 
Sec. 22-32. - Proximity to roadways, easements, etc. 
    Excavations which are conducted adjacent to roadways, easements, drainage systems, water lines, sewer lines, or other structures, shall be conducted at an adequate distance from such facilities, as determined by the public works director, so as not to interfere with or cause damage to such facilities. 
(Ord. No. 364, § 5, 2-20-67) 
Sec. 22-33. - Slope of borrow pits. 
    Borrow pits shall be sloped no steeper than two (2) feet horizontal for each one (1) foot vertical measurement. 
(Ord. No. 364, § 5, 2-20-67) 
Sec. 22-34. - Prohibited on streets, rights-of-way. 
    No borrow pit excavation shall be made upon any dedicated street or highway right-of-way or any planned or proposed street described in the master street plan of the city. 
(Ord. No. 364, § 6, 2-20-67) 
Sec. 22-35. - Fence required. 
    Upon completion of the excavation for which a permit has been granted, but not later than one hundred eighty (180) days after excavation has begun, a substantial fence, at least six (6) feet in height and otherwise being in accordance with specifications promulgated by the public works director shall be erected completely surrounding the borrow pit. Such fence shall be kept in good repair as long as the borrow pit exists, and all gates closed except as necessary for excavations and removal purposes. If any part of a borrow pit is situated within fifty (50) feet of a residence, the fence surrounding such pit shall be so constructed as to prevent small children from gaining access to the borrow pit. 
(Ord. No. 364, § 10, 2-20-67) 
Sec. 22-36. - Material not to be dropped on streets. 
    Excavated material shall not be dropped or placed upon any public street or highway. 
(Ord. No. 364, § 7, 2-20-67) 
Sec. 22-37. - Trucks to use truck routes. 
    Trucks hauling excavated material shall be required, insofar as possible, to use existing truck routes in the city. 
(Ord. No. 364, § 7, 2-20-67) 
Secs. 22-38-22-47. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 86-13, § 1, adopted Feb. 24, 1986, repealed Art. III, sidewalks and driveways, §§ 22-48, 22-49, derived from Ord. No. 291, §§ 1, 2, adopted Apr. 20, 1964. 

Secs. 22-48-22-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OBSTRUCTIONS AT INTERSECTIONS 

Sec. 22-60. - Declared traffic hazard. 
(a)  Any fence, tree, shrub, bush, vine or other plant, vehicle or any other article, existing at or within a distance of twenty-five (25) feet of the intersection of any street in the city, which interferes with the unobstructed vision of approaching vehicles at such intersection or which obstructs the view of any stop sign or other traffic signal in the city, is hereby declared to be a traffic hazard and to endanger the lives of persons approaching such intersection. 
(b)  Any fence, hedge, enclosure, shrub, bush, vine or other plant, vehicle or any other article, existing at or within a distance of ten (10) feet of a property line which borders a street in the city, which interferes with the unobstructed vision of vehicles at the intersection of a street or a private drive onto a street within the city, is hereby declared to be a traffic hazard and to endanger the lives of persons approaching such intersection. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 1, 11-16-64; Ord. No. 84-04, § 1, 1-30-84) 
Sec. 22-61. - Notice to correct hazard-Issuance. 
(a)  Whenever the existence of any condition declared to constitute a traffic hazard by this article shall come to the knowledge of the city marshal, he shall cause a written notice identifying the property on which such fence, tree, shrub, bush, vine or other plant exists, to be issued forthwith to the person owning or having possession or control of same. 
(b)  The notice shall require the remodeling, trimming, removing or otherwise correcting of such traffic hazard within ten (10) days from the service of such notice. Such notice shall also state that in default thereof the city may at once cause the same to be done, pay therefor, charge the cost and expense incurred in having such work done to the owner of such property and fix a lien on such property thereof. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 2, 11-16-64) 
Sec. 22-62. - Same-Service. 
(a)  The city marshal shall cause the notice provided for in section 22-61, to be served by any city policeman be delivering the same to the person to be served by leaving the same at his place of residence, if within the city. If such notice is to be served on a firm or corporation, he shall cause the notice to be served by any city policeman by delivering the same to any officer, agent or other representative authorized by law to accept service of citations. 
(b)  If the person to be served with the notice resides outside the limits of the city, the posting of a letter addressed to such person at his post office address, if known shall be sufficient service of such notice. If such person or his post office address is unknown, or if he cannot be found after a diligent search, service may be made by publishing such notice one time in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(c)  The officer serving the notice or causing publication thereof to be made, shall make due return thereof to the city marshal on a copy of such notice, showing the date and manner of service. 
(Ord. No. 308, §§ 3-5, 11-16-64) 
Sec. 22-63. - Same-Appeal. 
(a)  Right. If any person to whom the notice provided for in this article is issued is of the opinion that the condition declared a traffic hazard does not exist, he may, within ten (10) days after the date of such notice, file his written objections thereto with the city council. If the city council is of a contrary opinion, it shall set a date for hearing thereon. 
(b)  Notice of hearing. If the city council is of the opinion that a traffic hazard exists and is being maintained, it shall set a date for hearing thereon at any time not less than five (5) days from the date of receipt of the written objections thereto and not later than fifteen (15) days from receipt thereof. Notice of such hearing shall be served by personal service, by mail or by publication as provided in this article. 
(c)  Decision. If, upon such hearing, the city council is still of the opinion that such traffic hazard exists and is maintained, it shall direct the director of public works, without further notice to the owner, to proceed at once to cause the abatement of such traffic hazard by remodeling, trimming or removing same, as the city council may direct, and charge the necessary costs and expenses of such work to the owner of the property on which such traffic hazard exists. 
(Ord. No. 308, §§ 7-9, 11-16-64) 
Sec. 22-64. - Action by city to correct. 
    In the event of the failure, refusal or neglect of the person to whom notice prescribed in section 22-61 is given to comply with the requirements of such notice in the manner and within the time provided, the city marshal shall file a written report thereof to the city council showing due service of notice upon such person and describing the property and the condition existing thereon, and the city council shall order the abatement of such traffic hazard by remodeling, trimming, removing or otherwise correcting the same, unless written objections are filed with the city council. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 6, 11-16-64) 
    The work of abatement or correction of a traffic hazard shall either be done under contract to the lowest bidder or performed under the supervision of the director of public works, or his duly authorized representative, or by labor employed by the city, whichever the director of public works, in his opinion, deems most expeditious. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 10, 11-16-64) 
Sec. 22-65. - Filing of lien. 
(a)  When work to correct or abate a traffic hazard by the city has been completed, the director of public works shall cause a statement of the same to be filed in the office of the county clerk. 
(b)  The statement of costs shall show the costs and expense of the work, the date on which it was performed, a brief description of the property sufficient to identify the same and the name of the owner thereof, if known. 
(c)  Such statement of costs, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended in any such work. 
(d)  The amount shown by the statement of costs to have been expended by the city on such property, together with ten (10) per cent interest from the date of such payment, shall be a privileged lien thereon, second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements. 
(e)  For any such expenditures and interest, suit may be instituted and recovery and foreclosure had in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 11, 11-16-64) 
Sec. 22-66. - Maximum height of shrubs, etc. 
    No person shall plant, grow or maintain in any restricted area any plant, hedge, shrub or other growth, except trees, at a height greater than three (3) feet from the street gutter flow line. 
Sec. 22-67. - Maximum clearance of trees. 
    Any trees planted, grown and maintained in any area shall not have branches or foliage extending from the trunk thereof at a height lower than fifteen (15) feet from the street gutter flow line. 
Secs. 22-68-22-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PERMANENT STREET IMPROVEMENTS IN DEVELOPED AREAS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Article V, §§ 22-71-22-73, is derived from Ord. No. 428, §§ 1-3, enacted April 13, 1970. This ordinance did not amend this Code. 

Sec. 22-71. - Definitions. 
(a)  Permanent street improvements and streets shall have the meanings accorded them in Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes, Article 1105b and in Chapter XIV, Section 2 the City Charter. 
(b)  In regards to the surfacing of streets or alleys, the following work shall not be considered as permanent street improvements: 
(1)  The surfacing of less than twenty-five (25) lineal feet of street or alley, regardless of the thickness or type of surfacing material involved. This provision shall be construed so that only "spot" street or alley repairs may be made without expense to the owners of abutting property. It shall not be construed to authorize the use of city funds to construct small scale, permanent street or alley improvements abutting particular parcels or property without expense to the owners of the abutting property. 
(2)  The surfacing of streets, (regardless of the length of the section surfaced) by the laying of unstabilized shell or gravel. 
    All other surfacing work in streets and alleys shall be considered as "permanent street improvements". 
(3)  The surfacing, resurfacing and/or reconstruction of streets that are beyond the point of economical maintenance may be accomplished under the following conditions: Upon recommendation by the city manager, the city council may approve a yearly program for the surfacing, resurfacing and/or reconstruction of streets when such action is more economical than continued maintenance of said streets, and so long as sufficient funds, equipment and personnel are available. 
(c)  Developed area means an area situated within the corporate limits of the city, the plat of which has been on record in the office of the county clerk for at least five (5) years prior to the date upon which the request for permanent street improvements is submitted. 
(Ord. No. 428, § 1, 4-13-70) 
Sec. 22-72. - Statement of policy. 
(a)  The city council (regardless of whether it is acting under the statutory and Charter provisions cited herein or under some other lawful authority) will not authorize the spending or the obligation of the funds to the city to make permanent street improvements in developed areas until the requirements of section 22-73 hereof have been satisfied. 
(b)  The city council will not authorize the spending or the obligation of the funds of the city for the purpose of surfacing the streets of a developed area with oil. Nothing herein shall be construed to the contrary. 
(Ord. No. 428, § 2, 4-13-70) 
Sec. 22-73. - Prerequisites to authorize permanent street improvements in a developed area. 
(A)  A request, signed by at least twenty per cent (20%) of the owners of abutting property, shall be submitted to the city council through the city manager asking that permanent improvements be made on the street. The request shall contain: 
(1)  A designation of the section of the street which will be involved. 
(2)  A brief description of the permanent improvements which are proposed. 
(3)  A statement that the signers of the request have reason to believe that at least seventy-five per cent (75%) or more of the owners of abutting property or sixty per cent (60%) or more of the homestead owners of abutting property, abutting the section will sign the instruments required by subsection (F)(1) hereof. 
(4)  The date upon which the plat of the developed area was placed of record in the office of the county clerk. 
(B)  After studying the request, the city manager shall prepare his recommendations and forward his recommendations and the request to the city council. 
(C)  The city manager, when making his recommendations shall be guided by the following principles: 
(1)  If the city has sufficient funds immediately available to defray the entire cost of the proposed permanent improvements; if the proposed permanent improvements are consonant with the city's currently effective "Capital Planning Report"; if they are presently practicable; and if the area involved is in fact a developed area, the city manager shall recommend that the proposed permanent street improvements be authorized. 
(2)  In case the proposed permanent street improvements do not fulfill the requirements of subsection (C)(1), the city manager shall recommend (if it is possible so to do) the authorization of alternate permanent street improvements which fulfill the requirements of said subsection. 
(3)  In case the proposed permanent street improvements do not fulfill the requirements of subsection (C)(1), and in case an alternate improvement cannot be recommended, the city manager shall recommend that the request be rejected. 
(D)  If the city manager recommends that the permanent street improvements be made, his recommendations shall contain: 
(1)  Plans and specifications for said improvements. 
(2)  Estimate of the total cost of said improvements: 
(3)  A breakdown of the total cost to show what portion thereof shall be borne by the city and what portion shall be borne by the owners of abutting property. 
(4)  A list of all the abutting property which will be involved in making said improvement. The list will show: 
(a)  The legal description of each unit of property. 
(b)  The names of persons owning the property involved, indicating in every instance whether the property is or is not claimed by the owner as a homestead. 
(c)  The number of front feet which abut the street in each unit of property. 
(d)  The total cost which must be borne by each property owner. 
(5)  The priority to be assigned to making the improvements. 
(a)  It is the intent of this provision that the city manager shall maintain as a public record a "Priority List of Street Improvements." This list shall show the street improvement projects authorized by the city council, and the order in which the street improvement projects are to be accomplished. 
(b)  This rule shall be used both by the city manager and the city council in establishing the priority for accomplishing street improvement projects: 
(1)  Economical employment of the city's forces and equipment shall be determinative. 
(2)  When the factor of economy is equal, the date upon which the property owners sponsoring a have filed their request shall be determinative-priority being given the request which was filed first. 
(E)  This rule shall be used both by the city manager and the city commission in apportioning the cost of permanent street improvements: 
(1)  The city shall bear the expense of constructing: 
(a)  Storm sewers or drainage ditches. 
(b)  Base and/or wearing surface of the street at intersections. 
(c)  Curb and gutter "returns". 
(2)  The owner of abutting property shall bear the expense of constructing: 
(a)  Curb and gutter. 
(b)  Base and/or wearing surface of the street out to the center line of the street. 
(F)  The city council, after receiving the recommendations of the city manager, and acting in accordance with the principles set out in subsection (C) hereof, shall determine whether the request (or some modification thereof) shall be accepted or rejected. In the event a request is accepted, the council shall allocate from the city's unencumbered and immediately available funds a sum of money equal to the city manager's estimate of the total cost of said improvements. This allocation shall not have the effect of an "appropriation"; and it shall be effective only for a period of sixty (60) days. If the requirements provided hereafter in this subsection have been met on or before the end of said period, the council shall authorize the making of the requested improvements. If said requirements have not been met by the end of said period, the allocation shall expire; provided that the allocation, at the option of the council, may be extended for an additional period of thirty (30) days. 
(1)  Seventy-five (75) per cent, or more, of the owners of abutting property or sixty (60) per cent, or more, of the homestead owners of abutting property, using the forms prescribed herein, have properly executed, acknowledged, and delivered to the city three (3) instruments concerning their property, to-wit: street improvement contract, street improvement promissory note, and improvement deed of trust, (blank copies of these three instruments which are to be used are attached hereto and made a part hereof). 
(a)  The principal sum set forth in said three instruments shall be amortized as follows: If the principal sum is less than five hundred dollars ($500.00)-a minimum monthly payment (including payment to interest and principal) of ten dollars ($10.00) per month shall be made; if the principal sum is five hundred dollars ($500.00) or more-the principal sum and interest thereon shall be paid off in five (5) years. The monthly note payments set forth in said three instruments shall be established accordingly. 
(b)  It is hereby established as a public policy that should the homestead owners invoke the provisions of chapter XIX, section 14 of said Charter, the city council has determined that the proper execution and acknowledgment of these three instruments by seventy-five (75) per cent or more of the owners involved is the method which shall be used to secure the payment for said improvements. 
(2)  The city council (if such procedure is required by law) has given the notice, conducted the hearing, and adopted the ordinance which authorized construction of the permanent street improvements, and assesses the owners of abutting property according to the front foot plan. It is expressly provided that procedures of the nature described in this subsection shall not be started unless and until the provisions of subsection (F)(1) have been satisfied. It is further provided, however, that the city council is hereby authorized to construct permanent street improvements in a developed area without first making assessments if all the owners of the abutting property sign the instruments described in subsection (F)(1). 
(G)  Work on the permanent street improvements in a developed area may not be started until: 
(1)  All the applicable foregoing requirements have been met. 
(2)  An appropriate ordinance has been adopted which spells out that such requirements have been met, and which authorizes the construction of permanent street improvements in a developed area; and which establishes the priority assigned to accomplishing the street improvement. 
(Ord. No. 428, § 3, 4-13-70) 
ARTICLE VI. - MANAGEMENT OF STREET RIGHTS-OF-WAY 

Sec. 22-74. - Definitions. 
    Applicant means any user or potential user who desires to own, operate, maintain, and/or install facilities in city rights-of-way. 
    Facility or facilities means any utility infrastructure including but not limited to pipes, wires, conduits, utility poles, and related appurtenances, situated within city rights-of-way which are owned, operated, maintained, and/or installed by users other than the city. 
    Person means a designated representative of a user. 
    Street, public way, public right-of-way, public rights-of-way, rights-of-way or right-of-way means the surface of, and the space above and below a public street, road, highway, freeway, land, path, public way or place, alley, court, boulevard, parkway, drive, or other easement now or hereafter held by or under the control of the city, to which the city holds the property rights in regard to the use for utilities. 
    User means any business, firm, corporation, entity, owner, and/or operator, other than the city, which owns, operates, maintains, and/or installs facilities within city right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 3-11-02) 
Sec. 22-75. - Criminal penalties. 
(a)  Any violation or failure to abide by, and comply with, any provision or requirement of this article shall be a violation, and shall be punishable as a class "C" misdemeanor, subject to a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) per occurrence. 
(b)  Each day upon which there exists a violation of this article, or a failure to abide by, or comply with, any provision or requirement of this article, shall constitute a separate occurrence, and shall subject the offender to separate criminal penalties. 
(c)  Prosecution pursuant to this article is in addition to and does not supplant other remedies. 
(Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 3-11-02) 
Sec. 22-76. - Civil penalties. 
(a)  Civil penalties may be imposed for the violation of any provision of this article, as follows: 
(1)  Up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation, and each day of a continuing violation may be considered a new violation; and/or 
(2)  If applicable, default and revocation of any or all permits granted to allow work in the rights-of-way, subject to the procedural guidelines noted in this article and any agreement which applies to the right-of-way user, and further subject to any limitations imposed by federal or state law. 
(b)  In imposing the penalties and the amount, the city may weigh all applicable factors, such as damages caused by the violation, reasons for the violation, the seriousness of the violation, and all other factors. 
(c)  Monetary civil penalties may be imposed in the manner prescribed by either local or state law. 
(d)  In addition, the city council may order specific performance of any actions required by this article or required by a franchise, license or permit, including the permit authorizing work to be performed in the right-of-way, or any other agreement or authorization. 
(Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 3-11-02) 
Sec. 22-77. - Right-of-way construction. 
(a)  No user shall commence or continue with the construction, installation or maintenance of facilities within the right-of-way in the city except as provided by the ordinances of the city and the directives of the public works department. 
(b)  No user shall be permitted to cut or excavate a street when it is otherwise possible to perform the construction or installation without disturbing the roadway surface. The director of public works, or his/her designee, shall determine whether to allow excavation based upon the justification submitted by the person desiring to perform such work. 
(Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 3-11-02) 
Sec. 22-78. - Registration and construction permits. 
(a)  In order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, all users of the right-of-way will register with the city. Registration and permits will be issued in the name of the owner of the facilities. Registration must be renewed by January 15th of every year. Should, however, a user of right-of-way have a current and valid franchise agreement with the city, registration shall not be required as long as the franchise agreement remains in effect. When any information provided for the registration changes, the user will inform the city no more than thirty (30) working days after the date the change is made. 
Registration shall include: 
(1)  The name of the owner of the facilities located within the right-of-way; 
(2)  The name of the user of the right-of-way; 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of people who will be contact person(s) for the user; 
(4)  The name(s) and telephone number(s) of an emergency contact who shall be available twenty-four (24) hours a day; 
(5)  Proof of insurance and bonds to include: 
a.  An applicant must provide proof of liability insurance in the amount of six million dollars ($6,000,000.00); one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) primary, plus five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) umbrella. 
b.  The coverage must be on an occurrence basis and must include coverage for personal injury, contractual liability, premises liability, medical damages, underground, explosion and collapse hazards. 
c.  Each policy must include a cancellation provision in which the insurance company is required to notify the city in writing not fewer than thirty (30) working days before canceling, failing to renew, or reducing policy limits. 
d.  The applicant shall file the required original certificate of insurance. The certificate shall state the policy number; name of the insurance company; name and address of the agent or authorized representative of the insurance company; name, address and telephone number of insured; policy expiration date; and specific coverage amounts. 
e.  The city will accept letters and/or certificates of self-insurance which provide the same coverage as required herein. The city shall be notified in writing not fewer than thirty (30) working days prior to any modification of the terms and/or conditions stipulated in the letter and/or certificate. 
(b)  Construction permits. 
(1)  Unless waived by the director of public works, or his/her designee, no person shall perform any construction or installation of facilities in the right-of-way without first obtaining a construction permit, except as provided herein. The permit will be in the name of the person and/or entity which will own the facilities to be constructed. The permit application must be completed and signed by a representative of the owner of the facilities to be constructed. 
Emergency responses related to existing facilities may be undertaken without first obtaining a permit; however, the city shall be contacted by telephone, at a number furnished by the city, and the public works department shall be notified in writing within three (3) business days of any construction related to an emergency response; including a reasonably detailed description of the work performed in the right of way and an updated map of any facilities that were moved. This requirement shall be waived in the event of an on-going, large scale emergency situation as a result of any man-made or natural occurrence which alters or interrupts the normal use of the user's service to its customers. 
(2)  The permit shall state to whom it is issued, the location of work, the location of facilities, dates and times that work is to take place and any other conditions set out by the director of public works or his/her designee. 
(3)  The person (applicant) requesting a permit will provide the director of public works or his/her designee with documentation in the format specified by the city describing: 
a.  The proposed, approximate location and route of all facilities to be constructed, repaired, moved or installed and the applicant's plan for right-of-way construction; and the estimated construction time. 
b.  Engineering plans which will be on a scale of one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet unless otherwise approved by the director of public works. 
c.  Detail of the location of all right-of-way and utility easements which applicant plans to use. 
d.  Detail of all existing city utilities and, to the extent known, other facilities in the right-of-way in relationship to applicant's proposed route. 
e.  Detail of what applicant proposes to install, such as pipe size, number of interducts, valves, etc. 
f.  Detail of plans to remove and replace asphalt and/or concrete in the street and/or the right-of-way in accordance with the design improvement standards of the city. 
g.  Drawings of any bores, trenches, handholes, manholes, switch gear, transformers, pedestals, etc. including depth. 
h.  Handhole and/or manhole typical of type of manholes and/or handholes applicant plans to use or access. 
i.  Complete legend of drawings submitted by applicant. 
j.  Two (2) sets of engineering plans must be submitted with permit application. 
k.  The name, address and phone numbers of the contractor or subcontractor who will perform the actual construction, including the name and telephone number of an individual with the contractor who will be available at all times during construction. 
l.  The construction and installation methods to be employed for the protection of existing structures, fixtures, and facilities within or adjacent to the right-of-way, and the dates and times work will occur, all of which (methods, dates, times, etc.) are subject to approval of the director of public works or his/her designee. 
m.  Proof of insurance, bond or other required financial information is current and on file. 
(4)  All construction and installation in the right-of-way shall be in accordance with the permit for the facilities. The director of public works or his/her designee shall be provided access to the work and to such further information as he or she may reasonably require to ensure compliance with the permit. 
(5)  A copy of the construction permit and approved engineering plans shall be maintained at the construction site and made available for inspection by the director of public works or his/her designee at all times when construction or installation work is occurring. 
(6)  All authorized construction or installation work must be completed in the time specified in the construction permit. If the work cannot be completed in the specified time period, the applicant may request an extension in writing from the director of public works, or his/her designee. The work that was authorized under the permit may continue while the request for an extension is pending. 
(7)  A copy of any permit or approval issued by federal or state authorities for work in federal or state right-of-way located in the city. 
(8)  A request for a permit must be submitted at least three (3) working days before the commencement of work proposed in the request for review and approval, unless waived by the director of public works or his/her designee. 
(9)  Requests for permits will be approved or disapproved by the director of public works or his/her designee within a reasonable time of receiving all the necessary information. The director of public works or his/her designee will use his/her best efforts to approve or disapprove a request for a construction permit as soon as possible. 
(10)  The director of public works may request a preconstruction meeting with the applicant and their construction contractor. 
(11)  Valid permits are required for all construction whether new, replacement, or upgrading of the company's network facilities in the right-of-way, either aerial or underground. 
(12)  The utility shall be required to enter into a hold harmless agreement as a condition of the permit. Telecommunications providers shall comply with the provisions of section 283.057, Texas Local Government Code, in meeting this requirement. 
(13)  Restoration of right-of-way must be made to a condition which puts the right-of-way back in substantially the same condition as prior to the commencement of the work. Such restoration shall be guaranteed through one (1) full year after the completion of construction. 
(Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 3-11-02) 
Sec. 22-79. - Construction standards. 
(a)  The department of public works, or his/her designee, shall be notified twenty-four (24) hours in advance that construction is ready to proceed by either the right-of-way user, their contractor, or representative. 
(b)  All construction shall be in conformance with all city codes and applicable local, state and federal laws. 
(c)  Advance warning signs, markers, cones and barricades must be in place before work begins in accordance with the current edition of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(d)  Applicant may be required to show proof of TNRCC approved plans relating to storm water and erosion when applicable or a letter stating that they are not required to obtain such plans. 
(e)  Lane closures on major thoroughfares will be limited to between 8:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. unless the director of public works, or his/her designee, grants prior approval. 
(f)  Without affecting applicant's authority to pursue liability against its contractors, applicants are responsible for the workmanship and any damages by a contractors or subcontractors. A responsible representative of the applicant will be available to the public works department at all times during construction. 
(g)  Applicant or contractor or subcontractor will notify the public works department immediately of any damage to other utilities, either city or privately owned. 
(h)  Installed facilities must not interfere with city utilities, in particular gravity dependent facilities. 
(i)  New non-municipal, non-electric utilities must be installed at a minimum of two (2) feet depth, unless a lesser depth is approved by the director of public works, or his/her designee. New electric utilities must be installed at a minimum of three (3) feet depth, unless a lesser depth is approved by the director of public works, or his/her designee. Minimum depth requirements do not apply, however, to single, non-electric service drops. 
(j)  All directional boring shall have the locator place bore marks and depths while bore is in progress. Locator shall place mark at each stem with paint dot and depth at least every other stem. 
(k)  Working hours in the rights-of-way are 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. Work that needs to be performed after 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday or on Saturday must be approved by the director of public works or his/her designee in advance. Directional boring is permitted only Monday through Friday 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. No work in the right-of-way shall be performed, except for emergencies, on Sunday or city holidays. 
(l)  Contractors working for applicant are responsible for obtaining line locates from all affected utilities prior to any excavation. 
(m)  Applicant will be responsible for verifying the location, both horizontally and vertically of all affected facilities whether by pot holing or hand digging prior to any excavation or boring with the exception of work involving lane closures. 
(n)  Placement of all manholes and/or hand holes must be approved in advance by the director of public works, or his/her designee. 
(o)  No construction or installation work will be initiated unless a construction permit has been obtained from the city. 
(Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 3-11-02) 
Sec. 22-80. - Plans of record plans. 
(a)  Right-of-way users must provide the director of public works or his/her designee with plans of record (also called "as-built" plans) within ten (10) working days of completion of facilities in the right-of-way. Users who have facilities in the right-of-way existing as of the date of this article, and who have not provided "plans of record" shall do so not later than one hundred twenty (120) working days after the passage of this article when available. The plans shall be provided to the city in the format specified by the director of public works or his/her designee and with as much detail and accuracy as required thereby. All the criteria specified for plans submitted for the initial permit will be required for the "plans of record". Submittal of "plans of record" shall be in digital formatting as well as written or in any other format requested by the city. 
(b)  If the release of the location of any utilities or of plans of record submitted under this section would jeopardize public safety, the information shall be considered confidential. In addition, if plans of record submitted under this section include information expressly designated by the right-of-way user as a trade secret or other confidential information protected from disclosure by state law, the city may not disclose that information to the public without the consent of the right-of-way user, unless otherwise compelled by an opinion of the attorney general pursuant to the Texas Public Information Act, as amended, or by a court having jurisdiction of the matter pursuant to applicable law. This subsection may not be construed to authorize a right-of-way user to designate all matters in its plans of record as confidential or as trade secrets. 
(Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 3-11-02) 
Sec. 22-81. - Conformance with public improvements. 
    Whenever by reasons of widening or straightening of streets, water or sewer line projects, or any other public works projects (e.g. install or improve storm drains, water lines, sewer lines, etc.), it shall be deemed necessary by the city council to remove, alter, change, adapt, or conform the underground or overhead facilities of a right-of-way user, such alterations shall be made by the owner of the facilities at its expense within ninety (90) working days from receipt of notice to make the alternations, unless a different schedule has been approved by the director of public works or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 3-11-02) 
Sec. 22-82. - Improperly installed facilities. 
(a)  Any person doing work in the city right-of-way shall properly install, repair, upgrade and maintain city facilities as determined by the director of public works, or his/her designee. In the event that such work is not acceptable to the director of public works, or his/her designee, such person shall be notified in writing by the director of public works, or his/her designee, and be granted ten (10) working days to correct the unsatisfactory work. Should, however, the unacceptable work be deemed an immediate threat to health and safety by the director of public works, or his/her designee, such person shall be notified verbally by the director of public works, or his/her designee, for immediate corrective action by such person. 
(b)  Facilities shall be considered to be improperly installed, repaired, upgraded or maintained if: 
(1)  The installation, repairs, upgrade or maintenance endangers people or property; 
(2)  The facilities do not meet applicable city codes; 
(3)  The facilities are not capable of being located using standard practices; 
(4)  The facilities are not located in the proper place in accordance with the directions provided by the public works department; or 
(5)  The facilities are placed in an area that interferes with city-owned facilities, including but not limited to water or sewer lines or streets. Non-city-owned facilities shall be considered to interfere with city-owned facilities if the non-city-owned facility is within three (3) feet horizontally of the city-owned facility, or the distance required by the permit, whichever is greater. Nothing in this section shall diminish the authority of the director of public works to direct the specific placement of specific lines. 
(Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 3-11-02) 
Sec. 22-83. - Type of facilities. 
(a)  The director of public works, or his/her designee, shall approve the location of underground facilities. 
(b)  When poles are used, location and depth shall be subject to the approval of the director of public works, or his/her designee, as it pertains to possible conflicts with the city's infrastructure. 
(Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 3-11-02) 
Sec. 22-84. - Restoration of property. 
(a)  Users of the right-of-way shall reasonably restore property affected by the construction of facilities to a condition that is equal to or better than the condition of the property prior to the performance of the work. 
(b)  Restoration must be to the reasonable satisfaction of the director of public works, or his/her designee, and shall not be considered complete until approved by the director of public works, or his/her designee. The restoration shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Installation of all manholes and handholes, as required; 
(2)  Backfilling all bore pits, potholes, trenches or any other holes. All such excavations shall be filled in daily, unless other safety requirements are approved by the director of public works, or his/her designee; 
(3)  Leveling of all trenches and backhoe lines; 
(4)  Restoration of excavation site to city specifications including compacting, grading, and appropriate fill material; 
(5)  All locate flags shall be removed during the clean up process by the applicant or his/her contractor at the completion of the work; 
(6)  Restoration must be made in a timely manner as specified by approved schedules and to the satisfaction of the director of public works or his/her designee. If restoration is not satisfactory and/or performed in a timely manner, all work in progress, including all work previously permitted but not completed, will be immediately halted and additional permits shall not be approved until all restoration is complete. 
(Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 3-11-02) 
Sec. 22-85. - Revocation or denial of permit. 
    If any provisions of this article is not followed, a permit may be revoked by the director of public works, or his/her designee. If a person has not followed the terms and conditions of this article in work done pursuant to a prior permit, new permits may be denied or additional terms required. 
(Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 3-11-02) 
Chapter 23 - TAXATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Taxation, Art. VIII; persons indebted to city shall not hold office or employment, Art. XVIII, § 16. 
State Law reference- Taxation generally, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. Title 122, Vol. 20; Title 122A, Vol. 20A. 

Sec. 23-1. - Adoption of state law relative to payment of taxes and penalties. 
    The provisions of state law applicable to municipalities shall apply to and govern the payment of taxes due and owing to the city and penalties and interest in connection therewith, to the same extent as if such provisions have been, by the terms thereof, made applicable to city taxes by ordinances of the city. 
Secs. 23-2-23-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 2, Ord. No. 87-15, adopted Mar. 9, 1987, repealed §§ 23-2-23-4 and subsection (b)(3) of § 23-5. Sections 23-2-23-4, relative to personal and real property tax liens and occupation taxes, contained no historical notation and are presumed adopted with the adoption of this Code. 
Sec. 23-5. - Hotel occupancy tax. 
(a)  Definition of terms. The following words, terms and phrases are, for the purpose of this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, defined as follows: 
(1)  Hotel shall mean any building or buildings in which the public may, for a consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations. The term shall include hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses or courts, lodging houses, inns, rooming houses or other buildings where rooms are furnished for a consideration, but "hotel" shall not be defined so as to include hospitals, sanitariums or nursing homes. 
(2)  Consideration shall mean the cost of the room in such hotel only if the room is ordinarily used for sleeping, and shall not include the cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the occupant of such room not related to the cleaning and readying of such room for occupancy. 
(3)  Occupancy shall mean the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room in a hotel if the room is one ordinarily used for sleeping and if the occupant's use, possession or right to use or possession extends for a period of less than thirty (30) days. 
(4)  Occupant shall mean anyone who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has a right to use or possess, any room in a hotel if the room is ordinarily used for sleeping. 
(5)  Person shall mean any individual, company, corporation, or association owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel. 
(6)  Tax assessor-collector shall mean the tax assessor-collector of the City of Groves. 
(7)  Quarterly period shall mean the regular calendar quarters of the year, the first quarter being composed of the months of January, February and March, the second quarter being the months of April, May and June, the third quarter being the months of July, August and September, and the fourth quarter being the months of October, November and December. 
(8)  Permanent resident shall mean any occupant who has or shall have the right to occupancy of any room or room or sleeping space or facility in a hotel for at least thirty (30) consecutive days during the current calendar year or preceding year. 
(b)  Levy of tax; rate. 
(1)  There is hereby levied a tax upon the cost of occupancy of any sleeping room furnished by any hotel, where the cost of occupancy is at the rate of two dollars ($2.00) or more per day. Such tax is to be equal to seven (7) per cent of the consideration paid by the occupant of the sleeping room to the hotel, in accordance with V.T.C.A., Tax Code Section 351.001 et seq. 
(2)  No tax shall be imposed hereunder upon a permanent resident. 
(3)  Reserved. 
(4)  All revenue derived from the occupancy tax imposed in paragraph (1) hereof will only be used for the following: 
(i)  The acquisition of sites for and the construction, improvement, enlarging, equipping, repairing, operation and maintenance of convention center facilities, including, but not limited to, civic center convention buildings, auditoriums, coliseums and parking areas or facilities for the parking or storage of motor vehicles or other conveyances located at or in the immediate vicinity of convention center facilities. 
(ii)  The furnishing of facilities, personnel and materials for the registration of convention delegates or registrants. 
(iii)  For advertising of general promotional and tourist advertising of the City of Groves and its vicinity, and conducting a solicitation and operating program to attract conventions and visitors either by the City of Groves or through contracts with persons or organizations selected by the City of Groves. 
(iv)  A portion of the occupancy tax authorized hereby may be pledged to the payment of bonds which the city may issue pursuant to the provisions of Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1269j-4.1 if such bonds are issued solely for one or more of the purposes set forth herein; provided that at least one-half of one per cent (.5%) of the occupancy tax collected hereunder shall be reserved; however, all of such occupancy tax may be reserved, for the purpose of advertising and conducting solicitation programs to acquaint potential users with public meeting and convention facilities, and for promotion of tourism and advertising of the city and its vicinity either by the city or through contract with persons or organizations selected by the city. 
(c)  Collection. Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel shall collect the tax imposed in subsection (b) hereof for the City of Groves. 
(d)  Reports. On the last day of the month following each quarterly period, every person required in subsection (c) hereof to collect the tax imposed herein shall file a report with the tax assessor-collector showing the consideration paid for all room occupancies in the preceding quarter, the amount of the tax collection on such occupancies, and any other information as the tax assessor-collector may reasonably require. Such person shall pay the amount of tax collected from occupants during the period of the report at the time of filing the report. 
(e)  Rules and regulations. The tax assessor-collector shall have the power to make such rules and regulations as are necessary to effectively collect the tax levied herein, and shall upon reasonable notice have access to books and records necessary to enable him to determine the correctness of any report filed as required by this section. 
(f)  Penalty. If any person shall fail to collect the tax imposed herein, or shall fail to file a report as required herein, or shall fail to pay to the tax assessor-collector the tax as imposed herein when said report for payment is due, or shall file a false report, then such person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). In addition, such person who fails to remit the tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall forfeit five (5) per cent of the amount due as a penalty, and after the first thirty (30) days shall forfeit an additional five (5) per cent of such tax. Provided, however, that the penalty shall never be less than one dollar ($1.00). Delinquent taxes shall draw interest at the rate of six (6) per cent per annum beginning sixty (60) days from the date due on the tax imposed by this section. 
(Ord. No. 495, § 1, 11-20-72; Ord. No. 638, § 1, 10-31-77; Ord. No. 87-15, §§ 1, 2, 3-9-87; Ord. No. 89-05, § 1, 6-26-89) 
Sec. 23-6. - Exemption to persons sixty-five or over. 
(a)  From and after January 1, 1980, twelve thousand dollars ($12,000.00) of the assessed value of residence homesteads as defined by law, of persons who have attained the age of sixty-five (65) years on or before January first of the year for which the exemption is claimed shall be exempt from city ad valorem taxes; provided, however, that where the ad valorem tax has heretofore been pledged for the payment of any debt, the taxing officers of the city shall have authority to continue to levy and collect the tax against the homestead property at the same rate as the tax so pledged until the debt is discharged, if the cessation of the levy would impair the obligation of the contract by which the debt was created. 
(b)  In order to secure the benefit of the exemption, the owner shall, between January first and April thirtieth, inclusive, of each year, file with the city tax assessor and collector, on form furnished by the tax assessor-collector, a sworn inventory of such property owned on January first of each year for which the exemption is claimed, and shall initially furnish proof of age by certified copy of his or her birth certificate or, if such person does not have a certificate of birth, then by the affidavit of two (2) persons at least five (5) years older than the exemption claimant with actual knowledge of the date and place of birth and by the original or certified copy of any two, of the following documents, which must be at least five (5) years old, to-wit: 
(1)  Social Security record, 
(2)  Federal census record, 
(3)  State census record, 
(4)  Own child's birth certificate, 
(5)  Original birth notice in newspaper, 
(6)  School record, 
(7)  Insurance policy, 
(8)  Lodge record, 
(9)  Military record, 
(10)  Passport, 
(11)  Marriage record, 
(12)  Hospital record, 
(13)  Voter's registration record, 
(14)  Church baptismal record, 
(15)  Employment record, and 
(16) Physician's  record. 
(Ord. No. 498, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-72; Ord. No. 500, § 1, 2-26-73; Ord. No. 555, § 1, 11-1-8-74; Ord. No. 597, 1, 8-9-76; Ord. No. 653A, § 1, 8-7-78; Ord. No. 705, 1, 6-23-80) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 498 did not expressly amend the Code; hence codification as 123-6 was at the editor's discretion. 
Sec. 23-7. - Exemption for disabled persons. 
(a)  From and after January first, 1980, twelve thousand dollars ($12,000.00) of the assessed value of residence homesteads as defined by law of persons who are under a disability for purposes of payment of disability insurance benefits under Federal Old Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance, or its successor, shall be exempt from all ad valorem taxes thereafter levied by the city; provided, however, that where the ad valorem tax has heretofore been pledged for the payment of any debt, the taxing officers of the city shall have authority to continue to levy and collect the tax against the homestead property at the same rate as the tax so pledged until the debt is discharged, if the cessation of the levy would impair the obligation of the contract by which the debt was created. An eligible disabled person who is sixty-five (65) years of age or older may not receive this exemption and the twelve thousand dollars ($12,000.00) exemption already provided for age, in the same year, but may choose either. 
(b)  In order to secure the benefit of the exemption, the owner shall, between January first and April first of each year, file with the city tax assessor-collector written evidence of eligibility for disability insurance benefits from the Social Security Administration. 
(Ord. No. 680, § 1, 9-17-79; Ord. No. 706, § 1, 6-23-80) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 680, § 1, adopted Sept. 17, 1979, being nonamendatory of the Code has been codified as §§ 23-7. at the discretion of the editors. 
Sec. 23-8. - Ad valorem tax on leased motor vehicles. 
(a)  Pursuant to and in accordance with section 11.252(f) of the Texas Tax Code, the city council hereby declares its intent to assess a tax on leased motor vehicles that are not used for commercial purposes. 
(b)  The tax rate for such leased motor vehicles shall be in an amount set by city council from year to year as part of the budget and taxing process, or as may otherwise be approved from time to time in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. No. 01-17, § 1, 12-17-01) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 01-17, § 1, adopted Dec. 17, 2001, did not specifically amend the Code. Hence, its inclusion herein as section 23-8 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Chapter 24 - TAXICABS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city to license and regulate persons owning, operating or controlling vehicles used for carrying passengers for hire, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1175(21). 

Sec. 24-1. - City officers, employees not to accept favors from owners or drivers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any officer or employee of the city to accept directly or indirectly any gifts, discounts or gratuities from any holder of a taxicab franchise or any taxicab driver or from any person engaged in the repair of taxicabs. 
Sec. 24-2. - Nonbusiness use of vehicle restricted. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or driver of any taxicab to use such vehicle for any purpose other than the transporting of passengers for hire, running errands or delivering of packages customarily in the taxicab business. 
(b)  In the event the owner of any vehicle licensed as a taxicab during off duty hours needs the use of such vehicle in his personal affairs, a conspicuous sign with the words "Out of Service" shall be displayed in a prominent place on the taxicab. 
Sec. 24-3. - Property left in vehicle; disposition. 
    All drivers of taxicabs shall promptly deliver to the police department of the city or to their employers all property left in such vehicles by passengers. If a driver delivers such articles to his employer, the latter shall deliver them to the police department. When articles left in taxicabs have been delivered to the office of the city marshal, he shall make an entry of the fact in a book provided for that purpose and shall keep all such articles until claimed by the owner, as the city council may authorize. 
Sec. 24-4. - Maximum seating. 
    It shall be unlawful to carry more than five (5) passengers in any taxicab, and in no event shall more than two (2) passengers ride in the front seat with the driver. 
Sec. 24-5. - Receipt, discharge of passengers. 
    No driver of a taxicab shall receive or discharge passengers in the roadway of any street, but shall drive to the right-hand sidewalk, as nearly as possible, or, in the absence of a sidewalk, to the extreme right-hand side of the road, and there receive or discharge passengers. 
Sec. 24-6. - Use of streets for taxicab stand purposes. 
    It shall be unlawful for any taxicab owner or operator to use the public streets or any part thereof as a taxi stand. 
Sec. 24-7. - Parking of taxicabs generally. 
    All taxicabs shall be subject to the sections of this Code, ordinances of the city and state laws concerning parking of motor vehicles. 
Cross reference- Parking regulations, § 25-164 et seq. 
Sec. 24-8. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 1, Ord. No. 87-16, adopted Mar. 9, 1987, repealed §§ 24-8, 24-13 and 24-14, restricting operation of taxicabs on behalf of prostitutes or unlawful establishments, criminals and persons other than for hire, respectively, which sections contained no historical notation and are presumed adopted with the adoption of this Code. 
Sec. 24-9. - Alcoholic beverages-Transportation prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to transport alcoholic beverages, not owned and in the exclusive possession and control of a fare paying passenger, in the taxicab or for any taxicab driver to have on his person any alcoholic beverage while driving and operating a taxicab in service. 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 4. 
Sec. 24-10. - Same-Consumption in vehicle. 
    It shall be unlawful for any driver or passenger of any taxicab to drink alcoholic beverages of any kind while inside the taxicab. 
Sec. 24-11. - Same-Sale. 
    No driver of a taxicab or owner of a taxicab shall engage in selling intoxicating liquors or soliciting business for any person selling intoxicating liquors. 
Sec. 24-12. - Cruising prohibited. 
    The practice of cruising the streets of the city is hereby prohibited. 
Secs. 24-13, - 24-14. Reserved. 
Note- See the editor's note to § 24-8. 
Sec. 24-15. - State chauffeurs license prerequisite to issuance. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a taxicab within the city unless he is a duly licensed chauffeur under the laws of the state. 
Chapter 241/2 - TOXIC MATERIALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Fire protection and prevention, Ch. 10; flood damage prevention, Ch. 101/2; food and food establishments, Ch. 11; garbage and trash, Ch. 12; health and sanitation, Ch. 13; junk and junk dealers, Ch. 14; oil and gas wells, Ch. 17; police, Ch. 20; traffic, Ch. 25; sewers generally, § 27-44 et seq.; discharge of industrial waste, § 27-50 et seq.; buildings, Ch. 28; plumbing code, Ch. 31; zoning, App. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 241/2-1-241/2-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MANUFACTURE, STORAGE, HANDLING AND DISPOSAL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 83-24, §§ 1-13, adopted Dec. 5, 1983, amended the Code by the addition of the provisions herein set out; designation as Art. II, Divs. 1, 2, §§ 241/2-21-241/2-28, 241/2-41-241/245, was at the discretion of the editor. Penalty provisions, duplicative of § 1-5 of this Code, set out in § 14 of said ordinance have been left uncodified. For a complete account of the disposition of individual sections of said ordinance, see the history note following each Code section, and the Code Comparative Table at the back of this volume. 
Cross reference- General penalty for violation of Code, § 1-5. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 241/2-21. - Applicability. 
    The manufacturing, storage, handling and disposal of toxic materials within the city shall be, and is hereby, controlled by the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 83-24, § 1, 12-5-83) 
Sec. 241/2-22. - Definition. 
    Toxic materials, as referred to in this article are obnoxious, toxic or poisonous solids, liquids and gasses. 
(Ord. No. 83-24, § 2, 12-5-83) 
Cross reference- Rules of construction, definitions generally, § 1-3. 
Sec. 241/2-23. - Exceptions from article. 
    Retail sales of containers of household chemicals normally sold in retail stores or petroleum products normally sold in service stations or other retail establishments are excepted from this article. 
(Ord. No. 83-24, § 3, 12-5-83) 
Sec. 241/2-24. - Proximity to adjoining property. 
    No toxic material operation shall be conducted within two hundred (200) feet of any adjoining property line without the express written consent of the owner of said adjoining property. 
(Ord. No. 83-24, § 9, 12-5-83) 
Sec. 241/2-25. - Proximity to roadways, easements, drainage systems, water lines or sewer lines. 
    Toxic material operations conducted adjacent to roadways, easements, drainage systems, water lines or sewer lines shall be conducted at an adequate distance from such facilities, as determined by the building official, so as not to interfere with or cause damage to such facilities. 
(Ord. No. 83-24, § 10, 12-5-83) 
Sec. 241/2-26. - Fence required. 
    The tract of land upon which the toxic material operations are conducted must be fenced with a substantial industrial grade fence at least six (6) feet in height. Such fence shall be kept in good repair. All gates shall be closed except as is necessary for ingress and egress. 
(Ord. No. 83-24, § 11, 12-5-83) 
Cross reference- Screening walls and fences, Ch. 33. 
Sec. 241/2-27. - Trucks to use truck routes. 
    Trucks transporting toxic materials shall be required to use existing truck routes in the city. 
(Ord. No. 83-24, § 12, 12-5-83) 
Cross reference- Truck routes, § 25-134 
Sec. 241/2-28. - Nuisance. 
    The handling of toxic waste without complying with all of the provisions of this article is hereby declared to be a nuisance and may be summarily abated by the police department of the city. This remedy is in addition to the penal provision provided in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 83-24, § 13, 12-5-83) 
Cross reference- General penalty for violation of Code, § 1-5. 
Sec. 241/2-29. - Transports responsible for discharge, leak, etc. of hazardous materials. 
(a)  The Code of Federal Regulations Title 49, Parts 100 to 177, revised as of October 1, 1993, is annexed hereto and incorporated herein by reference. 
(b)  Hazardous substances will be defined for the purposes of this section as any substance that meets at least one (1) of the following criteria: 
(1)  Any petroleum product or by-product. 
(2)  Any mixture or solution containing material identified by the CFR 49, 172.101 as materials in a reportable quantity. 
(c)  The owner and/or carrier of any container, package, tank or vessel or the contents therein shall be responsible for all costs, to include standby costs, incurred by the city for the cleanup and restoration of any area within the jurisdiction of the city resulting from contamination by any hazardous substance described in subsection (b) hereof. 
(d)  If there is no actual discharge, leak, release or spill of a hazardous substance but rather the imminent potential for a discharge, leak, release or spill, as determined in the reasonable judgment of the chief of the Groves fire department or his designee, the owner and/or carrier shall be responsible for all costs, to include standby costs, incurred by any city agency due to the presence or threat of release of a hazardous substance. 
(Ord. No. 95-12, §§ 1-4, 10-9-95) 
Secs. 241/2-30-241/2-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 241/2-41. - Required. 
    Every person, firm or corporation desiring to engage in the manufacturing, storage, handling and disposal of toxic materials within the city shall first obtain a permit therefor, in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 83-24, § 4, 12-5-83) 
Sec. 241/2-42. - Application. 
    Any person desiring a permit required by the provisions of this article shall file a sworn written application therefor with the building official, which application shall contain the following: 
(1)  The purpose of the proposed use of the land upon which the manufacturing, storage, handling and disposal of toxic materials is proposed to be conducted; 
(2)  The names of all owners of land lying within five hundred (500) feet of the proposed operation; 
(3)  An accurate drawing showing the location, dimensions and general features such as proposed buildings, tanks, drainage facilities, utility systems, and other items as may be required by the building official; 
(4)  A complete explanation of the nature of the materials to be handled and the specific hazards involved in the handling of toxic, objectionable materials; 
(5)  A safety data sheet on all toxic materials to be handled or stored on the site; 
(6)  A full disclosure of all phases of the proposed operation, in order that it may be determined whether the operation is consistent with the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens; 
(7)  A statement that all provisions of this article will be complied with. 
(Ord. No. 83-24, § 5, 12-5-83) 
Sec. 241/2-43. - Fee. 
    At the time the application for a permit to be issued under the provisions of this article is filed with the building official, the applicant therefor shall pay to the building official a permit fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). Should the permit be denied or refused, the fee will be refunded to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 83-24, § 6, 12-5-83) 
Sec. 241/2-44. - Issuance. 
    The building official shall issue a permit if the evidence furnished with the application concerning the proposed operation shows that the operation will not adversely affect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens and that no adverse environmental impact would result from such operation. 
(Ord. No. 83-24, § 7, 12-5-83) 
Sec. 241/2-45. - Appeal from denial. 
    Upon the denial of a permit by the building official, the applicant may, within ten (10) days, appeal such denial to the city council. The city council shall set a public hearing not later than thirty (30) days after presentation of the appeal. After such public hearing, the city council may affirm, overrule or modify the decision of the building official and such ruling of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 83-24, § 8, 12-5-83) 
Chapter 25 - TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 87-17, § 1(2)-(50), adopted Mar. 9, 1987, repealed the following sections or subsections of this chapter, relative to various traffic regulations: §§ 25-8-25-10; 25-12; 25-14; 25-16(a); 25-17; 25-29; 25-30; 25-32; 25-33(a); 25-34, 25-49; 25-51-25-53; 25-55-25-57; 25-59; 25-60; 25-72-25-76; 25-78; 25-80; 25-83; 25-84(b); 25-85-25-87; 25-94; 25-95; 25-104-25-106; 25-119; 25-120; 25-125; 25-126; 25-128; 25-151; 25-152.1; 25-153; 25-165(a)(1)-(6); 25-167; 25-168; 25-171; 25-200; 25-201 and 25-203. Former sections 25-87, 25-152.1 and 25-165 derived from Ord. No. 565, § 1, adopted May 5, 1975; Ord. No. 667, § 2, adopted Apr. 2, 1979 and Ord. No. 71, § 2, adopted Apr. 25, 1955, respectively. The remaining repealed sections contained no historical notation and are presumed adopted with the adoption of this Code. 
Cross reference- Automobile tow trucks, Ch. 6; junked motor vehicles, § 14-37 et seq.; noise provisions, § 16-52 et seq.; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 22; taxicabs, Ch. 24; toxic materials, Ch. 241/2. 
State Law reference- Uniform Traffic Act, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 25-1. - Definitions. 
    When used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them: 
    Alley. A public way in the city extending either partly or through any city block in the rear of city lots and in a direction generally from avenue to avenue, not more than twenty (20) feet in width and capable of being traversed by a vehicle. 
    Bus stop. A section of the roadway along the edge thereof, authorized by order of the city council, marked by signs reading "bus stop" as a place for the sole use and convenience of the general public to board and depart from any bus. 
    Driveway, private. Any entrance or exit over the sidewalk or sidewalk area of any street affording a means of ingress or egress for vehicles to or from any private property, or the entrance or exit of any private garage into or from any alley. 
    Driveway, public. Any entrance or exit over the sidewalk or sidewalk area of any street affording a means of ingress or egress for vehicles to or from any public property. 
    Driver. That person who drives or is in actual physical control of the movements of a vehicle. 
    Digging out. The practice of starting any motor vehicle from a standing position by applying a sudden burst of power, recognized by spinning rear wheels and noise of tires on the surface of the roadway. 
    Intersection. The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines, of if none, then the lateral boundary lines, of the roadways of two (2) streets which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different streets joining at any other angle may come in conflict. Where a street includes two (2) roadways, thirty (30) feet or more apart then every crossing of each roadway of such divided street by an intersecting street shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the event such intersecting street also includes two (2) roadways thirty (30) feet or more apart, then every crossing of two (2) roadways of such streets shall be regarded as a separate intersection. 
    Laned roadway. A roadway which is divided into two (2) or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic. 
    Limited-access or control-access highway. Every highway, street or roadway in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting property or lands and other persons have no legal right of access to or from the same except at such points only and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over such highway, street or roadway. 
    Loading zone. That portion of any roadway set apart, marked and numbered for the sole use of the public as a place for loading or unloading passengers, merchandise or other cargo. 
    Motorcycle. Every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor. 
    Motor vehicle. Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails. 
    Official traffic-control devices. All signs, signals, markings, and devices not inconsistent with this chapter placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic. 
    No parking zone. A space on the roadway adjacent to the curb, whether marked by official signs or not, in which no vehicle may be parked. 
    Parking stall or parking space. That portion or section of a roadway adjacent to the curbing or edge, set apart, marked and bounded by lines painted or marked upon the surface of the roadway and extending into the roadway for the use of parking vehicles; or that portion of any alley marked by official signs showing such space to be a parking zone. 
    Pedestrian. Any person afoot. 
    Policeman or police officer. Any member of the police department of the city authorized by law to make arrests in traffic offenses. 
    Residence district. The territory contiguous to and including a street not comprising a business district, when the property on such street for a distance of three hundred (300) feet or more is, in the main, improved with residences or residences and buildings in use for business. 
    Safety zone. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as a safety zone. 
    Sidewalk. That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Stop. When required, means complete cessation of movement. 
    Street or highway. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
    Traffic. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, and other conveyances, either singly or together, while using any street for purposes of travel. 
    Traffic-control signal. Any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed. 
    U-turn. The turning or causing the turning of a vehicle, so that when such turn is completed that such vehicle will be headed in the opposite direction from that in which it was headed before such turning was begun, whether or not such vehicle is pulled into a driveway or any space beyond the curb line of the street. 
(Ord. No. 87-17, § 1(1), 3-9-87) 
Cross reference- General definitions and rules of construction, § 1-3. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, §§ 1-20. 
Sec. 25-2. - Purpose of chapter. 
    The purpose of the regulations prescribed by this chapter is to ensure to the people the maximum use and benefit of the public streets of the city and yet retain the maximum degree of safety to prevent injury to persons and property. 
Sec. 25-3. - Authority of police officers to direct traffic. 
    Officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the city marshal are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with this chapter and other traffic laws. In the event of fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter and other traffic laws. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate traffic by means of police officers, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 27(a)(2). 
Sec. 25-4. - Authority of officers of fire department to direct traffic. 
    Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. 
Sec. 25-5. - Obedience to traffic officers. 
    No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer or fire department official given to direct or control traffic as authorized in this chapter. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 22. 
Sec. 25-6. - Application of chapter to person propelling pushcarts, riding animals, etc. 
    Every person propelling any pushcart or riding any animal upon a roadway, and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those provisions which, by their very nature, can have no application. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 25. 
Sec. 25-7. - Applications of chapter to drivers of government vehicles. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States government, this state, county or city, and it shall be unlawful for any such driver to violate any of the provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise permitted herein or by state statute. 
Secs. 25-8-25-10. - Reserved. 
Note- See the editor's note to this chapter title. 
Sec. 25-11. - Riding on portion of vehicle not intended for passengers. 
    No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designated or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to any employees engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise. 
Sec. 25-12. - Reserved. 
Note- See the editor's note to this chapter title. 
Sec. 25-12.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 527, § 1, adopted Dec. 17, 1973, repealed Ord. No. 445, adopted Feb. 15, 1971, §§ 1-3 of which were formerly codified as § 25-12.1, pertaining to the operation of mini-bikes, motor-bikes, motor-scooters and go-carts. 
Sec. 25-13. - Boarding or alighting from moving vehicles. 
    No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. 
Sec. 25-14. - Reserved. 
Note- See the editor's note to this chapter title. 
Sec. 25-15. - Use of roller skates, coasters, etc., on roadway. 
    No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, skate board, toy vehicle or similar device shall go upon any roadway, except while crossing a street on a crosswalk, and when so crossing, such person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. 
Sec. 25-16. - Glass, other injurious material not to be deposited in street; removal of same. 
(a)  Reserved. 
(b)  Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or thrown upon any street or alley any destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove the same or cause it to be removed. 
(c)  Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from any street or alley shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon such street or alley from the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 87-17, § 1(7), 3-9-87) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, §§ 102, 103. 
Sec. 25-17. - Reserved. 
Note- See the editor's note to this chapter title. 
Sec. 25-18. - Removing or damaging traffic barriers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a city employee, to remove or damage any barriers erected under the direction of the city marshal or street superintendent either closing a street or for the purpose of warning traffic of an obstruction in the street. 
Secs. 25-19-25-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ACCIDENTS 

Secs. 25-29, - 25-30. Reserved. 
Note- See the editor's note to this chapter title. 
Sec. 25-31. - Duty upon striking unattended vehicle. 
    The driver of any vehicle which collides with any vehicle which is unattended shall immediately stop, and shall then and there either locate and notify the operator or owner of such vehicle of the name and address of the driver or owner of the vehicle striking the unattended vehicle, or shall leave securely fastened in a conspicuous place in or on the vehicle struck, a written notice, giving the name and address of the driver and of the owner of the vehicle doing the striking, and a statement of the circumstances thereof. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 41. 
Sec. 25-32. - Reserved. 
Note- See the editor's note to this chapter title. 
Sec. 25-33. - Accident reports-Required. 
(a)  Reserved. 
(b)  The police department may require any driver of a vehicle involved in an accident, of which a report must be made as provided herein, to file a supplemental report whenever the original report is insufficient, and it is hereby made the duty of all persons witnessing any accident or collision of a vehicle of any kind to report the same to the police department. 
(Ord. No. 87-17, § 1(12), 3-9-87) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, §§ 43, 44(b). 
Sec. 25-34. - Reserved. 
Note- See the editor's note to this chapter title. 
Sec. 25-35. - When driver unable to report accident. 
    When the driver or operator of a vehicle is unable physically to make the required accident report, if there were other occupants of the vehicle at the time of the accident capable of making the report, such occupant or occupants shall make or cause to be made said report. 
Sec. 25-36. - Garages to report damaged vehicles. 
    The person in charge of any garage or repair shop to which is brought any motor vehicle which shows evidence of having been involved in an accident of which report must be made as provided by state law, or struck by any bullet, shall report to the police department within twenty-four (24) hours after such motor vehicle is received, giving the engine number, registration number and the name and address of the owner or operator of such vehicle. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions authorized, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St., art. 6701d, § 49(b). 
Sec. 25-37. - Removing vehicle from scene. 
    It shall be unlawful for the driver or any other person to remove any vehicle involved in an accident from the scene of the accident until authorized to do so by a police officer of the police department of this city; provided however, that this section shall not apply if there exists or arises a duty on the part of such driver or other person in control of such vehicle to use said vehicle in carrying any person injured in said accident to a physician or surgeon for medical or surgical treatment. 
Sec. 25-38. - Moving, removal of wrecked vehicles by wrecker trucks. 
    It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle equipped with a crane, hoist, winch, or towing device who has answered a call to, or is attending the scene of any collision or accident of one or more vehicles on any highway or street in the city to remove or attempt to remove any vehicle involved in such collision or accident, or in any way to interfere with or change the position of any such vehicle, except upon authority or direction and in the presence of a police officer of the city, unless such change is made or attempted for the purpose of releasing a person or persons imprisoned within or under such vehicle; provided however, that it shall be unlawful for such operator of any such vehicle equipped with a crane, hoist, winch, or towing device to remove any vehicle from the scene of accident or collision without the consent of the owner of the vehicle so removed, unless directed by a police officer to remove such vehicle as a public safety measure or for the protection of private property. 
Secs. 25-39-25-48. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - VEHICLE EQUIPMENT 

Sec. 25-49. - Reserved. 
Note- See the editor's note to this chapter title. 
Sec. 25-50. - Headlights; visibility distance; mounted height. 
(a)  Whenever requirement is hereinafter declared as to the distance from which certain lamps and devices shall render objects visible or within which such lamps or devices shall be visible, said provisions shall apply during the times [from one-half (1/2) hour after sunset to one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise] in respect to a vehicle without load when upon a straight, level, unlighted highway under normal atmospheric conditions unless a different time or condition is expressly stated. 
(b)  Whenever requirement is hereinafter declared as to the mounted height of lamps or devices, it shall mean from the center of such lamp or device to the level ground upon which the vehicle stands when such vehicle is without a load. 
Editor's note- Section 1(14) of Ord. No. 87-17, adopted Mar. 9, 1987, repealed § 25-49, relative to when headlights are required to be turned on. Pursuant to such repeal, the words "stated in section 25-49" have been deleted from § 25-50(a) and replaced with the provisions in brackets ([ ]) which were taken from former § 25-49, at the discretion of the editor. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 109(b)(c). 
Secs. 25-51-25-53. - Reserved. 
Note- See the editor's note to this chapter title. 
Sec. 25-54. - Stop lights; number required or permitted. 
(a)  At all times specified in section 25-49 [section 25-50], at least two (2) lighted lights shall be displayed, one (1) on each side at the front of every motor vehicle other than a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle, except when such vehicle is parked subject to the regulations governing lights on parked vehicles. 
(b)  Whenever a motor vehicle equipped with headlights is also equipped with any auxiliary lights or a spotlight or any other light on the front thereof projecting a beam of intensity greater than three hundred (300) candle-power, not more than a total of four (4) of any such lamps on the front of a vehicle shall be lighted at any one (1) time when upon a street or highway. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 130. 
Secs. 25-55-25-57. - Reserved. 
Note- See the editor's note to this chapter title. 
Sec. 25-58. - Horns and warning devices. 
(a)  Every motor vehicle when operated upon a public thoroughfare shall be equipped with a horn in good working order and capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less than two hundred (200) feet, but no horn or other warning device shall emit an unreasonably loud or harsh sound or whistle. The driver of a motor vehicle shall when reasonably necessary to ensure safe operation give audible warning with his horn but shall not otherwise use such horn when upon a thoroughfare. 
(b)  No vehicle shall be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a vehicle any siren, whistle or bell, except as otherwise permitted in this section. 
(c)  It is permissible, but not required that any commercial vehicle be equipped with a theft alarm signal device which is so arranged that it cannot be used by the driver as an ordinary warning signal. 
(d)  Any authorized emergency vehicle may be equipped with a siren, whistle or bell, capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less than five hundred (500) feet but such siren shall not be used except when such vehicle is operated in response to an emergency call or in the immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, in which said latter events the driver of such vehicle shall sound said siren when reasonably necessary to warn pedestrians and other drivers of the approach thereof. 
Cross reference- Noise provisions, § 16-52 et seq. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 133. 
Secs. 25-59, - 25-60. Reserved. 
Note- See the editor's note to this chapter title. 
Sec. 25-61. - Windshields must be unobstructed and equipped with wipers. 
(a)  No person shall drive any motor vehicle with any sign, poster or other nontransparent material upon the front windshield, side wings, or side or rear windows of such vehicle which obstructs the driver's clear view of the roadway or any intersecting roadway. 
(b)  The windshield on every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a device for cleaning rain, snow or other moisture from the windshield, which device shall be so constructed as to be controlled or operated by the driver of the vehicle. 
(c)  Every windshield wiper upon a motor vehicle shall be maintained in good working order. 
State Law reference- Vernon's Ann. Civ. St., art. 6701d, § 134B. 
Secs. 25-62-25-71. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES GENERALLY 

Secs. 25-72-25-76. - Reserved. 
Note- See the editor's note to this chapter title. 
Sec. 25-77. - Turning movements generally. 
    The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as follows: 
(a)  Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practical to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway. 
(b)  The approach for a left turn from a two-way street into a two-way street shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the center line thereof and, after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the center line of the roadway being entered. 
(c)  The approach for a left turn from a two-way street into a one-way street shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the center line thereof and by passing to the right of such center line where it enters the intersection. A left turn from a one-way street into a two-way street shall be made by passing to the right of the center line of the street being entered upon leaving the intersection. 
(d)  Where both streets or roadways are one way, both the approach for a left turn and left turn shall be made as close as practical to the left-hand curb or edge of the roadway. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 65; authority of city to regulate turning at intersections, art. 6701d, § 27(a)(8). 
Sec. 25-78. - Reserved. 
Note- See the editor's note to this chapter title. 
Sec. 25-79. - Stopping and turning signals; manner of giving with hand and arm. 
    All signals required [for stopping or turning], when given by hand and arm, shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner and such signals shall indicate as follows: 
(1)  Left turn. Hand and arm extended horizontally. 
(2)  Right turn. Hand and arm extended upward. 
(3)  Stop or decrease speed. Hand and arm extended downward. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 70. 
Sec. 25-80. - Reserved. 
Note- See the editor's note to this chapter title. 
Sec. 25-81. - Right-of-way at intersections; when turning left. 
    The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the left shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard, but such driver, having so yielded and having given a signal when and as required by this article, may make such left turn, and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection from the opposite direction shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle making the left turn. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 72. 
Sec. 25-82. - Limitations on turning around. 
    It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction unless such movement can be made in safety and without backing or otherwise interfering with other traffic. 
    A complete turn shall not be made at any intersection of any two (2) streets or upon any street or alley in the city where the city council may determine that it is unsafe to make a complete turn and shall have caused to be posted at such place in the street or alley a sign showing that a complete turn is prohibited. 
Sec. 25-83. - Reserved. 
Note- See the editor's note to this chapter title. 
Sec. 25-84. - Driving on roadways laned for traffic. 
    Whenever any roadway has been divided into two (2) or more clearly marked lanes for traffic, the following rules, in addition to all others consistent herewith, shall apply: 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle shall drive as nearly as practical entirely within a single lane and shall not move from such lane until the driver has first ascertained that such movement can be made with safety. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Official signs may be erected directing slow moving traffic to use a designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction regardless of the center of the roadway and drivers of vehicles shall obey the direction of every such sign. 
(Ord. No. 87-17, § 27), 3-9-87) 
Secs. 25-85-25-87. - Reserved. 
Note- See the editor's note to this chapter title. 
Sec. 25-88. - Obstructing traffic generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, drive or propel a vehicle in such manner as to block or obstruct the traffic on any street or alley of the city. 
Sec. 25-89. - Obstructing intersection or crosswalk. 
    No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed. 
Sec. 25-90. - Parades and processions. 
    No parade or procession, excepting the forces of the United States Army, Navy, Air Force or Marines, the military forces of the state, and forces of the police and fire departments, shall occupy, march or proceed along any street, sidewalk or any other public place or way in the city, except in accordance with a permit therefor issued by the city marshal and such other regulations as are set forth herein which may apply. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate parades and processions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 27(a)(3). 
Sec. 25-91. - Processions-Funeral; to be identified. 
    A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant or other identifying insignia or by such other method as may be determined and designated by the city marshal. 
Sec. 25-92. - Same-Driving through. 
    No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as such. This provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals or police officers. 
Sec. 25-93. - Same-Drivers. 
    Each driver in a funeral or other authorized procession shall drive as near to the right-hand side of the roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle ahead as closely as is practical and safe. 
Secs. 25-94, - 25-95. Reserved. 
Note- See the editor's note to this chapter title. 
Sec. 25-96. - Driving over fire hose. 
    No driver of any vehicle shall drive over an unprotected hose of the fire department when such hose has been laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department official in command. 
(Ord. No. 345, § 1, 5-31-66) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 101. 
Sec. 25-97. - Driving on sidewalks. 
    Any driver of any vehicle who shall drive such vehicle upon or across any sidewalk or sidewalk area of any street within the city, except on a driveway, public or private, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
Sec. 25-98. - Driving through safety zones. 
    No driver of any vehicle shall, at any time, drive through or within a safety zone. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 85. 
Sec. 25-99. - Driving on fresh pavement. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle upon any portion of any street in the city that has been freshly paved, unless all barriers or signal lights have been lawfully removed therefrom indicating that the street is ready for travel. 
Sec. 25-100. - Operation of vehicles in parks, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any vehicle whatsoever through or upon or to park such vehicle upon any park, hospital grounds or other public property within the city except upon official, designated roadways or parking lots. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or park a motor vehicle within the city parks in the City of Groves except upon the paved roads or within the designated parking areas within said parks. 
(Ord. No. 528, § 1, 12-17-73) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 528, § 1, adopted Dec. 17, 1973, amended this Code by adding provisions which have been included herein as subsection (b) of § 25-100 at the discretion of the editors. 
Sec. 25-101. - "Digging out" prohibited. 
    Any driver of any motor vehicle who shall cause such vehicle to "dig out" or shall cause any such vehicle to make unnecessary noise by reason of operating such vehicle in such manner as to cause the wheels thereof to spin or slide on the roadway of any street when starting such vehicle or while making any turning movement shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
Cross reference- Noise provisions, § 16-51 et seq. 
Sec. 25-102. - Control of vehicle. 
    It shall be the duty of every person who shall operate any vehicle within the city to keep the same under control at all times and to avoid whenever possible colliding with any other vehicle or person. 
Sec. 25-103. - Opening doors into traffic. 
    No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, nor shall any person leave a door open on the side of a motor vehicle available to traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers. 
State Law reference- Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 176. 
Secs. 25-104-25-106. - Reserved. 
Note- See the editor's note to this chapter title. 
Sec. 25-107. - Maximum weight of concrete trucks within city limits. 
    The roads and highways within the city limits of the City of Groves are insufficient to carry the higher additional loads authorized under Article 6701d-12, V.T.C.S. as amended by the sixty-fifth legislature. 
    The maximum allowable weight of concrete trucks be and is hereby limited to standards prescribed under Article 6701d-12 before amendment, as aforesaid, (i.e., thirty-six thousand (36,000) pounds for a tandem-axle load, twelve thousand (12,000) pounds for a single-axle load, and forty-eight thousand (48,000) pounds for a gross load). 
    It is the intention of the city council to exercise its option as authorized by Article 6701d-12 V.T.C.S., as amended by the sixty-fifth legislature of the State of Texas, to limit the maximum allowable weight of concrete trucks operating within the city to the weights provided by Article 6701d-12, before amendment, as aforesaid. 
(Ord. No. 633, §§ 1-3, 8-22-77) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 633, §§ 1-3, adopted Aug. 22, 1977, did not specifically amend the Code, hence codification herein as § 25-107 is at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 25-108-25-116. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate traffic by means of traffic-control devices and signals, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, §§ 27(a)(2), 31. 

Sec. 25-117. - Conformity with manual and specifications of state highway department; uniformity. 
    All traffic-control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the manual and specifications approved by the state highway department. All signs and signals required under this chapter for a particular purpose shall, so far as practicable, be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic-control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this chapter shall be official traffic-control devices. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 21. 
Sec. 25-118. - General powers and duties of traffic engineer relative to devices. 
    The traffic engineer shall place and maintain traffic-control signs, signals and devices when and as required under this chapter to make effective the provisions of this chapter, and may place and maintain such additional traffic-control devices as he may deem necessary to regulate traffic under this chapter or under state law, or to guide or warn traffic. It shall be the duty of the traffic engineer to supervise the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic-control devices. 
(Ord. No. 337, § 2, 12-1-65) 
Secs. 25-119, - 25-120. Reserved. 
Note- See the editor's note to this chapter title. 
Sec. 25-121. - Ratification of existing devices. 
    All traffic-control signs, signals, devices, and markings placed or erected prior to the adoption of this Code and in use for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic are hereby affirmed, ratified and declared to be official traffic-control devices, provided such traffic-control devices are not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter or state law. 
(Ord. No. 337, § 2, 12-1-65) 
Sec. 25-122. - Unauthorized signs, signals, etc. 
(a)  No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any road, street or highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation or resembles an official traffic-control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic-control device or any railroad signal or sign, and no person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any highway or street any traffic signal or sign bearing thereon any commercial advertising. This shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection, upon private property adjacent to streets or highways, of signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signals. 
(b)  Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and the city is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed without notice. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 36. 
Sec. 25-123. - Altering, injuring, etc., devices. 
    No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic-control device or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon or any other part thereof. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 37. 
Sec. 25-124. - Installation of traffic lights. 
    The traffic engineer, as authorized by the city council from time to time, shall designate intersections at which traffic shall be controlled by electric traffic-control signals or lights and shall cause such signals or lights to be installed and maintained at such intersections. 
Secs. 25-125, - 25-126. Reserved. 
Note- See the editor's note to this chapter title. 
Sec. 25-127. - Stop intersections. 
    The traffic engineer, with the approval of the city council, may designate any street intersection as a stop intersection and designate the streets upon which vehicles shall stop before entering such intersection. Whenever any intersection has been so designated, the traffic engineer shall cause the same to be identified by the erection of stop signs indicating which vehicles approaching the intersection shall stop, and it shall be the duty of the driver of any vehicle approaching such a sign to bring such vehicle to a complete stop at such sign or at a clearly marked stop line before entering the intersection, except when directed to proceed by a police officer or a traffic-control signal. After having so stopped, such driver shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered the intersection or which are approaching so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard. Such driver, after having so yielded, may proceed and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching on the intersecting street shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle so proceeding into or across the intersection. 
(Ord. No. 165, § 2, 5-18-59) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to designate stop intersections, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, §§ 27(a)(6), 91(a); duty of drivers with respect to stop signs, art. 6701d, §§ 73, 91(c). 
Sec. 25-128. - Reserved. 
Note- See the editor's note to this chapter title. 
Sec. 25-129. - Designation of crosswalks, zones and marking traffic lanes. 
    The traffic engineer, with the approval of the city council, is hereby authorized: 
(1)  To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at any intersection where, in his opinion, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway and at such other places as he may deem necessary. 
(2)  To establish safety zones, quiet, play and other, of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary for the protection of the public. 
(3)  To mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as he may deem advisable, consistent with this chapter and other traffic ordinances of this city. 
(4)  To designate no parking areas or zones on streets, alleys, parks and any city owned property at such places as he may deem necessary for the protection of the public. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 1, 12-22-80) 
Sec. 25-130. - One-way streets and alleys. 
    Whenever any ordinance of the city council designates any one-way street or alley, the traffic engineer shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
    Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys which are designated as one-way streets or alleys, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction where signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to designate one-way streets and require traffic thereon to move in one specific direction, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 27(a)(4). 
Sec. 25-131. - Turning markers. 
    The traffic engineer, with the approval of the city council, is authorized to place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections and such course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by any provision of this Code, state law or city ordinance, rule or regulation. 
    When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such indications. 
Sec. 25-132. - Prohibited turns at intersections. 
(a)  The traffic engineer is hereby authorized, subject to approval by the city council, to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left and/or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such signs. 
(b)  No driver of any vehicle shall make a U-turn at any intersection within the city where there is suspended and operating a traffic-control signal light. 
Sec. 25-133. - No passing zone. 
    The city council is hereby authorized to determine by resolution those portions of any highway in the city where overtaking and passing or driving on the left side of the roadway would be especially hazardous and may indicate, by appropriate signs or markings on the roadway, the beginning and end of such zones. When such signs or markings are in place and clearly visible to any ordinarily observant person, every driver of a vehicle shall obey the directions thereof. 
Sec. 25-134. - Truck routes. 
(a)  The traffic engineer, as authorized from time to time by the city council, may designate such truck routes within the city as may be necessary for the proper flow of traffic through the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any truck with a gross vehicle weight rating of over thirty-two thousand five hundred (32,500) pounds (or thirty-two thousand five hundred (32,500) pounds gross cargo weight rating in the case of a truck-trailer or tractor-trailer unit) or having a greater weight than four hundred (400) pounds per inch width of tire tread upon any wheel concentrated on the street surface, to use, travel upon or be driven over any street, avenue or highway within the city not designated as a truck route in subsection (a); provided, however, that if the point of origin or destination, for commercial purposes only, for any such truck, shall be off such truck route, then such truck may proceed by the shortest possible route to the nearest truck route. 
Cross reference- Trucks carrying toxic materials to use truck routes, § 241/2-27. 
Secs. 25-135-25-144. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SPEED REGULATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Speed of vehicles in cities and authority of cities to alter prima facie speed limits established by state law, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, §§ 166, 169. 

Sec. 25-145. - Maximum limits generally. 
(a)  No person shall operate or drive any vehicle on any street within the city at a greater speed than thirty (30) miles per hour, unless signs are erected designating another speed in accordance with this article. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, no person shall drive a vehicle on a street at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual and potential hazards then existing. In every event, speed shall be so controlled as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person, vehicle or other conveyance on or entering the street in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care. 
(c)  The driver of every vehicle shall, consistent with the requirements of subsection (b), drive at an appropriate reduced speed when approaching a hill crest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway, and when a special hazard exists with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or street or highway conditions. 
Sec. 25-146. - Maximum limits on specific streets. 
    The city council may alter the maximum speed limit established by section 25-145, on any street or portion thereof within the city in accord with the provisions of Article 6701d, section 169, of Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes. Whenever signs are posted giving notice of the maximum legal speed limit so established for a particular street or portion thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any vehicle at a rate of speed in excess of such limit. 
Sec. 25-147. - Speed limits established. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of section 25-146, the following speed limits are hereby established for the streets and portions of streets enumerated below: 
Street Between Speed On State Hwy. 73 State Hwy. 73 and 32nd St. 45 On State Hwy. 73 32nd St. and State Hwy. 87 50 On State Hwy. FM 366 45 miles per hour from the South Groves city limit boundary to a point .876 miles; and 55 miles per hour from said point to the North Groves city limit boundary On Lincoln Ave. Jackson Blvd. and Van Buren St. 20 On Van Buren St. Grant Ave. and Lincoln Ave. 20 On Grant Ave. Van Buren St. and Jackson Blvd. 20 On Jackson Blvd. Grant Ave. and Lincoln Ave. 20 On West Washington Blvd. Gulf Ave. and Cambridge St. 20 On Beverly Drive Crescent Drive and State Highway 87 15 On Vincent Drive Crescent Drive and State Highway 87 15  
(Ord. No. 502, § 1, 5-21-73; Mo. of 6-22-92; Ord. No. 94-01, § 1, 2-28-94) 
Sec. 25-148. - School zones. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive any vehicle at a speed greater than twenty (20) miles per hour through or to overtake or pass any other vehicle in any school zone as may be marked or designated within the city during the hours indicated upon signs erected in such zones or whenever children are present in such zones. 
Sec. 25-149. - School zones designated. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of section 25-148, the following school zones are hereby designated on the following streets or portions of streets in the city. 
Street Extent Cleveland Ave. Between Howe and Hansen Sts. Grant Ave. Between Jackson and Van Buren Blvds. Gulf St. Between Washington and Monroe Blvds. Jackson Blvd. Between Grant Ave. and Van Buren Blvd. Jefferson Blvd., West Between Gulf St. and Boyd Ave. Lincoln Ave. Between Washington Blvd. and Hansen St. Real St. Between Grant Ave. and Van Buren Blvd. Taft Ave. Between Willow St. to a point 300 feet south of the school property. Terrell St. Between Cleveland and Suncrest Aves. Van Buren Blvd. Between Wilson and Grant Aves. Washington Blvd. Between Lincoln and Grant Aves. Wilson Ave. Between Van Buren Blvd. and Cleveland Ave. 25th St. Between Maple St. and Taft Ave. Between Owens Ave. to Lakeview drainage ditch. 39th St. Between Garfield and Harrison Aves.  
Sec. 25-150. - In city park. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle in excess of ten (10) miles per hour within the boundaries of any city park unless otherwise posted. 
(Ord. No. 136, § 1, 4-7-58) 
Sec. 25-151. - Reserved. 
Note- See the editor's note to this chapter title. 
Sec. 25-152. - Minimum limits. 
    No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 170(a). 
Secs. 25-152.1, - 25-153. Reserved. 
Note- See the editor's note to this chapter title. 
Secs. 25-154-25-163. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Application of parking regulations to taxicabs, § 24-7. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate standing and parking of vehicles, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 27(a)(1). 

Sec. 25-164. - Presumption that owner of vehicle illegally parked same. 
    In any prosecution charging a violation of any applicable provision of this Code, or of any other ordinance or regulation governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such ordinance or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was, at the time of such parking, the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred. 
Sec. 25-165. - Impoundment of standing or parked vehicles-Generally. 
(a)  Any vehicle which shall be or remain standing or parked upon any public street, avenue, way, alley or other public place may be removed by or upon order of the city marshal, and placed in storage in a privately operated garage or other place designated by or maintained by the city. 
(b)  In order to obtain possession of a vehicle stored under the provisions of this section, the claimant must produce satisfactory evidence of ownership or right to possession within thirty (30) days from the date of such storage and, in addition thereto, must pay all charges for storage and removal of such vehicle, in addition to any fine. 
(c)  If a vehicle removed under this section is not claimed within thirty (30) days from the date of storage, the same may be sold by the city or the garage where the same is stored, for storage charges, as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 71, § 2, 4-25-55; Ord. No. 87-17, § 1(44), 3-9-87) 
State Law reference- Removal of illegally parked vehicles, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 94. 
Sec. 25-166. - Same-Liability of city. 
    The provisions of section 25-165 shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any person who shall leave his vehicle parked on the streets of the city in such a manner that the same may be impounded; nor shall the city be held as assuming any such liability by reason of impounding or causing to be impounded such vehicle. 
Secs. 25-167, 25-168. - Reserved. 
Note- See the editor's note to this chapter title. 
Sec. 25-169. - Starting parked vehicle. 
    No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked unless and until such movement can be made with safety. 
State Law reference- Vernon's Ann. Civ. St., art. 6701d, § 67. 
Sec. 25-170. - Twelve feet of roadway to be left available for traffic. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than twelve (12) feet of the width of either lane of a roadway for free movement of the vehicular traffic, except that a driver may stop temporarily during the actual loading or unloading of passengers or when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals of a police officer. 
(Ord. No. 561, § 1, 4-7-75) 
Sec. 25-171. - Reserved. 
Note- See the editor's note to this chapter title. 
Sec. 25-172. - Parallel and angle parking. 
(a)  No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with the right hand wheels of the vehicle within eighteen (18) inches of the curb or edge of the roadway, except as otherwise provided in this section. On one-way streets, vehicles may be parked on the left side of the street, with the left-hand wheels within eighteen (18) inches of the curb or edge of the roadway, unless signs prohibit parking. 
(b)  The traffic engineer, with the approval of the city council, shall determine upon which streets angle parking shall be permitted and shall mark or sign such streets, but such angle parking shall not be indicated upon any federal aid or state highway within the city unless the state highway commission has determined by resolution or order entered in its minutes that the roadway is of sufficient width to permit angle parking without interfering with the free movement of traffic. Angle parking shall not be indicated or permitted at any place where passing traffic would thereby be caused or required to drive upon the left side of the street or upon any railway tracks. 
(c)  Upon those streets which have been signed or marked for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to, and with the hood or front end of such vehicle next to, the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings. 
(d)  Whenever parking spaces are marked by lines on the pavement, whether for parallel or angle parking, a vehicle must be parked entirely within the lines of the parking space. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 96. 
Sec. 25-173. - Designation and marking of parking stalls and areas where parking is prohibited or limited. 
    The traffic engineer shall cause parking stalls to be maintained and marked off in and on such streets and parts thereof as may be designated by the city council from time to time and he shall cause spaces in which parking is prohibited to be maintained and marked off in and on such streets and parts thereof as may be designated by the city council from time to time. The traffic engineer shall also cause time limit parking areas to be maintained and marked off in and on such part or parts of streets as may be designated by the city council from time to time. All such spaces or areas shall be clearly indicated by appropriate signs or by markings on the pavement or curb. 
    In areas designated as time limit parking areas, parking may be limited to any period prescribed by the council, the same to be designated with clearly distinguished markings or signs at both ends of the time limit area and at reasonable intervals between the beginning and ending of such time limit area, indicating the time allowed for parking in such area. 
    Any prohibition of or time limit on parking established under this section shall apply on such days and between such hours as prescribed by the council. 
Sec. 25-174. - Parking in prohibited areas; overtime parking. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his name or owned or operated by him or in his possession or under his control to be or remain in any space or area in which parking is prohibited, as provided in section 25-173, or in a time limit parking area for a longer period of time than that designated by the markings on the street or by signs clearly visible. 
Sec. 25-175. - Parking or standing in alleys. 
(a)  No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to block the free passage of other vehicles in such alley. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a), it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in any alley within the fire limits of the city, except when such vehicle is actually being used for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or passengers. 
Sec. 25-176. - Parking for more than seventy-two hours prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any vehicle to allow, cause or permit such vehicle to remain standing or parked on any street, alley, avenue or public way within the city for more than seventy-two (72) hours continuously. 
Sec. 25-177. - Loading and unloading generally. 
    All freight trucks shall be, and are hereby required, to be loaded and unloaded from the alley entrance, if practicable. Where conditions are such as to make the loading or unloading thereof from an alley impracticable, such trucks shall be parked on the street in accord with all applicable provisions of this article. 
Sec. 25-178. - Loading, unloading zones-Designation. 
    The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine and designate the location of passenger and freight curb loading zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating the same and stating the hours during which the provisions therefor are applicable. 
Sec. 25-179. - Same-Use of passenger zones. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the regulations applicable to such curb loading zones are effective, and then only for a period of time not to exceed three (3) minutes, except when such spaces are adjacent to and serving a hotel or bus station, when such period of time may not exceed fifteen (15) minutes. 
Sec. 25-180. - Same-Use of freight zones. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any length of time in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone during the hours so set aside except that commercial vehicles may so stop, stand or park for the expeditious unloading and delivery or loading and pickup of material. In no case shall the stop for unloading, loading, pickup or delivery of material exceed thirty (30) minutes. 
    The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily at a place marked as a freight curb loading zone for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping, standing or parking does not interfere with any motor vehicle used for the transportation of materials which is waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. 
Sec. 25-181. - Permit to back to curb for loading or unloading. 
    The city marshal is authorized to issue special permits of such fee as may be determined by the city council from time to time to permit the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions of such permit. Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to such person the privilege as therein stated and authorized herein, and it shall be unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of the special terms or conditions of any such permit. 
Sec. 25-182. - Vehicles exceeding twenty-five feet. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle, trailer or combination thereof on the streets, alleys or other public ways of the city which shall exceed twenty-five (25) feet in length for more than two (2) hours, unless obstructing traffic. 
Sec. 25-183. - Parking for the disabled; enforcement; offense; penalty for violation etc. 
(a)  Under the authority given by Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes, Article 6675a-5e.1, the police department of the city is hereby authorized and empowered to enforce parking regulations for the disabled by filing charges against any person who commits an offense at any place within the city at a parking space designated specifically for temporarily or permanently disabled persons in accordance with said act. 
(b)  A person commits an offense hereunder in accordance with Article 6675a-5e.1: 
(1)  If the person is neither temporarily nor permanently disabled nor transporting a temporarily or permanently disabled person and parks the vehicle with such special device or displaying a disabled person identification card in a parking space or parking area designated specifically for the disabled; 
(2)  If the person parks the vehicle neither displaying the special device nor displaying a disabled person identification card in a parking space or parking area designated specifically for the disabled; 
(3)  If the person parks a vehicle so that the vehicle blocks an access or curb ramp or any other architectural improvement designed to aid the disabled; 
(4)  If he lends an identification card issued to him for disabled parking as provided by the state law. 
(c)  An offense under this section is a Class C misdemeanor. In a prosecution of an offense under this section, it is presumed that the registered owner of the motor vehicle that is the subject of the prosecution is the person who parked the vehicle at the time and place the offense occurred. 
(Ord. No. 88-27, §§ 1-3, 10-31-88) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 88-27, §§ 1-3, adopted Oct. 31, 1988, being not expressly amendatory of this Code, has been included as § 25-183 at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 25-184-25-192. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PEDESTRIANS 

Sec. 25-193. - Application of article. 
    Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic-control signals as provided in this chapter, but at all other places pedestrians shall be granted those rights and be subject to the restrictions stated in this article. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 76(a). 
Sec. 25-194. - Right-of-way in crosswalks. 
    When traffic-control signals are not in place or not in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk, when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger, but no pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle, which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield. 
    Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 77. 
Sec. 25-195. - When pedestrian shall yield. 
    Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at any intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
    Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St., art. 6701d, § 78(a, b). 
Sec. 25-196. - When crosswalk required for crossings. 
    Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked crosswalk. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St., art. 6701d, § 76(b). 
Sec. 25-197. - Use of crosswalks required at intersections: crossing between intersection. 
(a)  All crossings by any pedestrian of any intersection within the corporate limits of the city shall be made within the crosswalk of such intersection. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a pedestrian to cross a street at any place other than an intersection, but when any such crossing is made or being made by any pedestrian he shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon such street approaching such place of crossing and in proximity thereto. It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to cause any vehicle to stop or for such pedestrian to cause any interference with the movements of any vehicle by reason of such crossing at such place. 
Sec. 25-198. - Roadway to be crossed at right angles; exception. 
    No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb, except in crosswalk. 
Sec. 25-199. - Walking on roadways. 
(a)  Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway. 
(b)  Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and upon a street or highway shall, when practicable, walk only on the left side of the roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the opposite direction. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 81(a, b). 
Secs. 25-200, - 25-201. Reserved. 
Note- See the editor's note to this chapter title. 
Sec. 25-202. - Use right half of crosswalk. 
    Pedestrians shall move, whenever possible, upon the right half of crosswalks. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 80. 
Sec. 25-203. - Reserved. 
Note- See the editor's note to this chapter title. 
Chapter 26 - INDUSTRIALIZED MODULAR STRUCTURES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, adopted June 18, 2012, repealed the former Ch. 26, §§ 26-1-26-15, and enacted a new Ch. 26, as set out herein. The former Ch. 26 was entitled "Mobile Home Parks and Mobile Home Subdivisions", and derived from: Ord. No. 388, §§ 1-15, adopted on April 1, 1968; and Ord. No. 84-11, adopted July 16, 1984. 
Cross reference- Mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions, App. A, § 10-800; mobile home subdivisions, App. B, § 10. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Short title. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be known as the "City of Groves Industrialized/Modular Structure Code" and may be cited as such. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, 6-18-12) 
Sec. 26-2. - Purpose. 
    The City of Groves, recognizes the hazards of being a coastal city and hereby prohibits the placement of a mobile home, a housing and urban development home, or a trailer home within the boundaries of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, 6-18-12) 
Sec. 26-3. - Definitions. 
    "HUD-code manufactured home" is: 
(1)  A structure constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development; 
(2)  Built on a permanent chassis; 
(3)  Designed for use as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when the structure is connected to the required utilities; 
(4)  Transportable in one (1) or more sections; 
(5)  In the traveling mode, at least eight (8) body feet in width or at least forty (40) body feet in length or, when erected on-site, at least three hundred twenty (320) square feet; 
(6)  Includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems of the home; and 
(7)  Does not include a recreational vehicle. 
    "Industrialized/modular housing" is a residential structure that is: 
(1)  Designed for the occupancy of one (1) or more families; 
(2)  Constructed in one (1) or more modules or constructed using one (1) or more modular components built at a location other than the permanent site; 
(3)  Designed to be used as a permanent residential structure when the modular or the modular component is transported to the permanent site or installed on a permanent foundation system; 
(4)  Industrialized housing includes the structure's plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems. 
"Industrialized/modular housing" does not include: 
a.  A residential structure that exceeds three (3) stories or forty-nine (49) feet in height as measured from the finished grade elevation at the building entrance to the peak of the roof; 
b.  Housing constructed of a sectional or panelized system that does not use a modular component; or 
c.  A ready-built home constructed in a manner in which the entire living area is contained in a single unit or section at a temporary location for the purpose of selling and moving the home to another location. 
    An "industrialized/modular building" is a commercial structure that is: 
(1)  Constructed in one (1) or more modules or constructed using one (1) or more modular components built at a location other than the commercial site; and 
(2)  Designed to be used as a commercial building when the module or the modular component is transported to the commercial site and erected or installed. 
(3)  An industrialized/modular building includes the structure's plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems. 
(4)  An industrialized/modular building includes a permanent commercial structure and a commercial structure designed to be transported from one (1) commercial site to another commercial site. 
"Industrialized/modular building" does not include: 
a.  A commercial structure that exceeds three (3) stories or forty-nine (49) feet in height as measured from the finished grade elevation at the building entrance to the peak of the roof; or 
b.  A commercial building or structure that is installed in a manner other than on a permanent foundation; and either is: 
1.  Not open to the public; or 
2.  Less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet in total area and used other than as a school or a place of religious worship. 
    "Manufactured home". The manufactured home must not have been constructed before June 15, 1976. The unit must have been built to the manufactured housing construction safety standards as evidenced by having a small, red metallic label attached to it. 
    "Mobile home" is: 
(1)  A structure constructed before June 15, 1976; 
(2)  Built on a permanent chassis; 
(3)  Designed for use as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when the structure is connected to the required utilities; 
(4)  Transportable in one (1) or more sections; and 
(5)  In the traveling mode, at least eight (8) body feet in width or at least forty (40) body feet in length or, when erected on-site, at least three hundred twenty (320) square feet; and 
(6)  Includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems of the home. 
    "Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle that is primarily designed as a temporary living quarters for recreational camping or travel use and that is permanently tied to, affixed, or anchored to the premises as in the case of a park model unit. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, 6-18-12) 
Sec. 26-4. - Municipal regulation of industrialized housing and buildings. 
    Industrialized/modular structures. Any person wishing to place an industrialized/modular housing unit or units within the city shall submit the engineered/architectural building plans to the building official for review. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, 6-18-12) 
Sec. 26-5. - Determining eligibility. 
    An engineered/architectural set of plans shall be submitted to the building official for review to determine eligibility for placement and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  a.  The determined wind load resistance of the module. 
b.  An elevation depicting the type of exterior siding, roofing materials and roof pitch. 
c.  A detail of the permanent foundation for which the industrialized/modular unit shall be placed upon. 
d.  Compliance with the municipal standards for square footage, and other site requirements applicable to single-family dwellings. 
(2)  The industrialized/modular unit shall have a value equal to or greater than the median taxable value for each single-family dwelling located within five hundred (500) feet of the lot on which the industrialized housing is proposed to be located, as determined by the most recent certified tax appraisal roll for each county in which the properties are located. 
(3)  The modular unit shall have exterior siding, roofing, roof pitch, foundation fascia, and fenestration compatible with the single-family dwellings located within five hundred (500) feet of the lot on which the industrialized housing is proposed to be located. 
(4)  The modular unit shall comply with municipal aesthetic standards, building setbacks, side and rear yard offsets, subdivision control, architectural landscaping, square footage, and other site requirements applicable to single-family dwellings. 
(5)  The modular unit shall be securely fixed to an engineered permanent foundation. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, 6-18-12) 
Secs. 26-6-26-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EXISTING MOBILE HOME PARKS 

Sec. 26-26. - License and fees for existing mobile home parks. 
(a)  Annual license fee. Before any mobile home park may be occupied, application shall be made to the city for a mobile home park license. Upon application for a mobile home park license or the renewal thereof, the applicant shall pay to the city a minimum fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) or four dollars ($4.00) for each mobile home space, whichever is greater. Said license shall be renewed in January of each year. 
(b)  Monthly parking fee. 
(1)  In addition to the above license fee, each licensee is hereby required to remit to the city on the first day of each month, a monthly parking fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for each occupied mobile home space. This fee is deemed equal to the actual cost of municipal services furnished by the city, including maintenance, debt retirement, general administrative costs, including, but without limitations because of lack of specific enumeration hereon, the following: fire protection, police protection, health services and street maintenance. Said fee shall be paid by the owner of said property to the city on or before the tenth day of the month following the month for which such parking permit fee is due. 
(2)  The licensee of a park shall be liable for the monthly parking permit fee for any mobile home occupying space therein. 
(c)  Failure on the part of the licensee of a park to pay the fees as provided for in subsections (a) and (b) above, will result in forfeiture of the right to renew the annual license and the right to replace any mobile home within the park with an industrialized/modular structure. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, 6-18-12) 
Sec. 26-27. - Revocation of mobile home park license. 
    A mobile home park license may be revoked or suspended by the building official for any period of time after a sixty-day written notice sent to the license holder and upon determination by him that: 
(1)  That the license holder or any employee of the license holder has violated or is failing to comply and maintain said mobile home park in compliance with the requirements set forth in this chapter and any other applicable ordinance. 
(2)  The license holder or any employee of the license holder has refused to allow the building official or any of his inspectors, the fire marshal, the city marshal, or any other duly authorized employee of the city to enter upon the mobile home park at all reasonable times for the purpose of inspecting same for compliance with the provision of this chapter or any other applicable city ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, 6-18-12) 
Sec. 26-28. - Application of provisions to existing mobile homes. 
(a)  Where an existing mobile home becomes damaged to the extent that the cost to repair said mobile home exceeds fifty (50) per cent of the appraised value of said mobile home, such mobile home shall be demolished or removed from the mobile home park. The replacement of said mobile home shall meet the requirements of section 26-5. 
(b)  There are mobile homes now located at the following places within the city which do not conform to some or all of the requirements as set forth in this chapter and which will hereafter fall in the category of mobile home parks as follows: 
Location Number of 
Mobile Homes Permitted 6116-6126 Capitol 6 6150-60 Hansen 4 6341 Gulfway 22 6345 Gulfway 37  
(c)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any of the above mobile home parks to exceed the total number of approved spaces as listed herein. And it is specifically provided that license shall be obtained and parking fees be paid in accordance with section 26-26 of this chapter. The failure to obtain a license and pay the fees as provided for herein shall result in a forfeiture of the right to renew the license and to renew any inhabited mobile home space. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, 6-18-12) 
Secs. 26-29-26-48. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS 

Sec. 26-49. - Application for a recreational vehicle park. 
    Any person wishing to develop a recreational vehicle park or in case of an existing mobile home park, wishing to extend, alter, expand and/or improve within the corporate limits of the City of Groves shall first make application to the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Groves for a specific use permit as required in appendix A Zoning of the City of Groves Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, 6-18-12) 
Sec. 26-50. - License and fees for (RV) recreational vehicle parks. 
(a)  Annual license fee. Before any RV park may be occupied, application shall be made to the city for a RV park license. Upon application for a RV park license or the renewal thereof, the applicant shall pay to the city a minimum fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) or five dollars ($5.00) for each RV space, whichever is greater. Said license shall be renewed in January of each year. 
(b)  Monthly parking fee. In addition to the above license fee, each licensee is hereby required to remit to the city on the first day of each month, a monthly parking fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for each RV space. This fee is deemed equal to the actual cost of municipal services furnished by the city, including maintenance, debt retirement, general administrative costs, including, but without limitations because of lack of specific enumeration hereon, the following: fire protection, police protection, health services and street maintenance. Said fee shall be paid by the owner of said property to the city on or before the tenth day of the month following the month for which such parking permit fee is due. 
(c)  The licensee of a park shall be liable for the monthly parking permit fee for any RV occupying space therein. Failure on the part of the licensee of a park to pay the fees as provided for in subsections (a) and (b) above, will result in forfeiture of the right to renew the annual license and the right to replace any recreational vehicle in the park. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, 6-18-12) 
Sec. 26-51. - Revocation of (RV) recreational vehicle park license. 
    An RV park license may be revoked or suspended by the building official for any period of time after a sixty-day written notice is sent to the license holder and upon determination by him that: 
(1)  That the license holder or any employee of the license holder has violated or is failing to comply and maintain said RV park in compliance with the requirements set forth in this chapter and any other applicable ordinance. 
(2)  The license holder or any employee of the license holder has refused to allow the building official or any of his inspectors, the fire marshal, the city marshal, or any other duly authorized employee of the city to enter upon the RV park at all reasonable times for the purpose of inspecting same for compliance with the provision of this chapter or any other applicable city ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, 6-18-12) 
Sec. 26-52. - Minimum standards for recreational vehicle park. 
    Any recreational vehicle park (RV) hereinafter established, constructed, erected, and in case of existing parks, that portion extended, altered, expanded and/or improved shall conform to and comply with the following minimum standards: 
(1)  Park area. Each recreational vehicle park shall provide a minimum of five (5) acres in area. 
(2)  Density. Each recreational vehicle park shall not exceed a maximum density of fifteen (15) spaces per acre as determined by the total area bounded by the mobile home park property lines. 
(3)  Private streets. Private streets shall be provided and shall extend continuously from the public street right-of-way so as to provide suitable access to all spaces and other facilities or uses permitted in said park. Private streets shall meet the following standards. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, 6-18-12) 
Sec. 26-53. - Minimum pavement widths. 
    Minimum pavement widths shall be as follows: 
(1)  Private streets which provide direct access recreational vehicle spaces: twenty (20) feet. 
(2)  Private street intersections shall generally be at right angles, offsets at intersections of less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet (centerline to centerline) should be avoided, intersection of more than two (2) streets at one (1) point should be avoided. 
(3)  Dead-end private streets shall be limited to a maximum length of one thousand (1,000) feet and shall be provided with a vehicular turning space, with a turning circle of eighty (80) feet in diameter. 
(4)  All private streets shall be provided with a smooth asphalt surface which shall be durable and well drained under normal use and weather conditions. 
(5)  Private streets which may connect two (2) public street rights-of-way shall by the use of curves, offsets, locations, and/or the use of two (2) or more streets be located so as to discourage through traffic. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, 6-18-12) 
Sec. 26-54. - Recreational vehicle space. 
    Each and every space shall conform to the following standards: 
(1)  Be served with sanitary sewer, water, electrical power. 
(2)  Provide an average minimum width of thirty (30) feet and an average minimum depth of seventy-five (75) feet and contain a minimum of two thousand two hundred fifty (2,250) square feet. 
(3)  Abut and/or have access to a private street for a minimum distance of twelve (12) feet. 
(4)  Setbacks for supplementary structure. No physical structure, dumpster container, carport, canopy, awning, fence or storage locker shall be permitted within ten (10) feet of a private street, provided further, the setbacks from the sides and rear shall be three (3) feet, save and except a fence, from any lot line not adjacent to the private street. 
(5)  Provide a minimum of two (2) off-street parking per RV space. 
(6)  Double frontage of RV spaces should be avoided. 
(7)  No vehicular access to a RV space is permitted from a public-dedicated street. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, 6-18-12) 
Sec. 26-55. - Useable open space. 
(a)  Conveniently situated and containing a minimum of two thousand two hundred fifty (2,250) square feet for each fifteen (15) RV spaces. 
(b)  Such open space may be in one (1) or more areas but shall be of such size and shape as to afford reasonable use by the occupants. 
(c)  No portion of such required useable open space shall be used for off-street parking, vehicular drive loading areas or accessory uses, save and except recreational uses such as swimming pools and tennis courts. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, 6-18-12) 
Sec. 26-56. - Visitor parking. 
    Off-street parking for visitors shall be provided at a rate of two (2) parking spaces for each RV lot. Off-street parking spaces not located on the RV lot shall be located on or within the park and be easily accessible to the occupants and visitors; said places shall: 
(1)  Have a permanent asphalt all-weather surface. 
(2)  Have dimensions of not less than nine (9) feet by eighteen (18) feet. 
(3)  Be accessible to an asphalt all-weather surfaced private street. 
(4)  Be appropriately defined and marked. 
(5)  Provide adequate barriers to keep any parked vehicle from extending into or overhanging any private street. 
(6)  Be so designed that any vehicle may be parked without requiring the moving of any other vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, 6-18-12) 
Sec. 26-57. - Setbacks. 
    All RV spaces shall be located at a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from any RV park property boundary line abutting upon a public-dedicated street and twenty-five (25) [feet from] all other property lines. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, 6-18-12) 
Sec. 26-58. - Lighting. 
    The private streets, parking lots, walks, and service areas shall be kept properly and adequately illuminated at all times so the RV park shall be safe for occupants and visitors; provided further, all entrances and exits shall be illuminated. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, 6-18-12) 
Sec. 26-59. - Refuse disposal. 
    Facilities shall be provided for the storage, collection, and disposal of refuse of the occupants of the RV park. Refuse containers (dumpsters) shall be located no closer than twenty-five (25) feet to any property line and maintained in a sanitary condition. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, 6-18-12) 
Sec. 26-60. - Fire protection. 
    Adequate fire hydrants must be provided for each RV park. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, 6-18-12) 
Sec. 26-61. - Screening. 
    A six-foot permanent screening fence or wall shall be constructed along the boundary lines of the RV park. Refuse containers (dumpsters) shall be screened in the same manner. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, 6-18-12) 
Sec. 26-62. - Laundromats. 
    Laundromats consisting of no less than two (2) washers and two (2) dryers shall be available for each fifteen (15) RV spaces. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, 6-18-12) 
Secs. 26-63-26-82. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - VARIANCES 

Sec. 26-83. - Authority of city council to allow specific permit variances. 
    When a developer shows that a provision of these regulations would cause unnecessary hardship if strictly adhered to; and where in the opinion of the city planning commission, a departure may be made without destroying the spirit of these regulations, the city planning commission may recommend to the city council, and the city council, at its sole discretion authorize a variance at the time of issuing the specific use permit. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, 6-18-12) 
Secs. 26-84-26-100. - Reserved. 
Chapter 27 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Utilities, art. XVII. 
Cross reference- Garbage and trash, ch. 12; health and sanitation, ch. 13; trailers, mobile homes and mobile home parks, ch. 26; electrical code, ch. 29; housing code, ch. 30; plumbing code, ch. 31. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 27-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    Customer, consumer. The person purchasing water, sewer, garbage or any other utility service from the city. 
    Department. The department of the city functioning and controlling water, the sewer or other utility service within the city. 
    Utility, utility service. Water, sewer, garbage collection or any other utility service furnished by the city to customers or consumers. 
(Ord. No. 41, § 1, 4-29-54; Ord. No. 353, § 1, 9-19-66) 
Cross reference- General definitions and rules of construction, § 1-3. 
Sec. 27-2. - Liability of city for damage. 
    The city shall not be liable for any damage to the property of any consumer of any utility service furnished by the city due to failure of water pressure, backflow of the sewerage system or any other cause affecting any utility service outside the direct control of the city. 
Sec. 27-3. - Trespass at city reservoir. 
    Any person entering and trespassing on the grounds of the city reservoir without the consent and permission of the superintendent of the water and sewer department or other person in charge of the reservoir shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 34, § 1, 3-11-54) 
Cross reference- Malicious mischief generally, § 16-23; climbing water towers or utility poles, § 16-31. 
Sec. 27-4. - Establishment of restricted zone at the raw water intake. 
    As required by the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission (TNRCC) Permanent Volume of Rules, Chapter 290, "Water Hygiene" (290.42(e)(2)(C)), there is hereby established a restricted zone of two hundred (200) feet radius from the raw water intake works of the city. All recreational activities and trespassing are hereby prohibited in this area, which shall be designated with signs recounting these restrictions. 
(Ord. No. 96-03, § 1, 3-25-96) 
Sec. 27-5. - Trespass prohibited at restricted zone of the raw water intake. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon and trespass on the grounds of the restricted zone (within a two hundred-foot radius of the raw water intake for the city potable water supply) without the consent and permission of the director of public works and engineering, or other person in charge of the raw water intake works of the city. 
(Ord. No. 96-03, § 1, 3-25-96) 
Sec. 27-6. - Water service required. 
    It shall be the duty of every person, corporation or firm that owns, occupies, rents or leases any building within the city to apply for and maintain water utility service. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, § 1, 3-16-09) 
Secs. 27-7-27-13. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 27-14. - Permission required for private collection of garbage, trash, etc.; application for city utility service. 
(a)  Permit. Control of the collection of garbage, trash, rubbish and junk is vested in the city and the collection thereof on a regular basis for hire is prohibited except upon written permission from the city manager. 
(b)  Application for service. Written application shall be made for water, sewer, or any other utility service that may be furnished by the city to the city upon forms furnished therefor. Such application shall state the name and address of the applicant, the type of utility service desired, the purposes for which the application is made and such other information as the city may request. 
(Ord. No. 353, §§ 2, 4, 9-19-66; Ord. No. 785, § 1, 9-13-82) 
Cross reference- Public utilities communications regulations, § 27-87 et seq. 
Sec. 27-15. - Service connections-Made by city. 
    The department shall install and maintain all utility service connections in the streets, alleys, or easements within the city, to the property line of the consumer if the distance from the main to the property line does not exceed twenty-five (25) feet except where a tie-in directly across the street is required and then an extension to the property line shall not exceed sixty (60) feet. 
(Ord. No. 353, § 3, 9-19-66) 
Sec. 27-16. - Service connections-Fees. 
    For each utility service tap or connection, the city shall charge the applicant therefore fees as set forth below: 
(1)  Water 
3/4-inch service ..... $ 500.00 
1-inch service ..... 600.00 
Over one-inch service-Actual cost of material and labor plus ten (10) per cent of cost of material plus twenty (20) per cent of cost of labor. 
(2)  Sewer. 
4-inch line ..... $ 400.00 
Over four-inch line-Actual cost of material and labor plus ten (10) per cent of cost of material plus twenty (20) per cent of cost of labor. 
(3)  Additional fee for unconventional taps. Taps requiring the saw cutting of concrete streets, or boring below or under concrete streets, or any excavations exceeding six (6) feet in depth, shall be charged the actual cost of material, equipment and labor plus ten (10) per cent of material plus twenty (20) per cent of cost of labor. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 1, 12-19-55; Ord. No. 353, § 3, 9-19-66; Ord. No. 560, § 1, 3-24-75; Ord. No. 756, § 1, 10-12-81; Ord. No. 2007-10, § 1, 5-14-07; Ord. No. 2017-12, § 1, 9-18-17) 
Sec. 27-17. - Same-Individual taps. 
    Each water customer shall have an individual water service tap and service line, and the same shall be carried in his own name or in the name of some firm, association or corporation with its agent making the application in its behalf. 
(Ord. No. 353, § 3(d), 9-19-66) 
Sec. 27-18. - Same-Multiple service. 
    Where multiple service is desired from one (1) tap, each utility service shall be at the regular price in accordance with section 27-16. 
(Ord. No. 353, § 3, 9-19-66) 
Sec. 27-19. - Meters-Required. 
    Meters shall be required to measure the consumption of each utility service furnished by the city, except garbage collection and sewerage service. 
(Ord. No. 353, § 3, 9-19-66) 
Sec. 27-20. - Same-Installation, maintenance. 
    All meters required by this chapter and used to measure the consumption of utility services furnished by the city shall be installed and maintained by the city. 
(Ord. No. 353, § 3, 9-19-66) 
Sec. 27-21. - Same-Ownership. 
    All meters used for the measurement of the consumption of any utility service furnished by the city shall be the property of the city. It shall be unlawful for any person to install or maintain any meter for such purposes anywhere within the city which is not owned by the city. 
Sec. 27-22. - Same-Tampering. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a duly authorized employee of the city, to tamper with any meter; or to in any manner injure any meter; or to manipulate or attempt to manipulate any meter in any manner so as to affect its registration or measurement of the metered utility service. 
Cross reference- Malicious mischief generally, § 16-23. 
Sec. 27-23. - Same-Malfunctions. 
    If any meter required by this article goes out of order, fails to register or develops any other malfunction, the consumer will be charged at the average bimonthly consumption rate, as shown by the meter in the last six (6) months or such lesser time as has elapsed. 
(Ord. No. 353, § 3, 9-19-66) 
Sec. 27-24. - Same-Testing. 
    When a test of any meter installed pursuant to the provisions of this article is requested, and in the event the meter is found to be two (2) per cent fast, the city shall adjust the customer's bill and no charge will be made; however, if the meter is slow or accurate, there shall be a twenty dollar ($20.00) charge made to the customer for such testing. 
(Ord. No. 353, § 5, 9-19-66; Ord. No. 482, § 1, 7-31-72; Ord. No. 743, § 1, 7-6-81; Ord. No. 98-17, § 1, 11-2-98) 
Sec. 27-25. - Water deposit. 
    Along with the application for new water service, the applicant shall pay to the city a deposit as follows: 
(1)  Residential: A deposit of one hundred seventy-five dollars ($175.00) shall be required. 
(2)  Commercial: A deposit equal to the charges for an average two-month period. 
(Ord. No. 353, § 3, 9-19-66; Ord. No. 526, § 1, 12-17-73; Ord. No. 537, § 1, 4-8-74; Ord. No. 84-15, § 1, 8-13-84; Ord. No. 95-13, § 1, 11-6-95; Ord. No. 2013-17, § 1, 9-23-13) 
Sec. 27-25.1. - Water turn-on fee. 
    There shall be charged and collected from each new water customer within the city a water turn-on fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Ord. No. 04-12, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 2013-17, § 2, 9-23-13) 
Sec. 27-26. - Deposit refund. 
(a)  Any deposit made to the city by any applicant shall be held by the city until such applicant's utility service for which the deposit was made shall be terminated. 
(b)  Upon termination of such service, the applicant shall be entitled to a refund of such deposit, less any amount which is due and owing to the city. Should the account not be paid in full, the city shall have the right to discontinue service and bill for the excess account balance. 
(Ord. No. 353, § 3, 9-19-66; Ord. No. 2013-17, § 3, 9-23-13) 
Sec. 27-26.1. - Delinquent account procedure. 
(a)  If utility services have been discontinued, any delinquent amount due to the city after the deposit has been applied for utility services at a place of consumption must be paid before any utility services are restored by the city. 
(b)  If any applicant is indebted to the city on any account at their then or previous place of consumption, the delinquent amount due at the previous place of consumption may be transferred to the applicant's active account and such service shall be discontinued by the city until payment in full, plus any service charge, is made. 
(Ord. No. 2013-17, § 4, 9-23-13) 
Sec. 27-27. - Solid waste rates and charges. 
    There shall be charged and collected from each person within the city who owns, manages, operates, leases or rents any premises where garbage, trash or rubbish is accumulated, the following monthly charges, whether or not any pickups of such garbage, trash or rubbish are made: 
(1)  For each residential unit, meaning one-family dwelling; and each unit of group housing; and each unit of apartment houses (except that multi-unit apartments using containers will be charged at the commercial rate) ..... $19.96 
(2)  Commercial: each establishment shall be charged a monthly fee for weekly pickup as noted on the current schedule determined by the solid waste division and approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 328, § 14, 9-20-65; Ord. No. 369, § 1, 8-7-67; Ord. No. 398, § 1, 9-16-68; Ord. No. 414, § 1, 5-28-69; Ord. No. 488, § 1, 10-9-72; Ord. No. 514, § 1, 8-31-73; Ord. No. 526, § 2, 12-17-63; Ord. No. 544, § 1, 8-26-74; Ord. No. 596, § 1, 8-9-76; Ord. No. 631, § 1, 8-22-77; Ord. No. 675, § 1, 8-6-79; Ord. No. 749, § 1, 8-3-81; Ord. No. 785, § 2, 9-13-82; Ord. No. 87-30, § 1, 8-10-87; Ord. No. 89-10, § 1, 8-21-89; Ord. No. 90-11, § 1, 8-9-90; Ord. No. 91-02, § 1, 3-4-91; Ord. No. 93-10, § 1, 8-2-93; Ord. No. 99-06, § 1, 4-19-99; Ord. No. 00-15, §§ 1, 2, 9-28-00; Ord. No. 04-01, § 2, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 04-10, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 05-10, § 1, 9-19-05; Ord. No. 06-16, § 1, 9-18-06; Ord. No. 2008-17, § 1, 9-29-08; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 1, 9-24-12; Ord. No. 2014-07, § 1, 9-22-14; Ord. No. 2015-12, § 1, 9-21-15; Ord. No. 2016-12, § 1, 9-19-16; Ord. No. 2018-02, § 1, 4-30-18) 
Sec. 27-28. - Sewer rates and charges. 
    The following rate is hereby established for sanitary sewer services to be furnished by the City of Groves, and said rates shall be charged and collected from all persons, firms and corporations for services rendered and shall be effective after the effective date of this section. The sewer rate charge shall be based on water consumption and the number of dwelling units located in a building and/or the number of commercial units located in a building as follows, to-wit: 
(1)  Within city limits: 
2,000 gallons of water consumption, per units ..... $11.25 
2,001 or more gallons of water consumption, per 1,000 gallons ..... 3.45 
(2)  Outside city limits: The rate shall be one and one-half (11/2) times the city rate. 
    Charges for sewer service furnished shall be rendered by the water and sewer departments of the City of Groves and shall be due and payable on the date of billing and shall become delinquent if not paid within ten (10) days from the date of billing. If after such charges are not paid, the city reserves the right to discontinue sewer service to the premises without further notice. Such charge shall be billed to the customer or user on the water bill of such customer or user each month. 
(Ord. No. 327, § 1, 9-20-65; Ord. No. 405, § 1, 12-9-68; Ord. No. 514, § 2, 8-31-73; Ord. No. 526, § 3, 12-17-73; Ord. No. 574, § 1, 8-25-75; Ord. No. 630, § 1, 8-22-77; Ord. No. 83-12, § 1, 8-1-83; Ord. No. 87-31, § 1, 8-10-87; Ord. No. 91-16, § 1, 8-5-91; Ord. No. 92-10, § 1, 8-31-92; Ord. No. 94-07, § 1, 8-1-94; Ord. No. 95-08, § 1, 8-28-95; Ord. No. 98-09, § 1, 8-31-98; Ord. No. 00-15, §§ 3, 4, 9-28-00; Ord. No. 02-10, § 1, 9-19-02; Ord. No. 06-18, § 1, 9-18-06; Ord. No. 2008-19, § 1, 9-29-08; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1, 9-27-10; Ord. No. 2011-14, § 1, 9-26-11; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 2, 9-24-12; Ord. No. 2013-17, § 5, 9-23-13; Ord. No. 2014-07, § 2, 9-22-14; Ord. No. 2015-12, § 2, 9-21-15; Ord. No. 2018-11, § 1, 9-7-18) 
Sec. 27-28.1. - Industrial sewer rate and surcharge. 
    An industrial sewer rate and surcharge shall be established to recover costs attributed to operation and maintenance of the sewer system. These charges shall be in addition to any industrial cost recovery system charges. The industrial sewer rate shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  Industrial sewer rate (based upon water consumption) to be billed monthly to match existing city policy: 
a.  Within city limits: 
Minimum (2,000 gallons) ..... $ 11.25 
All over 2,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons ..... 3.45 
b.  Outside city limits: 
The rate shall be one and one half (11/2)times the city rate. 
(2)  Surcharge: 
a.  Discharge of abnormal sewage shall pay a surcharge computed on the following formula: 
SC = V[$0.20(BOD 5 -340) + $0.50(TSS 5 -340)] 
SC = Surcharge 
V = Volume in million gallons based on metered water 
BOD 5 = 5 days, 20°biochemical oxygen demand of industrial wastewater in ppm (or mg/1) 
TSS 5 = Total suspended solids of industrial waste in ppm (or mg/1) 
(Ord. No. 703, § 7, 3-31-80; Ord. No. 724, § 1, 10-27-80; Ord. No. 91-16, § 2, 8-5-91; Ord. No. 92-10, § 1, 8-31-92; Ord. No. 94-07, § 2, 8-1-94; Ord. No. 95-08, § 2, 8-28-95; Ord. No. 98-09, § 1, 8-31-98; Ord. No. 00-15, § 5, 9-28-00; Ord. No. 02-10, § 2, 9-19-02; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 2, 9-27-10; Ord. No. 2011-14, § 2, 9-26-11; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3, 9-24-12; Ord. No. 2013-17, § 6, 9-23-13; Ord. No. 2014-07, § 3, 9-22-14; Ord. No. 2015-12, § 3, 9-21-15; Ord. No. 2018-11, § 2, 9-7-18) 
Sec. 27-28.2. - Sewer maintenance fee. 
    There shall be charged and collected from each water customer within the city a monthly maintenance fee of one dollar and five cents ($1.05) per one thousand (1,000) gallons of water used; said fee to be used for debt service for sewer rehabilitation. 
(Ord. No. 04-11, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 05-11, § 1, 9-19-05; Ord. No. 06-17, § 1, 9-18-06; Ord. No. 2008-18, § 1, 9-29-08; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 4, 9-24-12; Ord. No. 2014-07, § 4, 9-22-14) 
Sec. 27-29. - Water rates and charges. 
    The following monthly billing rates and charges for furnishing water and water service by the city are hereby fixed and established as follows, to-wit: 
(1)  Within city limits: 
2,000 gallons, or less, minimum charge ..... $ 11.00 
2,001 or more gallons, per 1,000 gallons ..... 3.45 
(2)  Outside city limits: 
The rate shall be one and one-half (11/2) times the city rate. 
    Where multiple services are provided, the minimum charge shall be made for each additional residence taking water through such meter. The regular minimum, the additional minimum and all water used over the minimum amounts by such consumers shall be charged to the customer having the meter. 
(Ord. No. 353, § 5, 9-19-66; Ord. No. 397, § 1, 9-16-68; Ord. No. 404, § 1, 12-9-68; Ord. No. 514, § 3, 8-31-73; Ord. No. 526, § 4, 12-17-73; Ord. No. 629, § 1, 8-22-77; Ord. No. 676, § 1, 8-6-79; Ord. No. 83-11, § 1, 8-1-83; Ord. No. 91-15, § 1, 8-5-91; Ord. No. 92-09, § 1, 8-31-92; Ord. No. 94-06, § 1, 8-1-94; Ord. No. 97-07, § 1, 8-25-97; Ord. No. 00-15, §§ 6, 7, 9-28-00; Ord. No. 02-10, § 3, 9-19-02; Ord. No. 06-19, § 1, 9-18-06; Ord. No. 2008-20, § 1, 9-29-08; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 3, 9-27-10; Ord. No. 2011-14, § 3, 9-26-11; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 5, 9-24-12; Ord. No. 2013-17, § 7, 9-23-13; Ord. No. 2014-07, § 5, 9-22-14; Ord. No. 2015-12, § 4, 9-21-15; Ord. No. 2018-11, § 3, 9-7-18) 
Sec. 27-30. - Payment of rates and charges. 
    The rates and charges fixed and prescribed by this chapter shall be due and payable in the office of the clerk of the water office on or before the tenth day after the date of billing. If said bill is not paid on or before the fifteenth day after the date of billing an additional charge of ten (10) per cent shall be added to the bill. 
(Ord. No. 353, § 5, 9-19-66; Ord. No. 439, § 1, 9-28-70) 
Sec. 27-31. - Disconnection of service for nonpayment. 
    In the event that any consumer of utility services furnished by the city does not pay the rates and charges on or before the day the same are due, the clerk of the water office shall have the authority to disconnect or terminate or cause to be disconnected or terminated all utility services furnished such consumer. 
(Ord. No. 353, § 5, 9-19-66) 
Sec. 27-32. - Resumption of service; reconnection fee. 
    Any consumer of the utility services furnished by the city whose utility services have been disconnected or terminated for the nonpayment of the rates and charges therefor may have such utility services resumed by paying all rates and charges due by the consumer to the city, including the making of a deposit in accordance with the current deposit required, and, in addition thereto, a reconnection fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00), if such reconnection is made during regular working hours. If such reconnection is made after regular working hours or on Saturday or Sunday, the reconnection fee shall be sixty-five dollars ($65.00). 
(Ord. No. 353, § 5, 9-19-66; Ord. No. 471, § 1, 2-28-72; Ord. No. 526, § 5, 12-17-73; Ord. No. 743, § 2, 7-6-81; Ord. No. 98-17, § 2, 11-2-98) 
Sec. 27-33. - Rates and charges for public utilities to be fixed by city. 
    The city council shall fix and approve the rates charged by any private public utility company doing business within the city. It shall be unlawful for any such public utility company or any officer or employee thereof to assess or charge for services rendered any rate other than the rate so fixed or approved. 
Sec. 27-34. - Service agreement required. 
    A service agreement, as required by the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission (TNRCC) Permanent Volume of Rules, Chapter 290, "Water Hygiene", in the form promulgated by said rules, with provisions for proper enforcement to insure that neither cross-connections, nor other unacceptable plumbing practices are permitted, shall be signed by the proposed customer and filed with water billing and public works. 
(Ord. No. 95-17, § 1, 12-18-95) 
Sec. 27-35. - Service inspection certification required. 
    A service inspection certification, as required by the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission (TNRCC) Permanent Volume of Rules, Chapter 290, "Water Hygiene", in the form promulgated by said rules, shall be completed, at customer's expense, prior to providing continuous water service to new construction, on any existing service when the water purveyor has reason to believe that cross-connections or other unacceptable plumbing practices exist, or after any material improvement, correction, or addition to the private plumbing facilities, and filed with public works. 
(Ord. No. 95-17, § 1, 12-18-95) 
Sec. 27-36. - Disconnection and resumption of service at request of customer. 
(a)  Temporary disconnection and resumption of utility services by the city to any customer of the city, whose account is current and not in arrears, shall be performed during regular working hours of the employees of the city, and the charge for such service shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00). 
(b)  In the case where a temporary disconnection or a reconnection is made for a customer on an emergency basis outside the regular working hours of the employees of the city, a fee of sixty-five dollars ($65.00) shall be charged to the customer for each instance that the employees of the city are called out to perform such service. 
(Ord. No. 98-17, § 3, 11-2-98) 
Sec. 27-37. - Water usage surcharge. 
    At any time the raw water rate charged to the city by the Lower Neches Valley Authority is increased pursuant to the drought contingency plan, said surcharge shall be passed through to each water customer of the city based upon the water usage of each customer. 
(Ord. No. 2011-20, § 1, 12-19-11) 
Secs. 27-38-27-43. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Sanitary sewer system, art. II, § 4. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Toxic materials, ch. 241/2. 

Sec. 27-44. - Privies, cesspools, septic tanks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to build, construct, dig, maintain or use any dry toilet, surface privy, cesspool or septic tank within the city; provided, however, when connection to the city's sanitary sewer system is impossible or impractical at any time, the construction, maintenance and use of a septic tank constructed in conformity to state law and approved by the building inspector may be permitted until such time as connection to the sewer system may be made. 
Sec. 27-45. - Sewer connections-Required. 
    All owners or occupants of buildings, or agents for the owners, situated within two hundred fifty (250) feet of a sanitary sewer are hereby required to construct or cause to be constructed suitable water closets on their property, and connect the same with the city sanitary sewer system under the direction and supervision of the city. 
(Ord. No. 88, §§ 1-3, 3-26-56) 
Sec. 27-46. - Same-Maintenance. 
    It shall be the duty of any owner or occupant of any building connected with the city sanitary sewer system to keep and maintain the connection to the sewer system in perfect condition and free from any obstruction. 
Sec. 27-47. - Discharge prohibited; notice; penalty. 
(a)  Prohibited discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, groundwater, surface water, roof runoff, foundation drainage, subsurface drainage, or any unpolluted industrial process water into the sanitary sewer system. 
(b)  Notice. The city shall serve persons in violation of this section with a written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing for satisfactory compliance within a period of sixty (60) days from the service of said notice. 
(c)  Continuing prohibited discharges. No person may continue to be in violation of this section beyond the time limit provided in the notice. 
(d)  Penalty. 
(1)  A person who continues prohibited violations is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction is punishable by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each act of violation and for each day of violation. 
(2)  In addition to preceding under authority of subsection (d)(1) above, the city is entitled to pursue all other criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under authority of statutes or other ordinances against a person continuing prohibited violations. 
(e)  Surcharge. A person who continues "prohibited discharges" as provided in the foregoing subsection (c), beyond the time period provided in subsection (b), shall, in addition to being subject to the penalty provided in subsection (d), also be subject to a surcharge of twenty-four dollars ($24.00) per month to cover the cost of treating the prohibited discharge into the sanitary sewer system. Such charge will be added to the person's monthly water, sewer and garbage bill and will remain in effect until the person satisfactorily corrects the violation and contacts the city for an inspection of the repairs. Upon approval of the repairs by the proper authority of the city, the surcharge shall henceforth be removed from the person's water, sewer and garbage bill. 
(Ord. No. 703, § 10, 3-31-80; Ord. No. 93-2, § 1, 3-15-93) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 703, §§ 3, 8-12, enacted Mar. 31, 1980, did not specifically amend the Code, hence inclusion as §§ 27-47-27-49 has been at the discretion of the editors. Sections 1, 2, 4, 6, 13 and 14 of such ordinance, providing for the adoption of a sewer use ordinance, including all previously enacted resolutions and ordinances since Jan. 2, 1953, providing that Ord. No. 702, be considered a part of the sewer use ordinance, providing that the Texas Department of Water Resources and U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Water Quality Standards will be enacted if needed, providing that conflict between this ordinance and others be ruled by the sewer use ordinance, providing for severability and an effective date, have been omitted from codification. 
Sec. 27-48. - Failure to pay. 
    In addition to sanctions provided for by subsection 27-47(d), the city is entitled to exercise sanctions provided for by the other ordinances of the city for failure to pay the bill for water and sanitary sewer service when due. 
(Ord. No. 703, § 11, 3-31-80) 
Note- See the editor's note following § 27-47. 
Sec. 27-49. - Penalty for criminal mischief. 
    The city may pursue all criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under authority of statutes and ordinances against a person negligently, willfully, or maliciously causing loss by tampering with or destroying public wastewater facilities. 
(Ord. No. 703, § 12, 3-31-80) 
Note- See the editor's note following § 27-47. 
DIVISION 2. - DISCHARGE OF INDUSTRIAL WASTE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 702, §§ 2-32, being nonamendatory of the Code has been set out herein as Div. 2, §§ 27-51-27-56.22 at the discretion of the editors. 
Cross reference- Toxic materials, Ch. 241/2. 

Sec. 27-50. - Definitions. 
    As used in this division: 
    Approving authority means the city manager or his duly authorized representative. 
    Average quality means the arithmetic average (weighted by flow value) of all the daily determinations of concentrations made during a calendar month. Daily determinations of concentrations made using a composite sample. When grab samples are used, the daily determination of concentration shall be the arithmetic average (weighted flow value) of all the samples collected during the calendar day. 
    B.O.D. (Biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen by weight, expressed in mg/l, utilized in the bio-chemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory conditions for five (5) days at a temperature of twenty (20) degrees centigrade. 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal (also called house lateral and house connection). 
    Daily composite quality means the concentration of a sample consisting of a minimum of three (3) grab samples of effluent collected at regular intervals over a normal operating day and combined proportional to flow, or a sample continuously collected proportional to flow over a normal operating day. 
    City means the City of Groves, Texas, or any authorized person acting in its behalf. 
    C.O.D. (Chemical oxygen demand) means measure of the oxygen consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in the water or wastewater expressed in mg/l as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specific test, but not differentiating between stable and unstable organic matter and thus not necessarily correlating with biochemical oxygen demand. 
    Control manhole means a manhole giving access to a building sewer at some point before the building sewer discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer. 
    Control point means a point of access to a course of discharge before the discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer. 
    Garbage means animal and vegetable wastes and residue from preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, processing, storage and sale of food products and produce. 
    Grab sample quality means the concentration of an individual sample of effluent collected in less than fifteen (15) minutes. 
    Hazardous metal includes each of the following metals in its elemental state and any of its compounds expressed as that metal: arsenic, barium, cadmium, chromium, copper, lead, manganese, mercury, nickel, selenium, silver, and zinc. 
    Industrial waste means waste resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade, or business from the development of any natural resource, or any mixture of the waste with water or normal wastewater, or distinct from normal wastewater. 
    Industrial waste charge means the charge made on those persons who discharge industrial wastes into the city's sewer system. 
    Inland waters shall include all surface waters in the state other than "tidal waters" defined below. 
    Milligrams per liter (mg/l) means the same as parts per million and is a weight-to-volume ratio; the milligram-per-liter value multiplied by the factor eight and thirty four one hundredths (8.34) shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
    Normal domestic wastewater means wastewater excluding industrial wastewater discharged by a person into sanitary sewers and in which the average concentration of total suspended solids is not more than three hundred forty (340) mg/l and BOD is not more than three hundred forty (340) mg/l. 
    Overload means the imposition of organic or hydraulic loading on a treatment facility in excess of its engineered design capacity. 
    Person includes corporation, organization, government or governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership association, and any other legal entity. 
    pH means the logarithm (Base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration. 
    Public sewer means pipe or conduit carrying wastewater or unpolluted drainage in which owners of abutting properties shall have the use, subject to control by the City of Groves, and Jefferson County Drainage District No. 7. 
    Sanitary sewer means a public sewer that conveys domestic wastewater or industrial wastes or a combination of both, and into which stormwater, surface water, groundwater, and other unpolluted wastes are not intentionally passed. 
    Slug means any discharge of water, wastewater, or industrial waste which, in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four-hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
    Standard methods means the examination and analytical procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" as prepared, approved, and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation. 
    Storm sewer means a public sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage and into which domestic wastewater or industrial wastes are not intentionally passed. 
    Stormwater means rainfall or any other forms of precipitation. 
    Superintendent means the water and/or wastewater superintendent of the City of Groves, or his duly authorized deputy, agent, or representative. 
    Suspended solids means solids measured in mg/l that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, wastewater, or other liquids, and which are largely removable by a laboratory filtration device. 
    Tidal waters shall mean those waters of the Gulf of Mexico within the jurisdiction of the State of Texas, bays, estuaries thereto, and those portions of the river systems which are subject to the ebb and flow of the tides, and to the intrusion of marine waters. 
    To discharge includes to deposit, conduct, drain, emit, throw, run, allow to seep, or otherwise release or dispose of, or to allow, permit, or suffer any of these acts or omissions. 
    Trap means a device designed to skim, settle, or otherwise remove grease, oil, sand, flammable wastes or other harmful substances. 
    Unpolluted wastewater means water containing: 
(a)  No free or emulsified grease or oil; 
(b)  No acids or alkalis; 
(c)  No phenols or other substances producing taste or odor in receiving water; 
(d)  No toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state, or solution; 
(e)  No noxious or otherwise obnoxious or odorous gases; 
(f)  Not more than an insignificant amount in mg/l each of suspended solids and BOD, as determined by the Texas Department of Water Resources; and 
(g)  Color not exceeding fifty (50) units as measured by the Platinum-Cobalt method of determination as specified in Standard Methods. 
    Waste means rejected, utilized or superfluous substances in liquid, gaseous, or solid form resulting from domestic, agricultural, or industrial activities. 
    Wastewater means a combination of the water-carried waste from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with any ground, surface, and stormwater that may be present. 
    Wastewater facilities includes all facilities for collection, pumping, treating, and disposing of wastewater and industrial wastes. 
    Wastewater treatment plant means any city-owned facilities, devices, and structures used for receiving, processing, and treating wastewater, industrial waste, and sludges from the sanitary sewers. 
    Wastewater service charge means the charge on all users of the public sewer system whose wastes do not exceed in strength the concentration values established as representative of normal wastewater. 
    Watercourse means a natural or man-made channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 2, 3-31-80) 
Sec. 27-51. - Prohibited discharges. 
(a)  No person may discharge to public sewers any waste which by itself or by interaction with other wastes may: 
(1)  Injure or interfere with wastewater treatment processes or facilities; 
(2)  Constitute a hazard to humans or animals; or 
(3)  Create a hazard in receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant effluent. 
(b)  All discharges shall conform to requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 3, 3-31-80) 
Sec. 27-52. - Chemical discharges. 
(a)  No discharge to public sewers may contain: 
(1)  Cyanide greater than 1.0 mg/l; 
(2)  Fluoride other than that contained in the public water supply; 
(3)  Chlorides in concentrations greater than 250 mg/l; 
(4)  Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas; or 
(5)  Substances causing an excessive chemical oxygen demand (C.O.D.) 
(b)  No waste or wastewater discharged to public waters may contain; 
(1)  Strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not; 
(2)  Fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32) and one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (0 and 65° Centigrade). 
(3)  Objectionable or toxic substances, exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment works exceeds the limits established by the Approving Authority for such materials; or 
(4)  Obnoxious, toxic, or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in quantities sufficient to violate the provisions of Section 27-51(a). 
(c)  No waste, wastewater, or other substance may be discharged into public sewers which have a pH lower than five and five tenths (5.5) or higher than nine and five tenths (9.5), or any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and/or personnel at the wastewater facilities. 
(d)  All waste, wastewater, or other substance containing phenols, hydrogen sulfide, or other taste-and-odor producing substances, shall conform to concentration limits established by the approving authority. After treatment of the composite wastewater, concentration limits may not exceed the requirements established by state, federal, or other agencies with jurisdiction over discharges to receiving waters. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 4, 3-31-80) 
Sec. 27-53. - Heavy metals and toxic materials. 
(a)  No discharges may contain concentrations of heavy metals greater than amounts specified in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  The allowable concentrations of heavy metals stated in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l), determined on the basis of individual sampling in accordance with "Standard Methods" are: 
Average Not to Exceed Daily Composite Grab Sample Arsenic   .01   0.2 mg/l 0.3 Barium   1.0   2.0 mg/l 4.0 Boron   1.0   2.0 mg/l 4.0 Cadmium  0.05   0.1 mg/l 0.2 Chromium   0.5   1.0 mg/l 5.0 Copper   0.5   1.0 mg/l 2.0 Lead   0.5   1.0 mg/l 1.5 Manganese   1.0   2.0 mg/l 3.0 Mercury 0.005 0.005 mg/l 0.01 Nickel   1.0   2.0 mg/l 3.0 Selenium  0.05   0.1 mg/l 0.2 Silver  0.05   0.1 mg/l 0.2 Zinc   1.0   2.0 mg/l 6.0  
(c)  No other heavy metals or toxic materials may be discharged into public sewers without a permit from the approving authority specifying conditions of pretreatment, concentrations, volumes and other applicable provisions. 
(d)  Prohibited heavy metals and toxic materials include but are not limited to: 
(1)  Antimony, 
(2)  Beryllium, 
(3)  Bismuth, 
(4)  Cobalt, 
(5)  Molybdenum, 
(6)  Uranyl ion, 
(7)  Rhenium, 
(8)  Strontium, 
(9)  Tellurium, 
(10)  Herbicides, 
(11)  Fungicides, and 
(12)  Pesticides. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 5, 3-31-80) 
Sec. 27-54. - Garbage. 
(a)  No person may discharge garbage into public sewers unless it is shredded to a degree that all particles can be carried freely under the flow conditions normally in public sewers. Particles greater than one-half (1/2) inch in any dimension are prohibited. 
(b)  The approving authority is entitled to review and approve the installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/4) horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 6, 3-31-80) 
Sec. 27-55. - Stormwater and other unpolluted drainage. 
(a)  No person may discharge to public sanitary sewers: 
(1)  Unpolluted stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff or subsurface drainage; 
(2)  Unpolluted cooling water; 
(3)  Unpolluted industrial process waters; or 
(4)  Other unpolluted drainage. 
(b)  In compliance with the Texas Water Quality Act and other statutes, the approving authority may designate storm sewers and other watercourses into which unpolluted drainage described in subsection (a) of this section may be discharged. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 7, 3-31-80) 
Sec. 27-56. - Temperature. 
    No person may discharge liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees centigrade), or any substance which causes the temperature of the total wastewater treatment plant influent to increase at a rate of ten (10) degrees Fahrenheit or more per hour, or a combined total increase of plant influent temperature to one hundred ten (110) degrees Fahrenheit. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 8, 3-31-80) 
Sec. 27-56.1. - Radioactive wastes. 
(a)  No person may discharge radioactive wastes or isotopes into public sewers without the permission of the approving authority 
(b)  The approving authority may establish, in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations, regulations for discharge of radioactive wastes into public sewers. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 9, 3-31-80) 
Sec. 27-56.2. - Impairment of facilities. 
(a)  No person may discharge into public sewers any substance capable of causing: 
(1)  Obstruction to the flow in sewers; 
(2)  Interference with the operation of treatment processes of facilities; or 
(3)  Excessive loading of treatment facilities. 
(b)  Discharges prohibited by subsection (a) include, but are not limited to materials which exert or cause concentration of: 
(1)  Inert suspended solids greater than two hundred fifty (250) mg/l including but not limited to: 
a.  Fuller's earth; 
b.  Lime slurries; and 
c.  Lime residues; 
(2)  Dissolved solids greater than five hundred (500) mg/l including but not limited to: 
a.  Sodium chloride; and 
b.  Sodium sulfate; 
(3)  Excessive discoloration including but not limited to: 
a.  Dye wastes; and 
b.  Vegetable tanning solutions; or 
(4)  BOD, COD or chlorine demand in excess of normal plant capacity. 
(c)  No person may discharge into public sewers any substances that may: 
(1)  Deposit grease or oil in the sewer lines in such a manner as to clog the sewers; 
(2)  Overload skimming and grease handling equipment; 
(3)  Pass to the receiving waters without being effectively treated by normal wastewater treatment processes due to the nonamenability of the substance to tacterial action; or 
(4)  Deleteriously affect the treatment process due to excessive quantities. 
(d)  No person may discharge any substance into public sewers which: 
(1)  Is not amenable to treatment or reduction by the process and facilities employed; or 
(2)  Is amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(e)  The approving authority shall regulate the flow and concentration of slugs when they may: 
(1)  Impair the treatment process; 
(2)  Cause damage to collection facilities; 
(3)  Incur treatment costs exceeding those for normal wastewater; or 
(4)  Render the waste unfit for stream disposal or industrial use. 
(f)  No person may discharge into public sewers solid or viscous substances which may violate subsection (a) of this section if present in sufficient quantity or size including but not limited to: 
(1)  Ashes; 
(2)  Cinders; 
(3)  Sand; 
(4)  Mud; 
(5)  Straw; 
(6)  Shavings; 
(7)  Metal; 
(8)  Glass; 
(9)  Rags; 
(10)  Feathers; 
(11)  Tar; 
(12)  Plastics; 
(13)  Wood; 
(14)  Unground garbage; 
(15)  Whole blood; 
(16)  Paunch manure; 
(17)  Hair and fleshings; 
(18)  Entrails; 
(19)  Paper products, either whole or ground by garbage grinders; 
(20)  Slops; 
(21)  Chemical residues; 
(22)  Paint residues; or 
(23)  Bulk solids. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 10, 3-31-80) 
Sec. 27-56.3. - Compliance with existing authority. 
(a)  Unless exception is granted by the approving authority, the public sanitary sewer system shall be used by all persons discharging: 
(1)  Wastewater; 
(2)  Industrial waste; 
(3)  Polluted liquids; or 
(4)  Unpolluted waters or liquids. 
(b)  Unless authorized by the Texas Department of Health Resources or Texas Department of Water Resources, no person may deposit or discharge any waste included in subsection (a) of this section on public or private property into or adjacent to any: 
(1)  Natural outlet; 
(2)  Watercourse; 
(3)  Storm sewer; 
(4)  Other area within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(c)  The approving authority shall verify prior to discharge that wastes authorized to be discharged will receive suitable treatment within the provisions of laws, regulations, ordinances, rules and orders of federal, state and local governments. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 11, 3-31-80) 
Sec. 27-56.4. - Approving authority requirements. 
(a)  If discharges or proposed discharges to public sewers may: 
(1)  Deleteriously affect wastewater facilities, processes, equipment, or receiving waters; 
(2)  Create a hazard to life or health; or 
(3)  Create a public nuisance; the approving authority shall require: 
a.  Pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
b.  Control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and 
c.  Payment to cover the cost of handling and treating the wastes. 
(b)  The approving authority is entitled to determine whether a discharge or proposed discharge is included under subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  The approving authority shall reject wastes when: 
(1)  It determines that a discharge or proposed discharge is included under subsection (a) of this section; and 
(2)  The discharger does not meet the requirements of subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 12, 3-31-80) 
Sec. 27-56.5. - Approving authority review and approval. 
(a)  If pretreatment or control is required, the approving authority shall review and approve design and installation of equipment and processes. 
(b)  The design and installation of equipment and processes must conform to all applicable statutes, codes, ordinances and other laws. 
(c)  Any person responsible for discharges requiring pretreatment, flow-equalizing, or other facilities shall provide and maintain the facilities in effective operating condition at his own expense. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 13, 3-31-80) 
Sec. 27-56.6. - Requirements for traps. 
(a)  Discharges requiring a trap include: 
(1)  Grease or waste containing grease in excessive amounts; 
(2)  Oil; 
(3)  Sand; 
(4)  Flammable wastes; and 
(5)  Other harmful ingredients. 
(b)  Any person responsible for discharges requiring a trap shall at his own expense and as required by the approving authority: 
(1)  Provide equipment and facilities of a type and capacity approved by the approving authority; 
(2)  Locate the trap in a manner that provides ready and easy accessibility for cleaning and inspection; and 
(3)  Maintain the trap in effective operating condition. 
(c)  Construction requirements of a grease trap or interceptor and maintenance involved with long term management of the facility: 
(1)  Design and construction: The design of a grease trap for any new facility shall conform to the standards of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 
The construction shall be of reinforced concrete, precast concrete, or fiberglass. It shall contain an inlet and outlet piping system, four (4) inch minimum, a baffle piping system, two (2) inspection covers, and a sample well. 
(2)  Quality control: All traps or interceptors shall be Park Environmental Equipment or an approved type of equal quality, including attachment. 
(3)  Management: The owner/operator of any facility that requires a trap shall maintain a record of the cleaning of such apparatus. These records shall be available upon request of the building official or his designee during regular business hours, Monday through Friday. Failure to maintain the records, or refusal of the inspector's request to examine such records, shall constitute a violation of this division of the Code of Ordinances and shall subject the owner/operator to the provisions of section 27-56.15, power to enter property. 
Owners of traps found to be in need of maintenance shall be given written notice to abate such conditions within ten (10) days, as provided in Section 27-56.17. Notice. and thereafter shall be subject to the provisions of Section 27-56.18. Continuing prohibited discharges. 
(4)  Substandard traps: Substandard traps will require a frequent cleaning schedule, or in the opinion of the inspector, the owner/operator may be required to replace the substandard apparatus with a new one which meets the design criteria. Should a facility be found not having a trap, notification to comply within sixty (60) days will be issued. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 14, 3-31-80; Ord. No. 00-08, § 1, 6-12-00) 
Sec. 27-56.7. - Requirements for building sewers. 
    Any person responsible for discharges through a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall at his own expense and as required by the approving authority: 
(1)  Install an accessible and safely located control manhole; 
(2)  Install meters and other appurtenances to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the waste; and 
(3)  Maintain the equipment and facilities. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 15, 331-80) 
Sec. 27-56.8. - Sampling and testing. 
(a)  Sampling shall be conducted according to customarily accepted methods, reflecting the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and determining the existence of hazards to health, life, limb, and property. (Note: The particular analyses involved will determine whether a twenty-four-hour composite sample from all outfalls of a premise is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from twenty-four-hour composites of all outfalls. Where applicable, sixteen-hour, eight-hour or some other period may be required. Periodic grab samples are used to determine pH.) 
(b)  Examination and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes required by this division shall be: 
(1)  Conducted in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods;" and 
(2)  Determined from suitable samples taken at the control manhole provided or other control point authorized by the approving authority. 
(c)  BOD and suspended solids shall be determined from composite sampling, except to detect unauthorized discharges. 
(d)  The city may select an independent firm or laboratory to determine flow, B.O.D., and suspended solids. 
(e)  The city is entitled to select the time of sampling at its sole discretion so long as at least annual samples are taken. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 16, 3-31-80) 
Sec. 27-56.9. - Payment and agreement required. 
(a)  When discharges of industrial waste are approved by the approving authority, the city or its authorized representative shall enter into an agreement or arrangement providing: 
(1)  Terms of acceptance by the city, and 
(2)  Payment by the person making the discharge. 
(b)  Persons making discharges of industrial waste shall pay a sewer use charge to cover the cost of operation and maintenance of the city's waste water treatment and collection facilities. Such sewer use charge and any surcharge for waste water over prescribed limitations shall be as described in the City of Groves' Sewer Use Ordinance and Amendments thereto. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 17, 3-31-80; Ord. No. 728, § 1, 11-24-80) 
Sec. 27-56.10. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 728, § 2, adopted Nov. 24, 1980, amended Ord. No. 702 by deleting § 18 thereof which had pertained to the industrial cost recovery system as set out in former § 27-56.10. 
Sec. 27-56.11. - Savings clause. 
    A person discharging industrial wastes into public sewers prior to the effective date of this division may continue without penalty so long as he: 
(a)  Does not increase the quantity or quality of discharge without permission of the approving authority; 
(b)  Has discharged the industrial waste at least twelve (12) months prior to the effective date of this division; and 
(c)  Applies for and is granted a permit no later than one hundred fifty (150) days after the effective date of this division. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 19, 3-31-80; Ord. No. 728, § 3, 11-24-80) 
Sec. 27-56.12. - Conditions for permits. 
(a)  The city may grant a permit to discharge to persons meeting all requirements of the savings clause provided that the person: 
(1)  Submit an application within one hundred twenty (120) days after the effective date of this division on forms supplied by the approving authority; 
(2)  Secure approval by the approving authority of plans and specifications for pretreatment facilities when required; and 
(3)  Has complied with all requirements for agreements or arrangements including, but not limited to, provisions for: 
a.  payment of charges; 
b.  installation and operation of pretreatment facilities; and 
c.  sampling and analysis to determine quantity and strength; and 
(4)  Provide a sampling point subject to the provisions of this division and approval of the approving authority. 
(b)  A person applying for a new discharge shall: 
(1)  Meet all conditions of subsection (a) of this section; and 
(2)  Secure a permit prior to discharging any waste. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 20, 3-31-80; Ord. No. 728, § 4, 11-24-80) 
Editor's note- Such application form, referred to in subsection (a) (1) above, is not set out at length herein, but is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 27-56.13. - Classification of industrial users. 
(a)  All industrial users shall be classified in accordance with the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, (SIC), 1972 by the Office of Management and Budget, Executive Office of the President of the United States, or latest manual. 
(b)  Major and minor industrial classifications for local industries shall be made based upon the SIC and characteristics of its wastewater. 
(c)  Industrial users will be monitored over the course of the ICR period. Reclassification will be made if necessary. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 21, 3-31-80) 
Sec. 27-56.14. - Exclusion of industrial users. 
(a)  Certain industrial users shall be excluded from the application of the ICR system if they fall within the following categories: 
(1)  Industrial users which discharge only nonprocess segregated domestic wastes, or wastes from sanitary conveniences (for example, the so called "dry" industries) which have not significant industrial uses as described under the EPA regulations. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 22, 3-31-80) 
Sec. 27-56.15. - Power to enter property. 
(a)  The city manager and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled to enter any public or private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of enforcing this division. 
(b)  Anyone acting under this authority shall observe the establishment's rules and regulations concerning safety, internal security, and fire protection. 
(c)  Except when caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions, the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the sampling operation. 
(d)  The city manager and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled to enter all private properties through which the city holds a negotiated easement for the purposes of: 
(1)  Inspection, observation, measurement, sampling or repair; 
(2)  Maintenance of any portion of the sewerage system lying within the easements; and 
(3)  Conducting any other authorized activity. All activities shall be conducted in full accordance with the terms of the negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(e)  No person acting under authority of this provision may inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the public sewers. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 23, 3-31-80) 
Sec. 27-56.16. - Authority to disconnect service. 
(a)  The city may terminate water and wastewater disposal service and disconnect an industrial customer from the system when: 
(1)  Acids or chemicals damaging to sewer lines or treatment process are released to the sewer causing rapid deterioration of these structures or interfering with proper conveyance and treatment of wastewater; 
(2)  A governmental agency informs the city that the effluent from the wastewater treatment plant is no longer of a quality permitted for discharge to a watercourse, and it is found that the customer is delivering wastewater to the city system that cannot be sufficiently treated or requires treatment that is not provided by the city as normal domestic treatment; or 
a.  Discharges industrial waste or wastewater that is in violation of the permit issued by the approving authority; 
b.  Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable rate in sufficient quantity to cause an imbalance in the wastewater treatment system; 
c.  Fails to pay bills for water and sanitary sewer services when due; or 
d.  Repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes to public sewers. 
(b)  If service is discontinued pursuant to subsection (a)(2) of this section, the city shall: 
(1)  Disconnect the customer; 
(2)  Supply the customer with governmental agency's report and provide the customer with all pertinent information; and 
(3)  Continue disconnection until such time as the industrial customer provides additional pretreatment or other facilities designed to remove the objectionable characteristics from his industrial wastes. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 24, 3-31-80) 
Sec. 27-56.17. - Notice. 
    The city shall serve persons discharging in violation of this division with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for satisfactory compliance. 
(Ord. No. 7029 § 25, 3-31-80) 
Sec. 27-56.18. - Continuing prohibited discharges. 
    No person may continue discharging in violation of this division beyond the time limit provided in the notice. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 26, 3-31-80) 
Sec. 27-56.19. - Penalty for violation of division 2. 
(a)  The penalty for violation of this division 2 shall be the same as provided in chapter 1, general provisions, section 1-5, general penalties; continuing violations; concurrent jurisdiction, of this Code. 
(b)  In addition to proceeding under authority of subsection (a) of this section, the city is entitled to pursue all other criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under authority of statutes or other ordinances against a person continuing prohibited discharges. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 27, 3-31-80) 
Sec. 27-56.20. - Failure to pay. 
    In addition to sanctions, provided for by this division, the city is entitled to exercise sanctions provided for by the other ordinances of the city for failure to pay the bill for water and sanitary sewer service when due. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 28, 3-31-80) 
Sec. 27-56.21. - Penalty for criminal mischief. 
    The city may pursue all criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under authority of statutes and ordinances against a person negligently, willfully, or maliciously causing loss by tampering with or destroying public sewers or treatment facilities. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 29, 3-81-80) 
Sec. 27-56.22. - Administrative appeal and local review procedures. 
(a)  Administrative appeal procedure. 
(1)  Any industrial user may appeal the conditions of ICR system placed upon it in accordance with the following procedures; 
a.  The industrial user shall submit, in writing, its complaint against the ICR system. 
b.  A public hearing on the complaint will be scheduled within fifteen (15) days after filing the complaint. The hearing will be conducted by the city attorney. The industrial user and approving authority will each be given an opportunity to present testimony for or against the complaint. 
c.  A panel made up of the mayor, one city councilman, city attorney, and the city engineer shall review the testimony and report its findings and recommendation to the city council within thirty (30) days after the hearing. 
d.  The city council shall act upon the recommendation and findings of the panel. Its decision will be final unless new evidence can be presented by the industrial user. If this is the case the matter will go back to the panel for reconsideration and recommendation. 
(b)  Local review procedures. 
(1)  Any industrial user may request a review of the ICR procedures at any time. Such a review shall be allowed by the city council only after written request presented at a regular meeting of the city council. 
(2)  The city council shall appoint a review committee composed of one councilman, the city manager, the city engineer, and one member of the staff of the industrial user making request. 
(3)  The review committee shall meet within the thirty (30) days following said city council meeting and review the ICR system. 
(4)  The committee shall present its recommendations and findings to the city council within thirty (30) days after the request is made at its next regular scheduled meeting and the council shall act upon the recommendations of the committee. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 30, 3-31-80) 
ARTICLE IV. - WATER AND SEWER EXTENSIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 02-01, § 1, adopted Jan. 14, 2002, repealed article IV, sections 27-57-27-61, in its entirety and replaced it with a new article IV, sections 27-57-27-59. Former article IV pertained to similar material and derived from Ord. No. 568, §§ 1-3, 5, 6, adopted June 30, 1975; Ord. No. 632, § 1, adopted Aug. 22, 1977; Ord. No. 756, § 2, adopted Oct. 12, 1981. 

Sec. 27-57. - Procedure for extension. 
(a)  When water and/or sewer service is not available to a lot located on a street dedicated prior to the incorporation of the city and the owner (requestor) desires water and/or sewer service, the owner may request such extension or extensions after paying the fee for such extension or extensions, as well as the building permit fees for the proposed building. Tap fees are in addition to the line extension cost. Once all fees are paid, the city will extend the water and or sewer lines. 
(b)  When developers require such extensions, they shall include the lines in their plans and specifications. 
(c)  For class B subdivisions, the cost of such extensions shall be included in the cost of the subdivision development. 
(Ord. No. 02-01, § 1, 1-14-02) 
Sec. 27-58. - Charges for water and sewer extensions. 
    Under this article, there shall be a charge for the extension of water and sewer lines. The charge shall be: 
(1)  If done by the city-The actual cost of labor, material and equipment. 
(2)  If done by a contractor-The actual cost of the contract. 
The public works director shall determine which method will be used. The first fifty (50) feet of any extension will be paid for by the city. The total cost of the extension will be divided by the total linear footage of the extension to determine the cost per foot of the extension. If the city finds need for the sanitary sewer extension to be larger than eight (8) inches in diameter, or the water line to be larger than six (6) inches in diameter, then the city will pay the difference in the cost of the pipe only for a larger size of pipe. This is provided that the development itself does not require the larger size. 
The public works director shall make an estimate of the cost for the extension and the party requesting the extension shall deposit funds with the city for the extension in advance of the said extension. After completion of the job, the requestor shall be refunded any difference in the actual cost and the original estimated cost or shall pay any additional cost over the original estimate. 
The requestor shall not acquire any vested rights in the line extension or extensions. 
(Ord. No. 02-01, § 1, 1-14-02) 
Sec. 27-59. - Extensions made under previous ordinances. 
    Line extensions made under previous ordinances shall continue to honor right of repayment of pro rata charges to the person who paid the original cost of the extension. 
(Ord. No. 02-01, § 1, 1-14-02) 
Secs. 27-60-27-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PUBLIC UTILITIES[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Charter reference- Public utilities, Art. XVII. 
Cross reference- Garbage and trash, Ch. 12; electricity utility company regulations, § 29-156 et seq.; standards for design of water system improvements, App. C, Exhibit "A." 
Editor's note- The manner of codification of Ord. No. 774, adopted July 1, 1982, was not specified by the city; therefore, designation of §§ 1-4 of said ordinance as Art. V, Div. 2, §§ 27-87-27-90, was at the editor's discretion. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 27-71-27-86. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COMMUNICATIONS REGULATIONS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Permission of city required for private collection of garbage, trash, etc., § 27-14(a). 

Sec. 27-87. - Definitions. 
    Terms used in this division shall have the same meaning as those terms which are defined in the Texas Public Utility Regulatory Act of 1975 (V.A.C.S. art. 1446c) and additional definitions pertinent to this division. Definitions of terms in the Act are adopted herein by reference for the purposes of this division. 
    Act shall mean the Public Utility Regulatory Act, article 1446c, V.A.C.S. (House Bill 819, 64th Legislature). 
    Communication shall include any verbal or written communication. 
    Public utility includes every entity defined as a public utility in the Act doing business within the city and whose rates and services are subject to regulation by the city council. 
    Regulatory authority is the city council of the City of Groves. 
    Regulatory chain shall mean all members of the city council and all city employees whose duties are directly connected, in whole or in part, with the regulation of rates and services of public utilities. City employees who deal with public utilities on matters not involving the regulation of rates and services are not within the regulatory chain. 
(Ord. No. 774, § 1, 7-1-82) 
Sec. 27-88. - Purpose. 
    It is the declared purpose of these rules to properly direct communications between public utilities and the regulatory authority, and to provide for maintaining of records of such communications in compliance with section 34 of the Act. The principal avenue for communications intended to affect or influence the decisions of the regulatory authority on matters regarding the regulation of public utility rates and services, shall be in open session of the regulatory authority. The principal contact for communications regarding the day to day supervision of regulated utility companies by the city and regarding matters under review by the city staff, shall be the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 774, § 2, 7-1-82) 
Sec. 27-89. - Maintenance of communications records and logs. 
(a)  Records to be made. Each public utility shall maintain a permanent record of all communications between employees or representatives of the public utility or its affiliates and any member of the regulatory authority, any city employee in the regulatory chain, or any other city employee when the subject matter of the communication pertains to the regulation of rates and services. 
(b)  Form and approval. The record shall be maintained as a log, and the form thereof shall be subject to the approval of the city manager. 
(c)  Content. At a minimum, such records shall contain the name of the person communicating with the regulatory authority or member or employee of the regulatory authority, the person contacted, the name of the business entities represented, the date of the contact or communication, a brief description of the subject matter of the communication, and the action, if any, requested by the public utility, affiliate or representative, and whether the communication was oral or written. 
(d)  Copy submitted to city. Each utility shall submit a copy of its log by the tenth day of each month to the city clerk, which shall be certified by the administrative officer in charge of the utility's services in the city, providing the required information for all contacts or communications occurring in the preceding calendar month. The city clerk shall maintain a cumulative file of all such log entries, and such file shall be made available for public inspection at all times during regular business hours. 
(e)  Inspection by city. The city manager or his authorized representative shall be entitled to inspect the logs maintained by any public utility at any time during regular business hours. 
(f)  Communications not required to be logged. The following are exempt from the logging requirements set forth above: 
(1)  Casual social contacts; 
(2)  Communications with city employees not in the regulatory chain, when such contacts do not pertain to the regulation of rates and services. Examples include (but are not limited to) liaison with the city regarding street cuts or easements, use of property by the city, payment of taxes, settlement of tort claims, and private (nonbusiness) contacts with the city by utility employees acting in their personal capacity. 
(g)  The regulatory chain. All members of the city council, the city manager, the city attorney, and city clerk are members of the regulatory chain. Staff members employed by the persons enumerated above are in the regulatory chain when their assigned duties relate to the regulation of public utility rates and services. 
(Ord. No. 774, § 3, 7-1-82) 
Sec. 27-90. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  Any public utility or affiliated interest violating any of the provisions of this division or failing to perform a duty imposed on it by this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined in an amount not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) and each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this division or failing to perform a duty required of him, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined in an amount not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) and each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 774, § 4, 7-1-82) 
Cross reference- General penalty for violation of Code, § 1-5. 
Secs. 27-91-27-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - WATER USAGE EMERGENCIES[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 96-12, §§ 1-12, adopted September 23, 1996, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as Art. VI, §§ 27-101-27-112 was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 27-101. - Definition of user. 
    Except as provided in sections 27-108 and 27-109 of this article, "users" shall include only retail customers served directly by the city water system, whether located within or outside the city, and not customers of wholesale users such as other cities, water districts, or water supply corporations. 
    Where more than one (1) residential or commercial unit is served by the same water meter: 
(1)  For surcharging or rationing purposes, each unit shall constitute a separate user for surcharging or rationing purposes. 
(2)  For disconnection purposes, the person, firm, or corporation responsible for the master meter shall be considered the user. 
(Ord. No. 96-12, § 1, 9-23-96) 
Sec. 27-102. - Declaration of emergency. 
    The city council may, at any properly posted, convened, and conducted meeting, declare the city to be in a water usage emergency requiring one or more of the following actions: 
(1)  Water waste. Prohibition of all water waste as defined in section 27-103 of this article. 
(2)  Outdoor water usage. 
a.  Alternate days for usage. 
b.  Prohibition of usage. 
(3)  Control measures for indoor usage. 
a.  Surcharge system. 
b.  Rationing. 
c.  Flow restricters (for violators only). 
(4)  Variances. 
a.  Variances for certain commercial users as prescribed in section 27-107 of this article. 
b.  Overriding of any standing variances which may have been previously granted. 
(Ord. No. 96-12, § 2, 9-23-96) 
Sec. 27-103. - Water waste and outdoor water usage. 
(a)  The city council may, after declaring a water usage emergency, prohibit all "water waste", which is defined as follows: 
(1)  Washing vehicles, buildings, and other similar items unless a bucket or a hose with a cutoff device at the downstream end of the hose is used. 
(b)  The city council may, after declaring a water usage emergency, prohibit any or all of the following outdoor water usages: 
(1)  Watering of grass, lawns, flowers, trees, gardens, or shrubbery. 
(2)  Washing vehicles, buildings, or swimming pools. 
(3)  Recreational purposes (including filling swimming pools). 
(4)  Ornamental fountains. 
(c)  The city council may, after declaring a water usage emergency, restrict any or all of the outdoor water usages listed in the foregoing subsection (b) to one (1) of the alternate day schedules as follows: 
(1)  Even numbered house, business, lot, or premise: Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Saturdays, or even numbered days. 
(2)  Odd numbered house, business, lot, or premise: Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays, or even numbered days. 
(3)  House, business, lot or premise with no visible number or no number known to city: Same as odd numbers. 
(d)  On or after the date when the city council shall meet and declare a water usage emergency requiring any or all of the restrictions described in subsections (a), (b), and (c) hereinabove, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to violate any of these restrictions, unless the city council grants an applicable variance and has not overridden such variance for the specific emergency. 
(Ord. No. 96-12, § 3, 9-23-96) 
Sec. 27-104. - Surcharge system. 
    The city council may, after declaring a water usage emergency, impose surcharges not to exceed the following amounts on all water usage (per two-month period) by any user: 
0-6,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons ..... $0.75 
6,000-10,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons ..... 1.00 
10,000-20,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons ..... 1.50 
Over 20,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons ..... 1.75 
    No surcharge for any bracket may be less than the surcharge for the next lower bracket. 
    These surcharges shall become effective for each user as soon as the city can read the meter serving that user and notify that user. 
(Ord. No. 96-12, § 4, 9-23-96) 
Sec. 27-105. - Rationing. 
    The city council may, after declaring a water usage emergency, impose rationing on any or all user classes. The daily amount which each user may be permitted to use shall be set at not less than the following amounts: 
Residential-50 gallons 
School-100 gallons (plus 5 gallons per student on days classes are held) 
Commercial-100 gallons 
Recreational facility-300 gallons 
Industrial-300 gallons 
    Rationing shall become effective for each user as soon as the city can read the meter serving that user and notify that user. 
(Ord. No. 96-12, § 5, 9-23-96) 
Sec. 27-106. - Commercial use. 
    The city manager may, in a water shortage emergency, direct any or all commercial, industrial, and recreational users to suspend use of city water for purposes other than domestic use. He may take this action regardless of whether the city council has declared a water usage emergency. 
(Ord. No. 96-12, § 6, 9-23-96) 
Sec. 27-107. - Appeal procedure. 
    The city shall, as soon as practical after the effective date of this ordinance, notify all nonresidential users of the following facts: 
(1)  Businesses which use outdoor water in their primary business functions (such as commercial car washes) may be considered for variances from emergency restrictions or prohibitions of outdoor water usage. 
(2)  The city may restrict or prohibit such outdoor usage, even if a business is qualified for a variance, if the water shortage emergency is severe enough to impose such restriction or prohibition. 
(3)  Any businesses which feel that they may qualify for variances are encouraged to request (preferably in nonemergency time) that the city grant a standing variance. 
(4)  Such businesses shall show to the city sufficient cause for granting the variance. 
(5)  The city may grant a specific variance during a water shortage emergency, or may override a standing variance. 
    The city shall notify all new nonresidential customers of the above facts at the time they apply for or receive service. 
(Ord. No. 96-12, § 7, 9-23-96) 
Sec. 27-108. - Notification of users. 
    The city shall notify all users (including designated representatives of wholesale users) promptly when a water supply emergency is declared. For prohibition of outdoor water usage, such notice may be through local news media. For surcharges or rationing, such notice shall be in writing for each user if practical, preferably delivered along with the meter reading. The individual notice shall, if practical, show the date and amount of the meter reading. 
(Ord. No. 96-12, § 8, 9-23-96) 
Sec. 27-109. - Applicability of restrictions. 
    Water use restrictions and surcharges contained in this ordinance shall apply to all water supplied by the city water system to its retail customers, whether located within or outside the city. 
    The following rules shall govern wholesale users and their customers: 
(1)  Restrictions on outdoor or other usage shall not apply to customers of wholesale users unless provided in the contract between the city and the wholesale user. 
(2)  Surcharges shall not apply to wholesale users or to their customers unless provided in the contract between the city and the wholesale user. If the surcharges are to be applied, they shall become effective for each customer of the wholesale user as soon as the wholesale user can read that customers meter. The surcharges prescribed by emergency resolution shall be collected by the wholesale user in its billing cycle and passed on directly to the city. Nothing in this article shall prevent the wholesale user from assessing an additional surcharge to defray its own expenses. 
(3)  Rationing shall not apply directly to customers of wholesale users unless provided in the contract between the city and the wholesale user. Otherwise, each wholesale user shall be rationed to the total amount of water to which its individual customers would be entitled under the emergency resolution. This amount shall be determined by the city according to available information on the number and type of individual customers. 
(4)  Any restriction, surcharges, or rationing adopted under authority of this article shall be applied uniformly to the city's retail customers and to such wholesale users and/or their customers as may be applicable. 
(Ord. No. 96-12, § 9, 9-23-96) 
Sec. 27-110. - Duration of restrictions. 
    All restrictions contained in this article shall remain in effect until terminated by further council action, unless, at the time the council initiates the restrictions, or at a subsequent meeting: 
(1)  The council sets a specific time limit, or 
(2)  The council delegates authority to the city manager to terminate the restrictions at his discretion. 
(Ord. No. 96-12, § 10, 9-23-96) 
Sec. 27-111. - Procedural requirements. 
    The city council may initiate and terminate water usage emergencies and accompanying restrictions by means of simple motions recorded in the minutes, so long as the intent of the action is made clear. 
(Ord. No. 96-12, § 11, 9-23-96) 
Sec. 27-112. - Penalty. 
    Penalty for violation of this article shall be the same as provided in section 1-5 of this Code of Ordinances, as amended. 
    In addition to a fine, the city may terminate water service to any user for violation of this article. Reconnection may be made only after the user pays all outstanding bills and fines, plus a ten dollar ($10.00) service charge. Reconnection of a commercial or recreational user may be postponed by the city if, in the opinion of the city, such postponement is necessary to conserve water in an acute emergency. 
    The city also may, at its option, install a flow restricter in the service line of any user for violation of this article. Such restricter may be set at any amount of flow equal to or larger than the amounts listed in section 27-105 of this article. The city may charge the user for the cost of the flow restricter, including installation, and may disconnect service for failure to pay for this item. 
(Ord. No. 96-12, § 12, 9-23-96) 
Secs. 27-113-27-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - WATER CONSERVATION[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 06-03, §§ 1-4, adopted Jan. 23, 2006, repealed article VII, sections 27-121-27-124, in its entirety and replaced it with a new article VII, sections 27-121-27-123. Former article VII pertained to similar material and derived from Ord. No. 96-13, §§ 1-4, adopted September 23, 1996. 

Sec. 27-121. - Adoption of water conservation plan. 
    The city council hereby approves and adopts the water conservation plan dated December, 2005, as prepared by Schaumburg & Polk, Inc., and previously submitted to the Texas Water Development Board, attached [to the ordinance from which this article is derived as exhibit A], and made a part hereof for all purposes, as the official policy of the city. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, § 2, 1-23-06) 
Sec. 27-122. - Availability of plan. 
    The above-referenced water conservation plan shall be made available for public inspection in the city clerk's office on a permanent basis and shall be plainly labeled as being the plan adopted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, § 3, 1-23-06) 
Sec. 27-123. - Implementation. 
    The city manager shall be responsible for the overall implementation of the program. In the event that measures requiring separate action by the city council are found necessary, the city manager shall be responsible for requesting a special or emergency council meeting if necessary, and for presenting the matter to the council for action. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, § 4, 1-23-06) 
PART II - TECHNICAL ORDINANCES 
Chapter 28 - BUILDINGS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Fire protection and prevention, Ch. 10; restoration of ratproofing following repair or reconstruction, § 18-39; skating rinks, § 21-128 et seq.; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 22; utilities, Ch. 27; electricity, Ch. 29; housing, Ch. 30; plumbing, Ch. 31; zoning, App. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 28-1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 699, § 1, enacted Mar. 31, 1980, provided for the deletion of § 28-1 pertaining to the fire district. Such section formerly was derived from Ord. No. 523, § 1, adopted Nov. 19, 1973. 
Sec. 28-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2011-11, § 1, adopted Sept. 12, 2011, deleted § 28-2, entitled "Swimming pools; fences, gates required; exceptions; penalty for failure to comply", which derived from: Ord. No. 640, §§ 1-6, adopted Dec. 12, 1977. 
Secs. 28-3-28-12. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2009-04, § 1, adopted Mar. 2, 2009, repealed and reenacted art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, art. II pertained to the Southern Standard Building Code, and derived from Ord. No. 262, § 1, adopted Nov. 30, 1962; Ord. No. 426, § 1, adopted Feb. 9, 1970; Ord. No. 478, § 1, adopted May 9, 1972; Ord. No. 523, § 2, adopted Nov. 19, 1973; Ord. No. 554, § 1, adopted Nov. 18, 1974; Ord. No. 637, § 1, adopted Oct. 3, 1977; Ord. No. 699, §§ 2, 3, adopted Mar. 31, 1980; Ord. No. 726, § 1, adopted Nov. 24, 1980; Ord. No. 83-05, §§ 1, 2, adopted Mar. 14, 1983; Ord. No. 83-15, § 1, adopted Aug. 29, 1983; Ord. No. 86-06, § 1, adopted Feb. 24, 1986; Ord. No. 87-37, § 1, adopted Oct. 5, 1987; Ord. No. 88-13, §§ 1, 2, adopted July 11, 1988; Ord. No. 92-13, § 1, adopted Nov. 9, 1992; Ord. No. 98-01, § 1, adopted Feb. 9, 1998; Ord. No. 00-19, § 1, adopted Nov. 13, 2000; Ord. No. 01-19, § 1, adopted Dec. 17, 2001, and Ord. No. 03-06, § 1, adopted Aug. 25, 2003. 
Annotation- Reasonable and valid building regulations established by ordinances of home-rule city are applicable to building and construction of school buildings by independent school district. Port Arthur Independent School District v. City of Groves , 376 SW2d 330. 

Sec. 28-13. - International Building Code adopted. 
    There is hereby adopted by the city for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations, a building code known as the International Building Code, 2006 Edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc., and referred to, incorporated herein and made a part hereof for all purposes, which shall be controlling in construction, alteration, repair, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every building, structure or premises not expressly covered by the International Residential Code, subject to the amendments and deletions set forth in this Code of Ordinances, and which book is on file in the office of the building official. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 1, 3-2-09) 
Sec. 28-14. - Amendments. 
Sec. 101. GENERAL is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Sec. 101.1. Title. These regulations shall be known as the Commercial Building Code of the City of Groves, hereinafter referred to this code. 
Sec. 101.4. Referenced codes is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Sec. 101.4.1. Electrical. To be the same as Chapter 29, Electricity. 
Sec. 101.4.2. Gas. To be the same as Chapter 31, Plumbing. 
Sec. 101.4.4. Plumbing. To be the same as Chapter 31, Plumbing. 
Sec. 102. Applicability. is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Sec. 102.4. Referenced codes and standards. "Deleted". 
Sec. 105. Permits. is amended to read as follows: 
Sec. 105.1.1. Annual permit. is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Sec. 105.1. Registration, Contractor responsibilities. 
Sec. 105.1.1 Contractor registration "license" and bond. 
1.  No general contractor shall, without first registering his/her construction company as hereinafter provided, engage in the business of general contracting to furnish labor and materials for the erection, construction, alteration, or repairs of buildings, structures, signs or moving of buildings for which a building permit is required. 
2.  License required; issuance deemed registration. 
Upon payment to the City the fees prescribed in this ordinance, and furnish a copy of their insurance certificate, if required herein, such applicant shall be considered registered with the City within the meaning of this ordinance. 
Such license shall be issued to such person upon payment of a fee of one hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00) and may, for a fee of sixty-five dollars ($65.00), be renewed upon application made prior to expiration of any current license. No such license shall be required for any subcontractor working for a general contractor, or for any contracts under the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
It shall further be the duty of each builder/general contractor, sign erector, or house mover to give good sufficient bond each year in the sum of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) to be approved by the city attorney, conditioned upon compliance with all building regulations and ordinances of the city. Such bond shall also inure to the benefit of any and all persons who sustain loss or damage on account of failure by said contractor to conform to the regulations of the aforementioned ordinances, rules and regulations promulgated by the city, in reference to buildings, and any such person sustaining loss or damage may bring suit on this bond against the principal and surety or sureties hereon in any court of competent jurisdiction to recover same. Instead of a bond, a certificate of commercial general liability insurance coverage in the amount of not less than three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for all claims arising in any one year period, may be provided to the city by the builder/general contractor, sign erector, or house mover. 
The certificate of insurance must be for property damage or bodily injury, regardless of whether the claim arises from negligence claim or contract claim. 
The failure to comply with or violation of any provision of this Code, any applicable provision of this Code of Ordinances, State Law, or City Ordinances, rule or regulation by the holder of any license issued under the provisions for subsection (a) above shall be deemed sufficient cause to revoke such license and forfeit the bond required herein. 
Owners of buildings making alterations or repairs to their own buildings shall be exempt from the license requirement. 
Sec. 105.2. Work exempt from permit "Deleted". 
Sec. 108. Fees. 
Sec. 108.2. Schedule of permit fees is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Sec. 108.2. Schedule of building permit fees 
Building permit fees shall be based on valuation in accordance with the national average. 
New construction or additions valuation examples are: 
Office Buildings $144.00 per square foot Convenience Store $96.00 per square foot Restaurants/Fast Food $169.00 per square foot Day Care $124.00 per square foot  
Remodel valuations shall be based on the actual contract cost, inclusive of electrical, plumbing, mechanical and alarms. 
1.  Permit fees. 
Total Valuation Fee $1,000.00 and less No fee, unless inspection required, in which case a $25.00 fee for each inspection shall be charged. $1,001.00 to $50,000.00 $25.00 for the first $1,000.00 plus $7.00 for each additional thousand or fraction thereof, to and including $50,000.00. $50,001.00 to $100,000.00 $350.00 for the first $50,000.00 plus $6.00 for each additional thousand or fraction thereof, to and including $100,000.00. $100,001.00 to $500,000.00 $650.00 for the first $100,000.00 plus $5.00 for each additional thousand or fraction thereof, to and including $500,000.00. $500,001.00 and up $2,500.00 for the first $500,000.00 plus $4.00 for each additional thousand, or fraction thereof.  
2.  Issuance of Certificate of Occupancy. 
For the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy the fee shall be one hundred ($100) dollars. 
3.  Moving fee. 
(a)  For the moving of any building or structure the fee shall be $150.00. 
4.  Demolition fee. 
(a)  For the demolition of any residence or commercial building or structure, the fee shall be $100.00, plus a deposit of $100.00 shall be required, which deposit will be returned if the job is completed and lot cleared of all debris within ninety (90) days. 
(b)  For the demolition of any accessory building or structure, the fee shall be $25.00. 
5.  For mechanical permit fees. 
Shall be the same as Sec. 108.2 
6.  For electrical permit fees. 
Shall be the same as Chapter 29 of the Code of Ordinances. 
7.  For plumbing and gas permit fees. 
Shall be the same as Chapter 31 of the Code of Ordinances. 
8.  Plan-checking fees. 
When the valuation of the proposed construction exceeds $100,000.00 and a plan is required to be submitted, a plan checking fee shall be paid to the Building Official at the time of submitting plans and specifications for checking. Said plan-checking fee shall be equal to one-half of the building permit fee as set forth in 108.2. Such plan-checking fee is in addition to the building permit fee. 
Sec. 108.4. Work commencing before permit issuance is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Sec. 108.4. Work commencing before permit issuance. 
Where work for which a permit is required by this Code is begun prior to obtaining said permit, the fees shall be doubled, plus an additional administrative fee of $100.00 shall be assessed when the value of the construction work is less than $2,000.00. If the value of the construction work is $2,000.00 or greater, the additional administrative fee assessed shall be $500.00. The payment of such double permit fee and the additional administrative fee shall not relieve any person from fully complying with the requirements of this Code in the execution of the work, nor from any other penalties prescribed herein. 
Sec. 109. INSPECTIONS. 
Sec. 109.3.3 Lowest Floor Elevation is hereby amended to be the same as Chapter 10 1/2 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION. 
Sec. 903. Automatic Sprinkler Systems. 
Sec. 903.2.9. Group S-2 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Sec. 903.2.9. 
Unless required elsewhere in this code, all new buildings constructed, existing buildings enlarged or occupancy changes "use" shall have an automatic sprinkler system installed throughout all buildings with a Group S-2 fire area in excess of 20,000 square feet. 
Sec. 907. Fire Alarm and Detection Systems. 
Sec. 907.1. General is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Sec. 907.1. 
Unless required elsewhere in this Code, all new buildings constructed, existing buildings enlarged or occupancy changes "use" shall have a fire alarm system installed if the fire area exceeds 2,000 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 1, 3-2-09; Ord. No. 2011-11, § 2, 9-12-11) 
Secs. 28-15-28-21. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GROVES RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2009-04, § 2, adopted March 2, 2009, repealed and reenacted article III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, article III pertained to the International Residential Code, and derived from Ord. No. 01-19, § 2, adopted December 17, 2001, and Ord. No. 03-06, § 2, adopted August 25, 2003. 

Sec. 28-22. - International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings adopted. 
    There is hereby adopted by the city for the purpose of providing minimum requirements to safeguard life or limb, health and public welfare, a building code known as the International Residential Code for One and Two-Family Dwellings, (IRC) 2006 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., the provisions of which shall apply to the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, removal and demolition of detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three (3) stories in height with a separate means of egress and their accessory structures, subject to the amendments and deletions set forth in this Code, and which book is on file in the office of the building official. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 2, 3-2-09) 
Sec. 28-23. - Amendments to the International Residential Code. 
    The following are amendments to the International Residential Code: 
(1)  Sec. R105. Permits is amended to read as follows: 
a.  Work authorized. Separate permits shall be required for all building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing work. The permit shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work in accordance with the specific code. 
b.  Contractor license and bond. 
1.  No person shall, without first obtaining an annual license as hereinafter provided, engage in the business of general contracting to furnish labor and materials for the erection, construction, alteration, or repairs of one-and two-family, or multi-single family dwellings, or moving of buildings for which a permit is required. 
2.  Such license shall be issued to such person upon payment of a fee of one hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00) and may, for a fee of sixty five dollars ($65.00), be renewed upon application made prior to the expiration of any current license. No such license shall be required for any subcontractor working for a general contractor, or for any contracts under the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
c.  Bond or certificate of liability insurance required. 
1.  It shall be the duty of each builder/general contractor, sign erector, or house mover to give sufficient bond each year in the sum of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) to be approved by the city attorney, conditioned upon compliance with all building regulations and ordinances of the city. Such bond shall also inure to the benefit of any and all persons who sustain loss or damage on account of failure by said contractor to conform to the regulations of the aforementioned ordinances, rules and regulations promulgated by the city, in reference to buildings, and any such person sustaining loss or damage may bring suit on this bond against the principal and surety or sureties hereon in any court of competent jurisdiction to recover same. Instead of a bond, a certificate of commercial general liability insurance coverage in the amount of not less than three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for all claims arising in any one year period, may be provided to the city by the builder/general contractor, sign erector, or house mover. The certificate of insurance must be for property damage or bodily injury, regardless of whether the claim arises from negligence claim or contact claim. 
2.  The failure to comply with or violation of any provision of this code, any applicable provision of this Code of Ordinances, state law, or city ordinances, rule or regulation by the holder of any license issued under the provisions for subsection (a) above shall be deemed sufficient cause to revoke such license and forfeit the bond required herein. 
3.  Owners of buildings making alterations or repairs to their own buildings shall be exempt from the license requirement. 
(2)  Sec. R105.2. Work exempt from permit. Deleted. 
(3)  Sec. R108.2. Schedule of building permit fees is amended to read as follows: 
Building permit fees shall be based on valuation in accordance with the national average. 
New construction or additions valuation examples are: 
New Construction or Additions 
Living Area $75.00 per square foot Garage Area $60.00 per square foot Patio/Porches $55.00 per square foot  
Remodel valuations shall be based on the actual contract cost, inclusive of electrical, plumbing and mechanical (A/C). 
Schedule of permit fees. 
a.  Permit fees. 
Total valuation Fees $1,000.00 and less No fee, unless inspection is required, in which case a $25.00 fee for each inspection shall be charged. $1,001.00 to $50,000.00 $25.00 for the first $1,000.00 plus $7.00 for each additional thousand or fraction thereof, to and including $50,000.00. $50,001.00 to $100,000.00 $350.00 for the first $50,000.00 plus $6.00 for each additional thousand or fraction thereof, to and including $100,000.00 $100,001.00 to $500,000.00 $650.00 for the first $100,000.00 plus $5.00 for each additional thousand or fraction thereof, to and including $500,000.00. $500,001.00 and up $2,500.00 for the first $500,000.00 plus $4.00 for each additional thousand, or fraction thereof.  
b.  Certificate of Occupancy. 
For the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy the fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) 
c.  Moving fee. 
For the moving of any building or structure the fee shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
d.  Demolition fee. 
1.  For the demolition of any residence, the fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00), plus a deposit of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be required, which deposit will be returned if the job is completed and lot cleared of all debris within ninety (90) days. 
2.  For the demolition of any accessory building, the fee shall be twenty dollars ($20.00). 
e.  Mechanical permit fees. 
Shall be the same as #1. above. 
f.  For electrical permit fees. 
Shall be the same as chapter 29 of the Code of Ordinances. 
g.  For plumbing and gas permit fees. 
Shall be the same as chapter 31 of the Code of Ordinances. 
h.  Penalties. 
Where work for which a permit is required by this Code is begun prior to obtaining said permit, the fees shall be doubled, plus an additional administrative fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be assessed when the value of the construction work is less than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). If the value of the construction work is two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) or greater, the additional administrative fee assessed shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00). The payment of such double permit fee and the additional administrative fee shall not relieve any person from fully complying with the requirements of this Code in the execution of the work, nor from any other penalties prescribed herein. 
i.  Plan-checking fees. 
When the valuation of the proposed construction exceeds one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) and a plan is required to be submitted, a plan checking fee shall be paid to the building official at the time of submitting plans and specifications for checking. Said plan-checking fee shall be equal to one-half of the building permit fee. 
(4)  Sec. R112. Board of appeals. Deleted. 
(5)  Sec. R113. Violations. 
Section R113.4. Violation penalties is amended to read the same as section R108.h. 
(6)  Sec. R301.2.1.1. Design criteria is amended to read: 
a.  The Southern Building Code Congress International Standard of Hurricane Resistant Residential Construction (SSTD 10-97) with the following amendments is adopted for use. 
b.  Minimum Design Loads for Buildings and Other Structures (ASCE-7). 
(7)  Sec. R324 Flood Resistant Construction is amended to read the same as Chapter 10 1/2 of the City of Groves Code of Ordinances. 
(8)  Sec. R403 Footings is amended to read as follows: 
Minimum dimensions of exterior footings: 
Foundation load Footing height Footing width One Story 20" 12" Two Story 24" 16"  
Minimum dimensions of interior footings: 
Foundation load Footing height Footing width One Story 12" 12" Two Story 16" 12"  
(9)  Sec. 403.1.3.2 Reinforcing Steel is amended to read as follows: 
Reinforcing Steel, General. Minimum reinforcement in monolithic slab-on-grade exterior footing shall consist of four (4) No. 5 bars. 
(10)  Part V Mechanical (chapters 12-18 of the International Residential Code) is amended to read the same as chapter 32, mechanical code of the Code of Ordinances. 
(11)  Part VI Fuel Gas (chapter 24 of the International Residential Code) and part VII Plumbing (chapters 25-32 of the International Residential Code) are amended to read the same as chapter 31, Plumbing and gas code of the Code of Ordinances. 
(12)  Part VIII Electrical (chapters 33-42 of the International Residential Code) is amended to read the same as chapter 29, electricity of the Code of Ordinances. 
(13)  Part X Appendices are deleted. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 2, 3-2-09; Ord. No. 2011-11, § 3, 9-12-11) 
ARTICLE IV. - BUILDING ENERGY EFFICIENCY PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 

Sec. 28-24. - Energy efficiency chapter of the International Residential Code adopted. 
    To achieve energy conservation in single-family residential construction, the energy efficiency chapter of the International Residential Code, as it existed on May 1, 2001, is adopted. (as provided in and in accordance with V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 388.003). 
(Ord. No. 01-19, § 3, 12-17-01) 
Sec. 28-25. - International Energy Conservation Code adopted. 
    To achieve energy conservation in all other residential, commercial, and industrial construction, the International Energy Conservation Code, as it existed on May 1, 2001, is adopted. (as provided in and in accordance with V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 388.003). 
(Ord. No. 01-19, § 3, 12-17-01) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 01-19, § 3, adopted Dec. 17, 2001, added art. IV, §§ 28-24 and 28-24. In order to avoid duplication of sections, the provisions of second § 28-24 have been redesignated as § 28-25 at the discretion of the editor. 
ARTICLE V. - DANGEROUS BUILDING AND STRUCTURES 

Sec. 28-26. - Authority regarding substandard buildings and structures. 
    An article pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 214, municipal regulation of housing and other structures, subchapter A, dangerous structures, § 214.001, et seq., establishing the minimum regulations governing the continued use and occupancy of all buildings and structures within the city, regardless of the date of their construction, by requiring the vacation, relocation of occupants, securing, repair, removal, or demolition of a building that is: 
(1)  Dilapidated, substandard, or unfit for human habitation and a danger or hazard to the public health, safety and welfare; 
(2)  Regardless of its structural condition, unoccupied by its owners, lessees, or other invitees and is unsecured from authorized entry to the extent that it could be entered or used by vagrants or other uninvited persons as a place of harborage or could be entered or used by children; or 
(3)  Boarded up, fenced, or otherwise secured in any manner if: 
a.  The building constitutes a danger to the public even though secured from entry; or 
b.  The means to secure the building are inadequate to prevent unauthorized entry or use of the building in the manner described by the foregoing subsection (2). 
Pursuant to this authority afforded to a municipality by the Local Government Code, the city hereby adopts the provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 214, municipal regulation of housing and other structures, subchapter A, dangerous structures, § 214.001, et seq., save and except such portions as are deleted, modified or amended by statute, or as modified or exceptions provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 03-05, § 1, 8-25-03) 
Sec. 28-27. - Minimum standards. 
(a)  As required by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.001(b)(1), the city establishes the following minimum standards for the continued use and occupancy of all buildings or structures regardless of the date of their construction: 
(1)  The owner of a building or structure shall maintain such property so that it does not become dilapidated, substandard, or unfit for human habitation, or a hazard to the public health, safety and welfare or constitute any condition or status described in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 214.001(a)(1), (2) or (3) or § 214.002; 
(2)  A building or structure is dilapidated, substandard or unfit for human habitation and a danger or hazard to the public health, safety and welfare, when the city finds that it is: 
a.  So damaged, decayed, structurally unsafe, or of such faulty construction or unstable foundation, that partial or complete collapse is possible; 
b.  Unsanitary, vermin or rat infested, containing filth and contamination, or lacking ventilation, illumination, sanitary or heating facilities or other essential equipment required by the city's codes, or because the location of the structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or to the public; 
c.  In a state of disrepair such that it could reasonably cause injury, damage harm or inconvenience to a considerable portion of the surrounding neighborhood in the use and enjoyment of property, materially interfering with the proper use or comfort and enjoyment of surrounding property, taking into consideration the nature and use of the properties in the area and the characteristics of the community in which they are situated which conditions would be substantially offensive and annoying to persons of ordinary sensibilities, tastes and habits living in the community; or 
d.  In a state of disrepair such that: 
1.  Its walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle in excess of three-fourths ( 3 / 4 ) inch of horizontal measurement; 
2.  It has thirty-three (33) percent or more damage or deterioration of the supporting members, or fifty (50) percent or more damage or deterioration of the non-supporting or outside walls or coverings; 
(3)  Its electrical wiring, gas piping, or appliances are so unsafe or defective that it is likely to cause or promote fires; or 
(4)  It is in violation of any provision of the city's building, electrical, mechanical or fire codes or other ordinances of the city, to the extent that it is a danger to the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(b)  Vacant buildings and structures which, in the opinion of the building official or city council, can be made to comply with the minimum standards set forth herein at a total cost of no more than fifty (50) percent of their fair market value will be provided the opportunity to be repaired by the owner to the minimum standards. When the necessary repairs to the building or structure is twenty-five (25) percent or less of the total structure, the repairs shall be performed to the requirements of the city codes in place at the time of its original construction. But if the repairs will affect more than twenty-five (25) percent but less than fifty (50) percent of the total structure, the necessary repairs shall be performed to the requirements of all codes in place to date. The 25-50 percent rule shall not apply to buildings or structures that are occupied so that the fifty (50) percent fair market value may be exceeded upon recommendation of the building official or the city council. 
(Ord. No. 03-05, § 1, 8-25-03) 
Sec. 28-28. - Notice. 
(a)  If a building or structure is found by the building official to be in violation of the minimum standards for continued use and occupancy set forth herein, the notice of public hearing shall be given to the owner, lienholder or mortagee in accordance with the applicable provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, chapter 214, subchapter A. The notice of hearing must include a statement that the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee will be required to submit at the hearing proof of the scope of any work that may be required to comply with the minimum standards set forth herein and the time it will take to reasonably perform the work. In addition, the notice of hearing may include the statement contained in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, § 54.005. 
(b)  Prior to notice of hearing, the building official may notify the owner of the building or structure in writing, by certified mail, of his findings and order the owner to repair, vacate, secure, demolish or remove the building or structure. The written notice shall specify a reasonable length of time for the owner to complete the action, the length of time being predicated on the nature and extent of the action required to make the building or structure comply with the minimum standards. 
(Ord. No. 03-05, § 1, 8-25-03) 
Sec. 28-29. - Public hearing. 
    A public hearing required by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, chapter 214, subchapter A shall be held before and conducted by the city council of the with a quorum present. The city council shall hold the required hearing required by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, chapter 214, subchapter A in lieu of the civil municipal court proceeding allowed by § 214.001(p). The city designates the building official, or his designated representative, to present all cases to the city council. After the public hearing, if a building is found to be in violation of the minimum standards set forth herein, the city council may take any and all action as is reasonably appropriate and authorized by law, including, but not limited to, actions and orders specifically authorized by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, § 54.004 and chapter 214, subchapter A. 
(Ord. No. 03-05, § 1, 8-25-03) 
Sec. 28-30. - Expenses, liens and civil penalties. 
    In addition to the authority granted to the city by V.T.C.A. Local Government Code, § 214.001, the city may assess expenses, impose and foreclose liens, and impose and enforce civil penalties as authorized by Local Government Code, § 214.001(m) and (n), § 214.0011(f), § 214.0015, or § 214.002, subject to the same conditions as provided in the applicable section, including any notice and filing requirements. Suit may be instituted by the city and recovery had and said liens foreclosed in the manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 03-05, § 1, 8-25-03) 
Sec. 28-31. - Judicial review. 
    Any owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of record aggrieved by an order of the city council issued under section 28-29 hereof, or under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, chapter 214, subchapter A as adopted herein, may appeal the decision or order as provided V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, § 214.0012. 
(Ord. No. 03-05, § 1, 8-25-03) 
Sec. 28-32. - Unlawful conduct and penalties. 
    Any person who intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly fails to comply with an order issued by the city council under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, § 214.002(a)(1) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each such person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion thereof during which non-compliance of said order is committed, and upon conviction shall be punished as provided by section 1-5, general provisions, of this Code and its future amendments. 
(Ord. No. 03-05, § 1, 8-25-03) 
Sec. 28-33. - Definitions. 
(a)  In this article: 
    Building official means, the appointed building official of the city who is charged with the administration and enforcement of the adopted building codes and other similar codes or any authorized representative. 
    Occupant means, any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having possession of a space within a building. 
    Owner means, a person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court. 
    Person means, an individual, corporation, partnership or any group acting as a unit. 
    Structure means, a building or a part of a building that is constructed, produced, or artificially built up or composed of parts purposefully joined together. 
(b)  Where terms are not defined herein and are defined in the building, fire prevention, zoning, electrical, plumbing or mechanical codes of the City, said terms shall have the hearings ascribed to them in those Codes. Where terms are not defined, as provided herein, such terms shall have ordinary accepted meanings as the context applies. 
(Ord. No. 03-05, § 1, 8-25-03) 
Chapter 29 - ELECTRICITY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2008-22, § 1, adopted October 13, 2008, amended chapter 29 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, chapter 29 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 04-13, § 1, adopted December 13, 2004. 
Cross reference- Fire protection and prevention, Ch. 10; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 22; utilities, Ch. 27; buildings, Ch. 28; housing, Ch. 30; plumbing, Ch. 31. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 29-1. - Short title. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be known as "The Groves Electrical Code" and may be cited as such. 
(Ord. No. 2008-22, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 29-2. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this code, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectfully ascribed to them: 
    Generally. The definitions contained in the National Electrical Code shall apply, except where the same may conflict with the following. 
    Approved or approval: Approved by the building official. National, state, and city standards shall be the basis of such approval. 
    Conductor: A wire or cable or other form of metal suitable for carrying electrical current or potential. 
    Electrical construction: All work and material used in installing, maintaining, or extending a system of electrical wiring, and all appurtenances, apparatus, and equipment used in connection therewith, inside of or attached to any building or structure, lot, or premises. 
    Electrical contractor: A person, licensed as an electrical contractor, who is in the business of performing "electrical contracting" as defined by V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 1305.002(5). He shall have a permanently established place of business with a published telephone number. He shall hold a "master electrician's" certificate or shall employ an individual who does and carry him on his active payroll. A master electrician may not qualify more than one contractor. He shall be available to the inspection authority to answer any questions relating to electrical work coming under the jurisdiction of this electrical inspection authority. 
    Electrical contractor: That person who has a current state electrical license and the proper amount of liability insurance required by the state and has paid the necessary registration fees to date, and that his name is carried in the records of the building official as a person authorized to do electrical work as defined in this chapter. 
    Electrical maintenance and repair: The replacement, or repair of existing electrical appurtenances, apparatus, equipment, machinery, or controls used in connection with the use of electrical energy in, on, outside, or attached to a building, residence, structure, property, or premises. All replacements or repairs must be of the same rating and type as the existing installation. No improvements may be made that are necessary to comply with applicable codes under V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 1305. Electrical maintenance work does not include the replacement of any raceways, conductors, disconnecting means, or service feeder components. It also does not include the installation of any new electrical appurtenances, apparatus, equipment, machinery, or controls beyond the scope of any existing electrical installation. The term does not include work exempted by V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 1305.003. 
    Equipment: Conductors, materials, fittings, devices, appliances, fixtures, signs, apparatus, motors, and the like, used as a part of or in connection with any electrical installation. 
    Journeyman electrician: An individual, licensed as a journeyman electrician, who works under the general supervision of a master electrician, on behalf of an electrical contractor, while performing "electrical work" as defined by V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 1305.002(11). 
    Journeyman sign electrician: Any person who is employed by a master sign electrician to install signs for wages and who does not furnish any materials and supplies in the performance of his work and who holds an electrical journeyman sign electrician's license with the state. 
    Maintenance electrician: An electrician regularly employed on a permanent basis by any person and who performs work only in the confines of the building or in or on the premises where he is regularly employed on a permanent basis, and who does maintenance work as defined in the paragraph "electrical maintenance and repair" and who holds a maintenance electrician's license with the state. A maintenance electrician shall not offer services to the public. 
    Master electrician: Any person who is, by training, experience, and education, competent to lay out, design, and install a system of wiring for light, heat, or power and who holds a master electrician's license with the state. 
    Master sign electrician: A person who holds himself out to the public to contract for himself, or through others, manufactures, installs, connects, re-connects, or services electric signs, or any cold cathode or neon gas tubing, inside or outside of whatever description or for any purpose and is qualified. The master sign electrician must hold a master sign electrician's license from the state. 
    Outside electrical work: The installing, maintaining, altering, repairing, or erecting of any electrical wiring, apparatus, devices, appliances, fixtures, or equipment located outside of and separate from buildings and on poles, towers, or other structures designed or constructed to be used exclusively for the support of such electrical wiring, apparatus, devices, appliances, fixtures, or equipment for which a permit is required under the terms of this code, except that overhead conductors may be attached to buildings. 
    Person: A human being or an entity that is recognized by law as having the rights and duties of a human being. 
    Responsible person: The person that is responsible for installing electrical wiring and/or equipment in a structure. This would include a licensed electrician doing residential or commercial work as well as a homeowner doing work on his/her own house, owned and occupied by him/her and has a homestead tax exemption filed with the office of the Jefferson County Appraisal Districts Tax Office. 
(Ord. No. 2008-22, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 29-3. - Purpose; scope. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this code is the practical safeguarding of persons, and buildings and their contents, from electrical hazards arising from the improper use of electricity. 
(b)  Scope. 
(1)  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all installations of and work done on electrical conductors, fittings, devices, motors, controls, appliances, fixtures, electronic devices, signs and gaseous tubing, herein referred to as electrical equipment, within or on public and private buildings and premises with exceptions as provided herein. 
(2)  On all installations of electrical conductors or equipment hereafter made, and all existing installations which are altered, or for which the use has changed, all work shall be done in a manner that will conform with the requirements for a sufficient and safe electrical structure and system under this chapter. 
(3)  Repair and maintenance work shall be such that if any electrical conductor or equipment is removed and later replaced, same shall be replaced in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2008-22, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 29-4. - Public utilities. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to installations made or used by agencies in the generation, transmission or distribution of electricity, or for the operation of railways, signal or transmission of intelligence when located within or on buildings, enclosures, or premises used exclusively by such agency or on public thoroughfare; provided, however, such agencies excepted are operating under a valid franchise agreement with the city. 
(Ord. No. 2008-22, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 29-5. - Signs and gaseous tubing. 
    This chapter shall apply to all forms of electrical signs, gaseous tubing, and outline lighting conductors and equipment. All sign structures, attachments to buildings and foundations shall be approved by the building official as set forth in sections covering the construction and erection of signs in the building code prior to inspection under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2008-22, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 29-6. - Use of aluminum wiring-prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to install aluminum wiring in any residential or commercial structure. 
(Ord. No. 2008-22, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 29-7. - Equipment standards generally. 
    All electrical equipment installed or used shall be reasonably safe to persons and property in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, the applicable statutes of the state and any rules or regulations issued by authority thereof. Conformity of electrical equipment with the applicable standards of the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., shall be prima facie evidence that such equipment is reasonable safe to persons and property. Only standard parts and materials approved by the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., shall be permitted in electrical repairs or maintenance work. 
(Ord. No. 2008-22, § 1, 10-13-08) 
ARTICLE II. - ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR 

Sec. 29-8. - Created. 
    The office of the electrical inspector is hereby created in and for the city. 
(Ord. No. 2008-22, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 29-9. - Appointment. 
    The office of the electrical inspector shall be filled by appointment by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2008-22, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 29-10. - Qualifications. 
    The person appointed to fill the office of electrical inspector shall be of good moral character, shall be possessed of such executive ability as is required for the performance of his duties; shall have a thorough knowledge of the standard materials and methods used in the installation of electrical conductors and equipment; shall be well versed in approved methods of construction for safety to persons and property, and in the provisions of the National Electric Code. 
(Ord. No. 2008-22, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 29-11. - Liability. 
    Any officer, employee, or member of the board of adjustments and appeals, charged with the enforcement of this Code, acting for the city in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal; liability, for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee or member because of such act performed by him in the enforcement of any provision of this Code shall be defended by the city attorney until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 2008-22, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 29-12. - Powers and duties of the electrical inspector. 
    The electrical inspector is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this Code. The electrical inspector is further authorized to render interpretations of this Code, which are consistent with their spirit and purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2008-22, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 29-13. - Stop work orders. 
    Upon notice from the electrical inspector, work on any building or structures an electrical system that is being done contrary to the provisions of this Code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the electrical inspector shall not be required to give written notice prior to stopping the work. 
(Ord. No. 2008-22, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 29-14. - Existing buildings. 
    Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure or building's electrical system without requiring the building or structure's electrical system to comply with all the requirements of the technical codes provided that the alteration, repair or rehabilitation of the electrical system does not exceed a total replacement of twenty-five (25) percent of the system. When repairs, alterations or rehabilitation exceed twenty-five (25) [percent] of the electrical system, the entire electrical system shall comply with the requirements of the technical codes. 
(Ord. No. 2008-22, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 29-15. - Change of occupancy. 
    If the occupancy classification of any existing building or structure is changed, the electrical system shall be made to conform to the intent of the technical codes as required by the electrical inspector. 
(Ord. No. 2008-22, § 1, 10-13-08) 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 29-16. - Powers. 
(a)  Effective September 1, 2004, all master electricians, journeyman electricians, master sign electricians, journeyman sign electricians and maintenance electricians doing residential or commercial wiring in the city shall be required to hold a valid state electrical license and be currently registered with the city. 
(b)  The building official shall have the power to suspend or revoke the registration of any electrician who is found guilty of: 
(1)  The practice of any fraud or deceit in obtaining such license; 
(2)  Taking out electrical permits in the name of some person authorized by law to do electrical work and thereafter permitting a person without a proper license to do the work; 
(3)  Any gross negligence, incompetence, or misconduct in the performance of electrical work within the jurisdiction of the city under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2008-22, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 29-17. - Appeals. 
(a)  Decision of the building official. The owner of the building, structure or service system, or his duly authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the building official to the construction board of appeals whenever any one of the following conditions are claimed to exist: 
(1)  The building official rejected or refused to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building, structure or service system. 
(2)  The provisions of this chapter do not apply to this specific case. 
(3)  That an equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case. 
(4)  The true intent and meaning of this chapter or any of the regulations there under have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
(b)  Variances. The construction board of appeals, when so appealed to and after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of this chapter to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this or the technical codes or public interest, and also finds all of the following: 
(1)  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure or service system involved and which are not applicable to others. 
(2)  That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant. 
(3)  That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the building, structure or service system. 
(4)  That the grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of this chapter and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(c)  Conditions of the variance. In granting the variance, the construction board of appeals may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is required shall be commenced or completed or both. In addition, the construction board of appeals may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this chapter. Violation of the conditions of a variance shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
(d)  Notice of appeal. Notice of appeal shall be in writing to the construction board of appeals and filed within thirty (30) calendar days after the decision is rendered by the building official. Appeals shall be in a form acceptable to the building official. 
(e)  Unsafe or dangerous buildings or service systems. In the case of a building, structure or service system which, in the opinion of the building official, is unsafe, or dangerous, the building official may, in his order, limit the time for such appeals to ten (10) calendar days or less. 
(f)  Decisions. The construction board of appeals shall meet within thirty (30) calendar days after notice of appeal has been received. They shall, in every case, reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Each decision of the construction board of appeals shall also include the reasons for the decision. If a decision of construction board of appeals reverses or modifies a refusal, order, or disallowance of the building official or varies the application of any provision of this chapter, the building official shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. Every decision shall be promptly filed in writing in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection. A certified copy of the decision shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the appellant. Every decision of the construction board of appeals shall be final, subject however to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. 
(g)  Revocation of registration. Conviction under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed just cause for the revocation of the city registration which such person must have under the provisions of this chapter in order to work in the city. Any registration being revoked shall be for a period that shall be determined by the construction board of appeals. Reinstatement shall be contingent upon payment of all current registration fees. The decision of the construction board of appeals shall be final, subject however to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 2008-22, § 1, 10-13-08) 
ARTICLE IV. - REGISTRATION FOR ELECTRICIANS 

Sec. 29-18. - Registration required; false representations of registration. 
(a)  [Required.] It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of installing maintaining, altering or repairing any wiring, fixtures or equipment used for the conducting of electricity for which a permit is required by this chapter, or to in any manner undertake to execute such work, unless such person is the holder of a license as required by this chapter. 
(b)  [False representations.] It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely represent himself as a licensed electrician of any class set forth in this chapter or to use the words "electrical contractor," "master electrician," or "electrician," or words of similar import or meaning, on signs, cards, stationery, or by any other manner whatsoever, unless such person is properly licensed within the meaning of this chapter. 
(c)  Registration classification. There shall be five (5) classes of state electrical licenses accepted by the city requiring registration and a fee. These are: 
(1)  Master electrician; 
(2)  Master sign electrician; 
(3)  Journeyman electrician; 
(4)  Journeyman sign electrician; 
(5)  Maintenance electrician. 
(d)  Registration; fees; issuance. Each state licensed electrician wishing to register to do electrical work in the city shall submit the required registration fee, a copy of their electrical license, and a copy of their liability insurance certificate to the inspection department. 
    The following fees shall be applicable in this chapter: 
Classification Registration Annual 
Renewal Liability 
Insurance Master electrician $75.00 $75.00 As required by state law Master sign electrician  75.00  75.00 As required by state law Journeyman electrician  15.00  15.00 None Journeyman sign electrician  15.00  15.00 None Maintenance electrician  15.00  15.00 None  
(e)  License required; issuance deemed registration. Upon presentation of the appropriate license from the state and after applicant has paid to the city the fees prescribed in this chapter, and furnish a copy of their insurance certificate, if required herein, such applicant shall be considered registered with the city within the meaning of this chapter. 
(f)  Registration renewal. Annual renewal of the city registration shall be accomplished by submitting the renewal fee and, if required, a copy of their renewed liability insurance certificate. 
(1)  The annual renewal fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) for master electricians and master sign electricians and five ($5.00) for journeymen, and maintenance electricians. 
(2)  Annual renewal fees are due January 1 and payable before January 31 of each year. License holders who have not paid their annual renewal fee will not be permitted to perform work or be issued permits until the fees are paid in full. 
(g)  License transferability; signing. A license registration shall not be transferable and shall be issued to the person examined by the state and named on the license and known as the holder of the license. 
(h)  Unauthorized use of license. It shall be unlawful for any person to lend, rent, or transfer his license or any rights to any other person, and for any person to make use of any such rights which are not actually his own. 
(i)  Master electrician's office. Every master electrician, if he qualifies as an electrical contractor as prescribed under V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 1305.159 must have and maintain an established place of business and shall either have a person in attendance or have an answering service to receive messages from the city or other persons concerned during regular business hours. A master electrician can represent and acquire permits for no more that one electrical business. 
(j)  Supervision of work. In the actual work of installing, maintaining, altering, or repairing of any electrical conductors or equipment for which a permit is required by this chapter, there shall be present and in direct supervision a qualified electrician of the proper classification as determined by this chapter. It shall be required that a master electrician or master sign electrician, as the case may be, be liable and responsible for the layout and technical supervision of any work which has required the securing of permits and journeyman electrician shall not supervise at the job site more than three (3) apprentices. Should it come to the notice of the building official or his assistants that such supervision and control are not being maintained, the building official may order the work to be discontinued and the person to whom the permit has been issued shall discontinue further work until proper supervision has been employed or supplied as verified by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 2008-22, § 1, 10-13-08) 
ARTICLE V. - PERMITS 

Sec. 29-19. - Required; to whom issued; exemption. 
(a)  Permits shall be issued to master electricians or master sign electricians qualified to secure permits, as set forth in this chapter, or to their duly authorized agent. The master electrician or master sign electrician shall certify their duly authorized agent to the building official in the form of an affidavit stating that such master or master sign electrician assumes all and full responsibility for any permit taken out or applied for by such agent. 
(b)  When one master electrician or master sign electrician completes the rough work, in whole or in part, or does any electrical wiring or installation of fixtures or equipment and a second master electrician or master sign electrician is called upon to complete the work, in whole or in part, a separate permit is required for which regular fees shall be paid for the work done. Each master or master sign electrician shall be held responsible only for the work installed by him. Before the second master electrician or master sign electrician is issued a permit for the completion of an electrical wiring or installation of fixtures or equipment job, the building official shall first attempt to notify the master electrician or master sign electrician holding the original or first permit that the second permit is to be issued. The issuance of the second permit shall cancel the first permit and no refund of fees shall be made. 
(c)  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent a person from doing electrical work himself on his own residence which is owned and occupied or to be occupied by him immediately upon completion of such residence, so long as he completes the required affidavit and complies with all of the other provisions of this chapter. This exception shall be construed to mean an individual owner (not a firm, co-partnership, or corporation) who actually does the labor himself. This individual owner shall be present at the time of any electrical inspection. Electrical work on rent property shall be performed by a licensed and bonded master electrician or a journeyman electrician working directly under the direction of a master electrician. 
(Ord. No. 2008-22, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 29-20. - Application; scope of permit requirements. 
(a)  Every person who shall install, cause to be installed, or permit to be installed, any electrical wiring, fixtures or equipment or shall make any alteration, addition, change or repair within the scope of this chapter shall, before commencement of such work, make application for a permit therefore with the building official. 
(b)  There shall be one permit for each building for which rough work for electrical wiring, fixtures, or electrical equipment is installed. Accessory buildings, tourist cottages, or group houses shall not be considered separate buildings when the work is to be installed as one complete project and at one time, except where separate switches or meter loops are installed thereon. 
(c)  Application for permits shall be made in writing upon forms provided by the city for that purpose. With such application there shall be filed a diagram or plan in such a format as required by the building official showing clearly the character and kind of wiring or installation of fixtures or equipment work to be done. The plan or diagram shall show the manner in which the electrical installation is to be made, or the character of any repairs to any existing electric installation. Such application shall include the following information: 
(1)  Street and house number; 
(2)  Name of the owner; 
(3)  Type of construction and use of buildings; and 
(4)  A list of electrical fixtures and appliances to be installed. 
(d)  The diagram or plans, and application, shall be referred to the building official who shall have the authority to issue or refuse to issue a permit. 
(e)  Plans for buildings of more than five thousand (5,000) square feet, based on exterior dimensions or more than two (2) stories in height, shall bear the seal and signature of a professional engineer licensed in the state. 
(Ord. No. 2008-22, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 29-21. - Fees, administrative. 
    Payment of permit fees shall be made prior to the issuance of a permit, and shall be based on the schedule of fees herein set out: 
(1)  Fee schedule. 
Issuance of permit ..... $20.00 
Service up to 200 amperes ..... 20.00 
Over 200 amperes ..... 40.00 
Each additional meter ..... 20.00 
Each additional panel ..... 20.00 
Each outlet, switch and receptacle ..... 0.50 
Fixtures ..... 1.50 
Bells, buzzers and chimes ..... 2.00 
Smoke detectors ..... 1.50 
Water heater ..... 10.00 
Dishwasher ..... 5.00 
Disposal ..... 5.00 
Dryer ..... 10.00 
Washing machine ..... 10.00 
Room air conditioner outlet ..... 5.00 
Space heating (each), furnace ..... 10.00 
Each motor up to five (5) HP ..... 10.00 
Each motor over five (5) HP ..... 20.00 
Electrical signs ..... 40.00 
Each transformer ..... 25.00 
Elevators, dumbwaiters, escalators ..... 25.00 
Gasoline pumps ..... 10.00 
Floodlight poles ..... 10.00 
Welding machine outlet ..... 10.00 
Temporary service on pole ..... 25.00 
Re-inspection ..... 25.00 
Minimum on any electrical permit ..... 40.00 
Re-inspection for lights or name change ..... 25.00 
Swimming pool ..... 30.00 
(2)  Administrative fee. 
a.  Where work for which a permit is required by this Code doubled, plus an additional administrative fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be assessed when the value of the construction work is less than two thousand dollars ($2000.00). If the value of the construction work is two thousand dollars ($2000.00) or greater, the additional administrative fee assessed shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00). The payment of such double permit fee and the additional administrative fee shall not relieve any person from fully complying with the requirements of this Code in the execution of the work, nor from any other penalties prescribed herein. 
b.  Outlet. The term "outlet" shall mean and be construed as any point on a wiring system at which a switch is installed or electricity is taken from a circuit for light, power, or any other purpose or service. 
c.  Outlet addition, outlet extension. The term "outlet addition" or "outlet extension" shall mean and be construed as any outlet installation made over and above the number as requested in the permit or as shown on the plans for new construction, or outlet installation extending from or added to old existing circuits, respectively. 
d.  Horsepower grouping. Permit applications covering the installation of motors on any job shall specify each motor individually and no grouping of horsepower shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2008-22, § 1, 10-13-08; Ord. No. 2011-12, § 1, 9-12-11) 
Sec. 29-22. - Expiration. 
    If electrical wiring or installation of fixtures or equipment work authorized under a permit is not started within sixty (60) calendar days after issuance of such permit, or if the work is started and then discontinued and the work remains discontinued without justifiable cause as determined by the building official for a period of sixty (60) calendar days, the permit shall become void, and no work shall be done on the premises until a new permit is issued and all necessary fees paid. No refunds shall be made for permits that have become void. 
(Ord. No. 2008-22, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 29-23. - Cancellation. 
    The building official shall have the right to declare a permit null and void if there has been misrepresentation of facts or any violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2008-22, § 1, 10-13-08) 
ARTICLE VI. - STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 29-24. - Responsibility for safe work, liability of city for damages. 
    The electrical regulations of this chapter shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility or liability of any person owning, operating or installing electrical conductors, devices, appliances, fixtures, apparatus, motors or equipment, for damages to persons or buildings caused by any defect therein by reason of the inspection herein authorized or the certificate of approved inspection issued by the building official as herein provided; nor shall the city be held liable for any damages that occurred from the action taken by the building official in connection with the performance of his duties. 
(Ord. No. 2008-22, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 29-25. - Installation standards generally; adoption of code. 
(a)  All installations of electrical wiring and equipment shall be reasonably safe to persons and property and in conformity with the provisions of this Code, the applicable statutes of the state, and any rules or regulations issued by authority thereof. 
(b)  Conformity of electrical installations with the applicable standards set forth in the 2002 National Electrical Code and each new addition as published in book form of the National Electric Code as adopted and approved by the National Fire Protection Association shall be prima facie evidence that such installations are reasonably safe for persons and property; provided that the provisions of this article shall prevail over the National Electrical Code in case of conflicting provisions. The 2002 version of the National Electrical Code is the electrical code of the city. Such Code is adopted and made a part of this article as if fully copied herein. One copy of such current code shall be filed in the office of the building official. 
(c)  Due to the unusual climatic conditions prevailing in and about the city, certain exceptions to the wiring methods and materials, as set forth in the National Electrical Code herein adopted, shall be made as listed in section 29-31. 
(Ord. No. 2008-22, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 29-26. - Equipment standards generally. 
(a)  Conformity of electrical equipment with the applicable standards of the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., shall be prima facie evidence that such equipment is reasonably safe to persons and property as it relates to the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  Only standard electrical parts and materials approved by the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., or by the building official shall be permitted in electrical repair or maintenance work. 
(Ord. No. 2008-22, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 29-27. - Sign standards generally. 
(a)  All electrically illuminated or electrically powered outdoor and indoor signs and displays shall be safe to persons and property and in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Conformity of all types of electrical signs with applicable standards of the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., and the National Electrical Code shall be prima facie evidence that such installations are reasonably safe to persons and property; provided that the provisions of this chapter shall prevail in case of conflicting provisions. 
(c)  Conformity of construction, erection, foundation and means of support of all such signs with the adopted building code shall be approved by the building official before permits for electrical inspection shall be issued under the authority of this chapter. 
(d)  A permit for an electrical sign must be obtained from the building official before any sign is installed. 
(Ord. No. 2008-22, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 29-28. - Utility company rules and regulations. 
    Rules and regulations for the company supplying electricity to the city, regarding service and meter installations for the kind and character of service to be rendered, as passed and approved by the city council from time to time, in accordance with franchise provisions, are hereby referred to, incorporated herein, and made a part hereof. 
(Ord. No. 2008-22, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 29-29. - Approved wiring methods, use thereof. 
    Wiring methods approved by the National Electrical Code shall be used with the exceptions listed below: 
(1)  Any National Electrical Code approved method may be used for temporary work. 
(2)  In all commercial buildings, and all buildings used for commercial purposes, the following wiring methods for new construction, renovations, or a change of occupancy requirements as described in the building code are excluded from the approved methods, as listed in the National Electrical Code: 
a.  *Article 398-Open wiring on insulators. 
b.  *Article 394-Concealed knob and tube work. 
c.  Article 362-Electrical non-metallic tubing. 
d.  *Article 320-Armored cable. 
e.  Article 334-Non-metallic sheathed cable. 
f.  *Article 338-Service entrance cable. 
g.  Article 339-Underground feeder and branch circuit cable. 
* Cannot be used in residential structures. 
(3)  Low voltage wiring. All low voltage wiring and devices shall be installed according to the requirements of the National Electrical Code. 
(4)  Minimum size for underground conduit shall be one-half-inch in diameter. 
(5)  Wiring in all residences and commercial structures shall be number 12 AWG copper conductors or larger. 
(6)  All wiring with nonmetallic overall coverings shall be kept isolated from contact of metallic components of other systems. 
(Ord. No. 2008-22, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 29-30. - Main disconnects. 
    There shall be an outside main disconnect provided for all new construction, renovations, or replacement and repair on any commercial or residential structure. 
(Ord. No. 2008-22, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 29-31. - Branch circuit protection. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to bridge, tamper with or change from its original installation, except upon the approval of the building official, and then only after proper permit for alteration has been issued, any fuse of the plug, cartridge type or link type, installed in panel boards, main switches or switchboard, or to alter or change circuit breakers so that the original calibration will be affected, or to tie down or secure any circuit breaker so that it will not function properly. 
(Ord. No. 2008-22, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 29-32. - Service clearances. 
    Service clearances shall comply with the current requirements of the National Electrical Code. 
(Ord. No. 2008-22, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 29-33. - Temporary construction poles. 
    Temporary poles shall comply with the requirements of the local utility company's standard service practices. 
(Ord. No. 2008-22, § 1, 10-13-08) 
ARTICLE VII. - INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 29-34. - Certificate of approval required before connecting. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make connections from a source of electrical energy to any electrical wiring, device or equipment on an installation for which a permit is required, as set forth in this chapter, until a certificate of approval has been issued by the electrical inspector authorizing such connection and the use of such wiring, devices or equipment. 
(Ord. No. 2008-22, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 29-35. - Unauthorized connection after disconnection. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make connections from a source of electrical energy to any electrical wiring, device or equipment which has been disconnected by order of the building official, or the use of which has been prohibited for reasons herein set forth in subsection 29-29(2), until a certificate of approval has been issued by him authorizing the re-connection and use of such wiring, devices or equipment. Whenever the service wires are once disconnected in any commercial building in the city limits the service shall not again be connected until the same has been wired so as to conform to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2008-22, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 29-36. - Rough work inspection, correcting faulty work, re-inspection. 
(a)  Notice, time, signing inspection tag. When the rough wiring or installation work is completed on any premises, the responsible person therefore shall notify the building official that the job is ready for inspection, giving proper identification of the work, address and permit number. The electrical inspector shall then make every reasonable effort to do an inspection of the electric installation within twenty-four (24) hours from the time of notification (exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays). If the wiring or installation work has been installed in accordance with the terms and provisions of this chapter, the electrical inspector shall sign the inspection tag, noting thereon the date of approval of the work. More than one rough inspection may be made without charge when the progress of construction requires such inspection. 
(b)  Faulty work. If the electric wiring or installation of fixtures or equipment is found to be faulty, incorrectly or defectively installed, the electrical inspector shall notify the responsible person who installed such work of the changes necessary to be made in order that the work may conform to this chapter. 
(c)  Rectification of faulty work. The responsible person shall, within forty-eight (48) hours from the time of notification; make or start to make the changes ordered and shall proceed with the work until the same is completed. Upon completion thereof and payment of the re-inspection fee, he shall notify the electrical inspector to the effect that faulty work has been corrected. The latter shall then cause the re-inspection to be made and, if such work is found to comply with this chapter, he shall sign the inspection card noting thereon the date of approval of the work. If the electrical inspector shall again find the work incorrectly installed, he shall notify the responsible person of the necessary changes and that person shall pay an additional re-inspection fee to the city before any other inspections are made. If the responsible person does not make the required changes within a reasonable time, the building official shall refuse to issue to any such person any further permits until such work in question is corrected and approved. 
(Ord. No. 2008-22, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 29-37. - Final inspection. 
    Upon the completion of all electrical wiring or installation of fixtures or equipment in any building or on any premises, the responsible person shall notify the building official that the work is ready for final inspection, giving the electrical permit number and street address. The electrical inspector shall make every reasonable effort to make the final inspection within twenty-four (24) hours from the time of receipt of notification (exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays) and, if any faulty or defective wiring or equipment is found, the responsible person shall be notified of the changes to be made in order that such work shall conform to this chapter. If such work is found to be correctly installed, replaced or repaired, the electrical certificate shall state that the wiring or installation work has been installed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. For each final inspection requested after the first has been made, a re-inspection fee shall be charged. 
(Ord. No. 2008-22, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 29-38. - Leaving work open. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cover, or cause to be covered, any part of a wiring installation with flooring, lath, wallboard or other material, until the electrical inspector shall have approved the wiring installation, in part or as a whole. 
(Ord. No. 2008-22, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 29-39. - Altering conductors or equipment; when interference with other work. 
    It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to, in any manner, change or alter electrical conductors or equipment in or on any building. If, in the course of the erection of a building or structure, electrical conductors or equipment have previously been installed in such position as to interfere with the erection or completion of the structure, notice shall be immediately given the person using the electrical conductors or equipment, and he shall be required to accomplish this needed change in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2008-22, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Chapter 30 - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2008-23, § 1, adopted October 13, 2008, amended chapter 30 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, chapter 30, §§ 30-1 and 30-2 pertained to the housing code, and derived from Ord. No. 478, §§ 3, 4, adopted May 9, 1972; Ord. No. 525, §§ 1-3, adopted November 19, 1973; Ord. No. 698, § 1, adopted March 31, 1980, and Ord. No. 86-08, § 1, adopted February 24, 1986. 
Cross reference- Fire protection and prevention, Ch. 10; garbage and trash, Ch. 12; health and sanitation, Ch. 13; trailers, mobile homes and mobile home parks, Ch. 26; utilities, Ch. 27; buildings, Ch. 28; electricity, Ch. 29; plumbing, Ch. 31. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Short title. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be known as "The Groves Property Maintenance Code." 
(Ord. No. 2008-23, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 30-2. - International Property Maintenance Code adopted. 
    There is hereby adopted for and by the city a property maintenance code known as the International Property Maintenance Code 2006 edition, published in book form by the International Code Council, and referred to, incorporated herein, and made part hereof for all purposes, subject to the amendments and deletions set forth in this Code, and which book is on file in the office of the building official. 
(Ord. No. 2008-23, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 30-3. - Amendments to the International Property Maintenance Code. 
    Sec. 102.3 Application of other codes is hereby amended to read as follows. 
    Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the International Building Code, International Residential Code, Uniform Plumbing Code, International Mechanical Code, National Electric Code and the International Energy Conservation Code. 
    Sec. 102.7 Referenced codes and standards is hereby amended to read as follows. 
    The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those of the Technical Ordinances, Part II of the City of Groves Code of Ordinances. 
    Sec. 103.5 Fees. is hereby amended to read as follows. 
    The fees for the activities and services performed by the department in carrying out it's responsibilities under this code shall be as prescribed in the Technical Ordinances, Part II of the City of Groves Code of Ordinances. 
    Sec. 103.6 is hereby created to read as follows: 
    103.6 Work commencing prior to the issuance of permit. 
    Where work for which a permit is required by this Code is begun prior to obtaining said permit, the fees shall be doubled, plus an additional administrative fee of $100.00 shall be assessed when the value of the construction work is less than $2,000.00. If the value of the construction work is $2,000.00 or greater, the additional administrative fee assessed shall be $500.00. The payment of such double permit fee and the additional administrative fee shall not relieve any person from fully complying with the requirements of this Code in the execution of the work, nor from any other penalties prescribed herein. 
    Sec. 107.3 Method of service is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is: 
    Delivery personally or sent certified mail addressed to the last known address, or published two (2) times within ten (10) consecutive days in a newspaper of general circulation published within the city. Any notice returned stamped "refused or undeliverable" shall constitute the same as being served. 
    Sec. 108 through Sec. 110 are hereby amended to read the same as Chapter 28, Article V. "Dangerous Building and Structures" of the City of Groves Code of Ordinances. 
    Chapter 3 General Requirements 
    Sec. 302.4 Weeds is hereby amended to read the same as Chapter 13 Health and Sanitation of the City of Groves code of Ordinances. 
    Sec. 303 Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs is hereby amended to add Sec. 303.3: 
    Sec. 303.3 All existing swimming pools, spas and hot tubs within the City shall be in compliance with the terms of Chapter 303 of this code within six (6) months from the date of final passage hereof. 
    Sec. 304.14 Insect screens is hereby amended to require year round protection. 
    Chapters 4 thru 7 are hereby amended to read the same as the applicable chapters in the City of Groves Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2008-23, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Secs. 30-4-30-7. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REGISTRATION AND INSPECTION OF ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLINGS-GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 30-8. - Short title. 
    This article may be referred to as the "City of Groves One- and Two-Family Inspection Code." 
(Ord. No. 2008-23, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 30-9. - Definitions. 
    The terms used herein shall be defined the same as those defined in the City Code, part III, appendices, appendix A, zoning article XVI. 
(Ord. No. 2008-23, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 30-10. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to safeguard the life, health, safety, welfare, and property of individuals who, by rent, lease, or permission, occupy one-family and dwelling units of two-family dwellings and the general public by developing a process to enforce the minimum building standards, and to provide equitable and practical criminal, administrative, and civil penalties for the violation of minimum building standards. 
(Ord. No. 2008-23, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 30-11. - Applicability and administration. 
(a)  This article shall apply to all one-family dwellings and dwelling units of two-family dwellings, as defined in part III, appendices, appendix A, zoning article XVI, which are now in existence or which may hereafter be constructed or converted from other uses. 
(b)  The building official and the authorized personnel representatives are authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of this article and the building codes. 
(Ord. No. 2008-23, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 30-12. - Registration required. 
(a)  An owner of a one-family dwelling or a dwelling unit of a two-family dwelling shall be required to register a minimum of two (2) consecutive years if a code violation (high grass/weeds, junk motor vehicle) is not corrected within the prescribed time frame of the notice given. 
(b)  A on-site or tenants request for an inspection uncovers a fire safety and/or public health and sanitation violation including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Non-working doors, windows, or escape routes required for emergency exit; 
(2)  Unsafe or hazardous plumbing systems; 
(3)  Unsafe or hazardous electrical systems; or 
(4)  Hazardous structural conditions that could cause serious bodily injury due to collapse or partial collapse of a dwelling unit's structural member. 
(c)  If during the period in which a one-family dwelling or dwelling unit of a two-family dwelling is registered, a subsequent condition that would require registration under subsection (a) occurs, then the one-family dwelling or dwelling unit of a two-family dwelling shall be subject to all registration requirements of this article and fee requirements as set out in subsection 30-15(a) for an additional year. The additional registration year shall commence from the date the current period of registration expires. 
(Ord. No. 2008-23, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 30-13. - Registration. 
(a)  An owner who rents, leases to, or allows another person to occupy a one-family dwelling or dwelling unit of a two-family dwelling, and is required to register by this article, shall file with the building official a written registration application, on the form provided for that purpose, and signed by the owner of the dwelling to be registered. 
(b)  The registration shall be on a form prescribed by the building official, and shall at a minimum contain the following information: 
(1)  The trade name, physical address, and business address; 
(2)  The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the owner, property manager, and resident manager; and the type of business entity which owns the complex; 
(3)  The name and physical address of designated employees or authorized representatives who shall be assigned to respond to emergency conditions, and a telephone number where said employees can be contacted during any 24-hour period. Emergency conditions shall include fire, natural disaster, flood, burst pipes, collapse hazard, and violent crime. A post office box shall not suffice for the address requirements of this section; 
(4)  The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of any mortgagees; 
(5)  If the property is owned by a corporation, limited liability company, partnership, limited partnership, trust or real estate investment trust, the name and address of any of the following: 
a.  For a corporation, a corporate officer; 
b.  For a partnership, a general partner; 
c.  For a limited liability company, the managing or administrative member; 
d.  For a limited partnership, a general partner; 
e.  For a limited liability partnership, a general partner; 
f.  For a limited liability limited partnership, a general partner; 
g.  For a trust, a trustee; 
h.  For a real estate investment trust, a general partner or an officer. 
i.  For any other legal entity not named above, a duly authorized agent; 
(6)  If the property is owned by a person, other than an individual, who lives outside the state, the owner shall designate a registered agent, in the state, who will accept legal service on behalf of the owner. If the property is owned by a person who is an individual and who lives outside the state, the individual shall either designate a registered agent, in the state, who will accept legal service on behalf of the owner or provide a physical address where the owner may receive legal service. A designation of a registered agent under this section shall include the name and address of the agent; and 
(7)  If any change in the information required by this section occurs the owner shall notify the building official within thirty (30) days of the change. 
(Ord. No. 2008-23, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 30-14. - Fees. 
(a)  A first-year fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each one-family dwelling or dwelling unit of a two-family dwelling required to register shall be: 
(1)  Submitted with the registration form required by this article; and 
(2)  Submitted with a new registration upon a change of ownership of the one-family dwelling or dwelling unit of a two-family dwelling. 
(b)  Unless an additional year has been added under subsection 30-13(c), a second-year fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each one-family dwelling or dwelling unit of a two-family dwelling required to register shall be: 
(1)  Submitted with the registration form required by this article; and 
(2)  Submitted with a new registration upon a change of ownership of the one-family dwelling or dwelling unit of a two-family dwelling. 
(c)  A registration is valid for one year from the date the completed registration form is filed in the office of the building official, and payment of the registration fee for that year has been made, unless the ownership of the complex changes. 
(d)  A registration is not assigned or transferable. If a change of ownership of the complex occurs during the period that a registration is otherwise valid, the landlord of the complex shall have thirty (30) days from the date the change of ownership occurred to file a new registration with building official, and pay a new registration fee. 
(e)  If a one-family dwelling or dwelling unit of a two-family dwelling fails a follow-up inspection, the city shall assess the owner a follow-up inspection fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). Written notice of the assessed follow-up inspection fee shall be sent by the building official via Certified U.S. mail to the owner. 
(Ord. No. 2008-23, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 30-15. - Inspection and reporting. 
(a)  An owner shall inspect each dwelling for compliance with the standards set forth in this article. Inspections shall be recorded on a form approved by the building official. 
(b)  The inspection of a dwelling shall be conducted a minimum of once annually and at any time when the occupancy changes. 
(c)  The owner shall sign each inspection report, and shall require a tenant to sign the report for the tenant's dwelling. If the tenant disagrees with any notation made by the owner on the report, the owner shall permit the tenant to make written comments on the report prior to signing it. The owner shall provide the tenant with a copy of the report after it is signed. 
(d)  An owner shall maintain a copy of the report of every inspection conducted pursuant to this section for a minimum of three (3) years. A copy of the reports maintained by an owner pursuant to this subsection shall be provided to the building official upon request. 
(e)  A notice for reporting code violations to the city shall be provided to the tenants once annually and at any time when the occupancy changes. The notice shall be in a form provided by the building official. 
(f)  The building official may conduct: 
(1)  Inspections based on indication of Code violations; 
(2)  Periodic inspections; and 
(3)  Follow-up inspections. 
(g)  The following areas shall be subject to periodic inspection by the building official: 
(1)  All building exteriors; 
(2)  Vacant dwelling units, with the owner's consent; and 
(3)  Occupied dwelling units upon receipt of complaint by the unit's tenant during a periodic inspection. 
(h)  The building official is authorized to make follow-up inspections of a one-family dwelling or dwelling unit of a two-family dwelling which fails an initial inspection or a periodic inspection. 
(i)  In addition to other authority granted by this article, the building official has all rights and authority granted by Article 18.05 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(Ord. No. 2008-23, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 30-16. - Criminal enforcement. 
    A violation of this article is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed the penalty prescribed in section 1-5. Each separate occurrence of a violation or each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2008-23, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 30-17. - Civil enforcement. 
(a)  The city may invoke V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 54.012-54.019, as amended, and petition the state district court or the applicable county court at law, through the city attorney, for either injunctive relief, civil penalties, or both injunctive relief and civil penalties, whenever it appears that a person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter. 
(b)  Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.016, as amended, the city may obtain against the owner or the operator of a facility, a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, that: 
(1)  Prohibits specific conduct that violates the ordinance; or 
(2)  Requires specific conduct that is necessary for compliance with the ordinance. 
(c)  Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.017, as amended, the city may recover a civil penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day for each violation of any provision of this chapter that relates to any matter specified in subsection (a), if the city proves that: 
(1)  The defendant was actually notified of the provisions of the chapter; and 
(2)  After the defendant received notice of the ordinance provisions, the defendant committed acts in violation of the ordinances or failed to take action necessary for compliance with the ordinance. 
(d)  The city may also institute suit to recover the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city, and any costs of response, remediation, abatement, and restoration incurred by the city as allowed under state or federal laws, or at common law. 
(e)  In determining the amount of civil liability, the court should take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the violation, corrective actions by the violator, the compliance history of the violator, and any other factors as justice requires. 
(Ord. No. 2008-23, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 30-18-30-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REGISTRATION AND INSPECTION OF MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING COMPLEXES-GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 30-30. - Short title. 
    This article may be referred to as the "The City of Groves Multi-Family Inspections Code." 
(Ord. No. 2008-23, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 30-31. - Definitions. 
    The terms used herein shall be defined the same as those defined in part III, appendices, appendix A, zoning article XVI. 
(Ord. No. 2008-23, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 30-32. - Applicability and administration. 
(a)  This article shall apply to all multi-family dwelling complexes (three (3) or more dwelling units located within the same structure) in the city which are now in existence or which may hereafter be constructed or converted from other uses. 
(b)  The building official or authorized representatives are authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-23, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 30-33. - Registration and inspections 
(a)  Certificate of occupancy. 
(1)  No multi-family dwelling complex shall be used or occupied, and no change in the existing occupancy classification or ownership of a multi-family dwelling complex, or any portion thereof, shall be made until the landlord has obtained a certificate of occupancy as provided by the building code. 
(2)  Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions of the building codes, this article, or of other ordinances of the city. Certificates presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of the building code and other applicable ordinances shall not be valid. Changes in the character or use of a building shall not be made except as provided in the building code. 
(3)  The certificate of occupancy for all multi-family dwelling complexes shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises of the complex, and shall not be removed except by the building official. 
(4)  A landlord commits an offense if the landlord knowingly operates a multi-family dwelling complex in violation of this section. 
(b)  Registration required. 
(1)  The landlord of a multi-family dwelling complex shall annually register the complex with the building official. 
(2)  The landlord of a multi-family dwelling complex which is constructed after the effective date of this chapter shall register the complex within thirty (30) days after the complex receives its certificate of occupancy, and annually thereafter. 
(3)  A registration is valid for one year from the date the completed registration form is filed in the office of the building official, and payment of the registration fee has been made, unless the ownership of the complex changes. 
(4)  If a change of ownership of the complex occurs during the period that a registration is otherwise valid, the landlord of the complex shall have thirty (30) days from the date the change of ownership occurred to file a new registration with the building official, and pay a new registration fee. 
(5)  The registration shall be on a form prescribed by the building official, and shall at a minimum contain the following information about the complex: 
a.  The trade name, physical address, and business address; 
b.  The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the owner, property manager, resident manager, registered agent, and all federal, state, and local funding agencies; and the type of business entity which owns the complex; 
c.  The names of designated employees or authorized representatives who shall be assigned to respond to emergency conditions, and a telephone number where said employees can be contacted during any 24-hour period. Emergency conditions shall include fire, natural disaster, flood, burst pipes, collapse hazard, and violent crime; 
d.  The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of any mortgagees; 
e.  A copy of a site plan depicting the total number of all buildings within the complex, including a description of the use of each building and the location of each building within the complex; 
f.  The total number of dwelling units; 
g.  The number of dwelling units per category, with the categories based on the number of sleeping rooms in a unit; and 
h.  The number and type of security systems and fire alarm systems maintained on the premises and the names and telephone numbers of the alarm companies which respond to alarms or relay alarms to emergency services. 
(6)  A landlord commits an offense if the landlord knowingly operates a multi-family dwelling complex which is not currently registered with the building official. 
(c)  Fees. 
(1)  The landlord of a multi-family dwelling complex shall pay the city fees to offset the city's costs of administration, registration and inspection. 
(2)  An annual fee of nine dollars ($9.00) per dwelling unit, with a minimum of fifty dollars ($50.00) per complex per year shall be: 
a.  Submitted annually with the registration form required by subsection (b)(5), and 
b.  Submitted with a new registration upon a change of ownership of the complex. 
(3)  The landlord of a multi-family dwelling complex that fails a periodic inspection shall eliminate all violations identified at the time of the periodic inspection. The landlord must allow follow-up inspections by the building official after a period of time determined by the building official to be sufficient for the landlord to abate the violations. If the complex fails the first follow-up inspection, the landlord shall pay the city a follow-up inspection fee of eighteen dollars ($18.00) per dwelling unit for the gross number of dwelling units registered within the complex. No subsequent follow-up inspection fees shall be charged unless a new periodic inspection is performed and the complex fails both the new periodic inspection and the follow-up inspection. Follow-up inspection fees shall not be charged more than one time in two (2) years. 
(4)  The fee requirements described above shall not include a dwelling unit on a college, university, or seminary occupied by a student or a student and the student's family and in which the dwelling unit is owned by the respective college, university, or seminary. 
(d)  Inspection by building official. 
(1)  The building official may conduct: 
a.  Inspections for issuance of certificate of occupancy; 
b.  Inspections based on indications of Code violations, including complaints filed with the building official; 
c.  Periodic inspections; and 
d.  Follow-up inspections. 
(2)  The following areas of a multi-family dwelling complex shall be subject to periodic inspection by the director: 
a.  All building exteriors; 
b.  All exterior and interior public areas; 
c.  Vacant dwelling units; 
d.  Occupied dwelling units upon receipt of complaint by the unit's tenant during a periodic inspection. 
(3)  Except as provided by subsection (4) below, the building official may inspect portions of a multi-family dwelling complex as frequently as deemed necessary. The building official shall schedule periodic inspections no less frequently than once every two (2) years. 
(4)  Exemption. A multi-family dwelling complex whose original construction was completed on or after December 31, 2007, shall be exempt from the building official's periodic inspection for three (3) years from the date the original certificate of occupancy was issued for the complex. If a complex was constructed in phases, each phase shall be treated as a separate complex for the purposes of this subsection. However, an inspection of the complex shall be triggered during the exemption period if: 
a.  The ownership of the complex changes, in which case an inspection pursuant to subsection (7) shall be made; or 
b.  The building official receives a valid complaint of, or otherwise becomes aware of, a violation of this article or of the building code at the complex. 
(5)  The landlord of a multi-family dwelling complex shall make all exteriors, all exterior and interior public areas, and all vacant dwelling units of the complex available to the building official for inspections at all reasonable times. 
(6)  The building official is authorized to make follow up inspections of a multi-family dwelling complex which fails periodic inspection and to inspect all areas included in the periodic inspection as well as occupied dwelling units, in such frequency and scope as deemed necessary to determine compliance with this article. 
(7)  Change of ownership. Within thirty (30) days after the change of ownership of a multi-family dwelling complex, the landlord shall obtain a new certificate of occupancy in order to continue operating. The complex, including all occupied and all vacant dwelling units, shall be subject to a complete certificate of occupancy inspection by the building official before a new certificate of occupancy will be issued. 
a.  If the complex fails the certificate of occupancy inspection, all vacant units within the complex shall be posted for non-occupancy, and the landlord shall not allow the occupancy of such units until the complex passes final inspection and is issued a certificate of occupancy. 
b.  If vacant units are posted for non-occupancy pursuant to subparagraph a. above, the landlord may ask the building official to allow the occupancy of individual posted units. The occupancy of a posted unit may be occupied only if the unit passes interior inspection and the building it occupies passed the certificate of occupancy inspection. 
(8)  In addition to the other authority granted by this section, the building official is authorized to inspect a multi-family dwelling complex with greater frequency than provided above if the he has cause to believe that the complex is not in compliance with the building code or this article. 
(9)  In addition to the authority granted by this section, the director has all rights and authority granted by Article 18.05 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(e)  Landlord/tenant inspections. The landlord of a multi-family dwelling complex shall inspect each dwelling unit within the complex. 
(1)  The inspection of a dwelling unit shall be conducted with the unit's tenant: 
a.  A minimum of once annually; and 
b.  When the occupancy of the unit changes; 
(2)  The landlord shall sign each inspection report, and shall require a tenant to sign the report for the tenant's dwelling unit. If the tenant disagrees with any notation made by the landlord on the report, the landlord shall permit the tenant to make written comments on the report prior to signing it. The landlord shall provide the tenant with a copy of the report after it is signed. 
(3)  The building official shall determine which standards established by the building code shall be covered by the inspection. 
(4)  The failure of a landlord to make inspections as required by this subsection, to maintain records of the inspections, and to permit inspection of those records pursuant to this subsection may cause the complex to fail inspection. 
A landlord shall maintain reports of the inspections conducted pursuant to this subsection for all dwelling units within the multi-family dwelling complex. 
a.  The reports shall either be on a form provided by the building official or on a form that complies with the requirements herein. 
b.  A report shall include places for marking whether the dwelling unit complies with the standards set by the building official to be included within the scope of the inspection, and shall include the names of all persons occupying the dwelling unit (other than overnight guests). 
c.  A report shall also include: 
1.  The names of designated employees or other authorized persons who shall be assigned to respond to emergency conditions, and a telephone number where said employees can be contacted during any 24-hour period. Emergency conditions shall include fire, natural disaster, flood, collapse hazard, burst pipes, or violent crime; and 
2.  A notice for reporting code violations to the city as follows: TO REPORT UNRESOLVED VIOLATIONS OF CITY CODE MAINTENANCE STANDARDS FOR THESE PREMISES, CONTACT THE NEIGHBORHOOD SERVICES DIVISION AT 960-5703 OR 960-5707 
(5)  The landlord shall maintain these inspection reports on the premises of the complex, and shall make them available for inspection at all reasonable times. If there is no business office on the premises of the complex, the landlord shall maintain reports at the landlord's central business office, and shall make them available for inspection at the complex at all reasonable times. 
(6)  The inspection reports shall be maintained for a minimum of three (3) years. 
(Ord. No. 2008-23, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Secs. 30-34-30-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CRIME PREVENTION 

Sec. 30-46. - Crime prevention standards. 
    The landlord of a multi-family dwelling complex shall provide the following crime prevention measures: 
(1)  Signs for emergencies and code violations. A landlord of a multi-family dwelling complex shall post and maintain signs on the premises of the complex which include the following: 
a.  Emergency numbers. The names of designated employees or other authorized persons who shall be assigned to respond to emergency conditions, and a telephone number where said employees can be contacted during any 24-hour period. Emergency conditions shall include fire, natural disaster, flood, collapse hazard, burst pipes, or violent crime. 
b.  Notice for reporting code violations. The signs shall state in capital letters: 
TO REPORT UNRESOLVED VIOLATIONS OF CITY CODE MAINTENANCE STANDARDS FOR THESE PREMISES, CONTACT THE NEIGHBORHOOD SERVICES DIVISION AT 960-5703 OR 960-5707. 
(2)  The signs required by subsection a. shall be a minimum of twelve (12) inches by twenty-four (24) inches. Sign facings shall be fabricated out of weather-proof material. The signs shall have a white background, with letters and numbers in a contrasting color. At each multi-family dwelling complex there shall be at least one sign posted, and an additional sign for each fifty (50) dwelling units in excess of fifty (50). The signs shall be prominently displayed in exterior, publicly accessible areas of the complex. If the complex has an on-site management office, one sign shall be on the exterior of the office. 
(3)  Lighting. 
a.  Exterior illumination shall be provided at appropriate points adjacent to all building entrances, including individual dwelling units. Lighting shall be sufficient to illuminate areas where hazards may reasonably exist, and shall be operable between a half hour after sunset and a half hour before sunrise. 
b.  If control mechanisms for such lighting are not accessible by each tenant, such illumination shall be activated and deactivated by a photo cell or seasonally-adjusted timer switch, not operable by individual tenants of the complex. 
c.  A landlord shall repair all inoperable exterior lighting fixtures within a reasonable period of time after being notified that the fixture is not working. In no instance shall a reasonable period of time be deemed to mean more than ten (10) days. 
(4)  Vacant buildings. 
a.  All openings in vacant buildings and dwellings shall be closed and secured from unlawful entry by the installation and maintenance of appropriate locking devices and intact doors and windows which are proportioned to securely and completely fit the openings. 
b.  Alternatively, openings may be secured by means of the installation of proportioned wood materials in good condition. The surfaces of such materials exposed to the weather shall be protected with the application of exterior grade paint, or a similar weather resistant finish, which blends with the background color of the building. 
(5)  Security gate access. 
a.  A landlord of a multi-family dwelling complex which has unstaffed security gates which restrict vehicle access onto the premises shall provide the city marshal of the police department and the city fire chief of the fire department with master codes to the gates so that police and fire vehicles and personnel and ambulance and ambulance personnel are allowed unrestricted entry onto the premises when responding to emergencies and calls for service and routine patrols. 
b.  Prior to changing the master codes, the landlord shall notify the city marshal and the fire chief of the new codes. 
c.  All security gates shall be equipped with a manual override to be used in the event of a power outage or system failure. The landlord shall notify the chief of police and fire chief of the location of the override. 
d.  Access through such security gates by fire trucks and fire personnel shall be provided as required by the fire code. 
e.  Fire lanes shall be kept clear of obstructions such as motor vehicles, solid waste collection bins, equipment or other similar items. 
(6)  Graffiti abatement. A landlord shall remove graffiti from the landlord's multi-family dwelling complex as required by this ordinance. 
(7)  Occupancy limits. A landlord shall not permit a dwelling unit within the complex to be occupied other than by a family, as that term is defined within city ordinances, and shall not permit the number of persons occupying a dwelling unit to exceed the occupancy load of the unit based on the standards set in appendix A zoning definitions. 
(8)  A landlord commits an offense if the landlord knowingly violates this section. 
(9)  Tenant responsibility. Even the best security plans, devices and systems cannot completely prevent crime. The best safety measures a tenant of a multi-family dwelling complex can utilize are those performed out of common sense and habit. Such measures include locking doors and windows, not opening doors to strangers, and promptly reporting malfunctioning security devices and exterior lighting to the landlord. 
(Ord. No. 2008-23, § 1, 10-13-08) 
ARTICLE V. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 30-47. - Criminal enforcement. 
    A violation of this article is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed the penalty prescribed in section 1-5. Each separate occurrence of a violation or each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2008-23, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Sec. 30-48. - Civil enforcement. 
(a)  The city may invoke V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 54.012-54.019, as amended, and petition the state district court or the applicable county court at law, through the city attorney, for either injunctive relief, civil penalties, or both injunctive relief and civil penalties, whenever it appears that a person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter. 
(b)  Pursuant to V.T.C.A., § 54.016, as amended, the city may obtain against the owner or the operator of a facility, a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, that: 
(1)  Prohibits specific conduct that violates the ordinance; or 
(2)  Requires specific conduct that is necessary for compliance with the ordinance. 
(c)  Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.017, as amended, the city may recover a civil penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day for each violation of any provision of this chapter that relates to any matter specified in subsection (a), if the city proves that: 
(1)  The defendant was actually notified of the provisions of the chapter; and 
(2)  After the defendant received notice of the ordinance provisions, the defendant committed acts in violation of the ordinances or failed to take action necessary for compliance with the ordinance. 
(d)  The city may also institute suit to recover the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city, and any costs of response, remediation, abatement, and restoration incurred by the city as allowed under state or federal laws, or at common law. 
(e)  In determining the amount of civil liability, the court should take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the violation, corrective actions by the violator, the compliance history of the violator, and any other factors as justice requires. 
(Ord. No. 2008-23, § 1, 10-13-08) 
Chapter 31 - PLUMBING CODE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2011-13, § 1, adopted Sept. 12, 2011, amended ch. 31 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 31, §§ 31-1 and 31-2, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from: Ord. No. 524, §§ 2-25, adopted Nov. 19, 1973; Ord. No. 701, §§ 1-4, adopted Mar. 31, 1980; Ord. No. 83-06, §§ 1-3, adopted Mar. 14, 1983; Ord. No. 86-09, § 1, adopted Feb. 24, 1986; Ord. No. 88-14, §§ 1-4, adopted July 11, 1988; Ord. No. 96-11, §§ 2-7, adopted Sept. 23, 1996, Ord. No. 98-03, § 1, adopted Feb. 9, 1998; and Ord. No. 2009-08, § 1, adopted Mar. 16, 2009. 
Cross reference- Fire protection and prevention, Ch. 10; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 22; toxic materials, Ch. 241/2; mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions, Ch. 26; utilities, Ch. 27; buildings, Ch. 28; electricity, Ch. 29; housing, Ch. 30. 

Sec. 31-0. - Short title. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be known as "The Groves Plumbing Code". 
(Ord. No. 2011-13, § 1, 9-12-11) 
Sec. 31-1. - Uniform Plumbing Code adopted. 
    There is hereby adopted for and by the city, a plumbing code known as the Uniform Plumbing Code, 2009 Edition, published in book form by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials (IAPMO) and referred to, incorporated herein and made a part hereof for all purposes, subject to the amendments and deletions set forth in this Code of Ordinances, and which book is on file in the office of the building official. 
(Ord. No. 2011-13, § 1, 9-12-11) 
Sec. 31-2. - Amendments to the Uniform Plumbing Code, 2009 Edition. 
Chapter 1 Administration 
Amend Section 103.1.3. Licensing by adding a new subsection 103.1.3.a.-g. , to read as follows: 
Sec. 103.1.3.a. Registration of Plumbing/Irrigation Companies 
Registration required; false representations of registration. 
(a.1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of installing maintaining, altering or repairing any sanitary plumbing or gas system, fixtures or equipment and or irrigation systems for which a permit is required by this ordinance, or to in any manner undertake to execute such work, unless such person is the holder of a license as required by this ordinance. 
(a.2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely represent himself as a licensed plumber of any class set forth in this ordinance or to use the words "plumbing contractor," "master plumber," "plumber," or "irrigator" or words of similar import or meaning, on signs, cards, stationery, or by any other manner whatsoever, unless such person is properly licensed within the meaning of this ordinance. 
Sec. 103.1.3.b. Registration; fees; issuance. 
Each state licensed irrigator wishing to register his/her company to do irrigation work in the City of Groves shall submit the required registration fee, a copy of their irrigation license, and a copy of their general liability insurance certificate to the City of Groves Inspection Department. 
Registration Renewal Insurance $75.00 $75.00 As required by State Law  
Sec. 103.1.3.c. License required; issuance deemed registration. 
Upon presentation of the appropriate license from the State of Texas and after applicant has paid to the City the fees prescribed in this ordinance, and furnish a copy of their insurance certificate, if required herein, such applicant shall be considered registered with the City within the meaning of this ordinance. 
Sec. 103.1.3.d. Registration renewal. 
Annual renewal of the City registration shall be accomplished by submitting the renewal fee and, if required, a copy of their renewed liability insurance certificate. 
(a)  Annual renewal fees are due January 1 and payable before January 31 of each year. License holders who have not paid their annual renewal fee will not be permitted to perform work or be issued permits until the fees are paid in full. 
Sec. 103.1.3.e. License transferability; signing. 
A license registration shall not be transferable and shall be issued to the person examined by the State of Texas and named on the license and known as the holder of the license. 
Sec. 103.1.3.f. Unauthorized use of license. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to lend, rent, or transfer his license or any rights to any other person, and for any person to make use of any such rights which are not actually his own. 
Sec. 103.1.3.g. Master plumber/irrigator's office. 
Every Master plumber or irrigator, if he qualifies as the responsible plumber/irrigator of the plumbing/irrigation company must have and maintain an established place of business and shall either have a person in attendance or have an answering service to receive messages from the City or other persons concerned during regular business hours. A Master plumber/irrigator can represent and acquire permits for no more than one plumbing/irrigation company. 
Amend Section 103.2. Application For Permit by adding a new subsection 103.2.a. to read as follows: 
103.2.a. Who May Obtain a Permit. 
Permits shall only be issued to the following: 
1.  Any master plumber licensed by the Texas State Board of Plumbing Examiners, and having a certificate of liability insurance on file in accordance with the provisions of the Texas State Board of Plumbing Examiners. 
2.  Any property owner doing plumbing/irrigation in a building owned and occupied by him as his homestead. 
3.  Any irrigator licensed by the Texas State Bar of Irrigators and having a certificate of liability insurance on file in accordance with the provisions of 103.1.3.b for the installation and connection of an irrigating system to a private or public, raw or potable water supply system or any water supply. 
Amend Section 103.3.4. Expiration to read as follows: 
103.3.4.a. Expiration of Plumbing Permit. 
1.  If the work described in any plumbing permit has not begun within six (6) months from the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall expire; it shall be canceled by the building official; and notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected. 
2.  If the work described in any plumbing permit has not been substantially completed within one (1) year of the date of the issuance thereof, said permit shall expire and be canceled by the building official and notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected, together with notice that further work as described in the canceled permit shall not proceed unless and until a new permit has been obtained. 
Amend Section 103.4. Fees/Table 1-1 by adding a new subsection 103.4.a. to read as follows: 
Sec. 103.4.a. Schedule of Permit Fees. 
On all plumbing installations or alterations requiring a plumbing permit, a fee for each plumbing permit shall be paid as required at the time of filing the application in accordance with the fee schedule as established herein. 
FEE SCHEDULE 
For issuing each permit ..... $20.00 
Plus the following when provided: 
Toilets, each ..... $5.00 
Tubs, each ..... $5.00 
Showers, each ..... $5.00 
Lavatories, each ..... $5.00 
Sinks, each ..... $5.00 
Urinals, each ..... $5.00 
Water heaters, each ..... $20.00 
Water service yard line ..... $10.00 
Sewer service, yard line ..... $20.00 
Floor drains, each ..... $5.00 
Washing machines, each ..... $5.00 
Air conditioner drain, each ..... $5.00 
Drinking fountains, each ..... $10.00 
Grease trap/Interceptors, each ..... $50.00 
Dishwasher, each ..... $5.00 
Sinks in cafe or restaurant: 
2 compartments ..... $5.00 
3 compartments ..... $7.00 
Mop sink, each ..... $5.00 
Soda fountain, each ..... $10.00 
Steam tables, each ..... $10.00 
Dental chairs, each ..... $25.00 
RV parks, each space ..... $50.00 
Irrigation system ..... $25.00 
Hose bibs ..... $5.00 
For each atmospheric-type vacuum breaker: 
(1) to (5) ..... $5.00 
Over 5, each ..... $5.00 
Gas lines: 
One (1) to four (4) outlets ..... $25.00 
Each additional outlet ..... $5.00 
Gas vented appliance, each ..... $5.00 
Backflow prevention assemblies: 
Two inch and smaller, each ..... $25.00 
Over two inch, each ..... $50.00 
Gas Test ..... $25.00 
Re-inspection ..... $25.00 
Pool heater ..... $25.00 
Generator ..... $25.00 
Minimum on any plumbing inspection or reinspection ..... $40.00 
Amend Section 103.4.4. Investigation Fees: Work Without a Permit by adding a new subsection 103.4.4.1.a. to read as follows. 
Sec. 104.4.1.a. Work Without a Permit 
Where work for which a permit is required by this Code is begun prior to obtaining said permit, the fees shall be doubled, plus an additional administrative fee of $100.00 shall be assessed when the value of the construction work is less than $2,000.00. If the value of the construction work is $2,000.00 or greater, the additional administrative fee assessed shall be $500.00. The payment of such double permit fee and the additional administrative fee shall not relieve any person from fully complying with the requirements of this Code in the execution of the work, nor from any other penalties prescribed herein. 
Amend Section 103.4.5. Fee Refunds by adding a new section 103.4.5.1.a. to read as follows: 
Sec. 103.4.5.1.a. Fee Refunds. 
When one master plumber or irrigation installer completes the rough work, in whole or in part, or does any plumbing or irrigation or installation of fixtures or equipment and a second master plumber or irrigation installer is called upon to complete the work, in whole or in part, a separate permit is required for which regular fees shall be paid for the work done. Each master plumber or irrigation installer shall be held responsible only for the work installed by his company. Before the second master plumber or irrigator, installer is issued a permit for the completion of a plumbing or irrigation project, the Building Official shall first attempt to notify the master plumber or irrigation installer holding the original or first permit that the second permit is to be issued. The issuance of the second permit shall cancel the first permit and no refund of fees shall be made. 
Chapter 5 Water Heaters 
Section 508.14. Installation in Residential Garages is hereinafter amended to read as follows: 
Sec 508.14. Installation in Residential Garages. 
(1)  Gas utilization equipment "water heaters" in residential garages and in adjacent spaces that are open to the garage and are not part of the living space of a dwelling unit shall be installed so that all burners and burner-ignition devices are located not less than eighteen (18") inches above the floor. 
(2)  Water heaters equipped with listed flammable vapor ignition resistant devices shall also be installed so that all burners and burner-ignition devices are located not less than eighteen (18") inches above the floor unless special conditions prohibit the installation as described and then only with permission from the Building Official. 
Chapter 7 Sanitary Drainage 
Section 715.1 is amended by adding a new subsection 715.1.a. to read as follows: 
Sec. 715.1.a. Building sewer materials 
The building sewer, beginning two (2) feet from any building or structure, shall be of Schedule 40 PVC DWV, with solvent weld joints. 
Chapter 12 Fuel Piping 
Section 1214.3.2. Test Pressure is amended by adding a new subsection 1214.3.2.a. to read as follows. 
Sec. 1214.3.2.a Test pressure 
All gas piping systems shall withstand the following pressure test for a period of not less than ten (10) minutes without showing any drop in pressure. 
(a)  Rough-in test -15 PSI 
(b)  Final with all valves in place--5 PSI 
(Ord. No. 2011-13, § 1, 9-12-11) 
Chapter 32 - MECHANICAL CODE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2009-09, § 1, adopted March 16, 2009, repealed and reenacted chapter 32 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, chapter 32 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 700, §§ 1, 2, adopted March 31, 1980; Ord. No. 86-10, § 1, adopted February 24, 1986; Ord. No. 88-15, §§ 1, 2, adopted July 11, 1988, and Ord. No. 98-04, § 1, adopted February 9, 1998.  The provisions of this chapter shall be known as "The Groves Mechanical Code." 

Sec. 32-1. - International Mechanical Code adopted. 
    There is hereby adopted for and by the city, a mechanical code known as the International Mechanical Code, 2006 Edition, published in book form by the International Code Council ("ICC") and referred to, incorporated herein and made a part hereof for all purposes, subject to the amendments and deletions set forth in this Code of Ordinances, and which book is on file in the office of the building official. 
(Ord. No. 2009-09, § 1, 3-16-09) 
Sec. 32-2. - Amendments. 
Section 102.8 Referenced codes and standards is hereby amended to read: 
102.8 Referenced codes and standards. 
The codes and standards referenced herein shall be those (standards) listed in Chapter 15, the (Codes) Electricity shall be the same as Chapter 29, Plumbing shall be the same as Chapter 31. 
Section 106 Permits 
Section 106.1 When required is hereby amended to read: 
106.1. When Required is hereby amended by adding new subsections 106.1.1 and 106.1.2 
Sec. 106.1.1 Who May Obtain a Permit. 
Permits shall be issued only to the following: 
1.  Any contractor having a valid State of Texas air conditioning/refrigeration license. 
2.  Any property owner installing and/or repairing air conditioning and heating equipment in a building owned by him as his homestead. 
106.1.2 Contractor's Responsibilities "Registration" 
It shall be the duty of every contractor who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs for any mechanical systems within the City to register his/her company with the City of Groves Inspection Division. 
Sec. 106.1.3.a Registration of Mechanical Companies 
Registration required; false representations of registration. 
(a 1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of installing maintaining, altering or repairing any air conditioning or refrigeration equipment systems for which a permit is required by this ordinance, or to in any manner undertake to execute such work, unless such person is the holder of a license as required by this ordinance. 
(a 2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely represent himself as a licensed mechanical contractor of any class set forth in this ordinance or to use the words "air conditioning contractor", "refrigeration contractor", or words of similar import or meaning, on signs, cards, stationery, or by any other manner whatsoever, unless such person is properly licensed within the meaning of this ordinance. 
Sec. 106.1.3.b Registration; fees; issuance. 
Each state licensed air conditioning or refrigeration contractor wishing to register his/her company to do mechanical work in the City of Groves shall submit the required registration fee, a copy of their state license, and a copy of their general liability insurance certificate to the Inspection Department. 
Registration Renewal Insurance $75.00 $75.00 As required by State Law  
Sec. 106.1.3.c License required; issuance deemed registration. 
Upon presentation of the appropriate license from the State of Texas and after applicant has paid to the City the fees prescribed in this ordinance, and furnished a copy of their insurance certificate, if required herein, such applicant shall be considered registered with the City within the meaning of this ordinance. 
Sec. 106.1.3.d Registration renewal. 
Annual renewal of the City registration shall be accomplished by submitting the renewal fee and, if required, a copy of their renewed liability insurance certificate. 
Sec. 106.1.3.e License transferability; signing. 
A license registration shall not be transferable and shall be issued to the person examined by the State of Texas and named on the license and known as the holder of the license. 
Sec. 106.1.3.f Unauthorized use of license. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to lend, rent, or transfer his license or any rights to any other person, and for any person to make use of any such rights which are not actually his own. 
Sec. 106.1.3.g Mechanical Contractors office. 
Every mechanical contractor, if he qualifies as the responsible mechanical contractor of the mechanical company must have and maintain an established place of business and shall either have a person in attendance or have an answering service to receive messages from the City or other persons concerned during regular business hours. A mechanical contractor can represent and acquire permits for no more that one mechanical company. 
106.4. Expiration of Permit. 
1. If the work described in any mechanical permit has not begun within six (6) months from the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall expire; it shall be canceled by the building official; and notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected. 
2. If the work described in any mechanical permit has not been substantially completed within one (1) year of the date of the issuance thereof, said permit shall expire and be canceled by the building official and notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected, together with notice that further work as described in the canceled permit shall not proceed unless and until a new permit has been obtained. 
Sec. 106.5.2 Fees schedule shall be amended to read as follows: 
Sec. 106.5.2 Fee schedule 
Permit fees 
Total valuation Fees $1,000.00 and less No fee, unless inspection is required, in which case a $15.00 fee for each inspection shall be charged. $1,001.00 to $50,000.00 $15.00 for the first $1,000.00 plus $5.00 for each additional thousand or fraction thereof, to and including $50,000.00. $50,001.00 to $100,000.00 $260.00 for the first $50,000.00 plus $4.00 for each additional thousand or fraction thereof, to and including $100,000.00 $100,001.00 to $500,000.00 $460.00 for the first $100,000.00 plus $3.00 for each additional thousand or fraction thereof, to and including $500,000.00. $500,001.00 and up $1,660.00 for the first $500,000.00 plus $2.00 for each additional thousand, or fraction thereof.  
Section 108.4 Violation penalties shall be amended to read as follows: 
Sec. 108 Violation penalties 
Where work for which a permit is required by this Code is begun prior to obtaining said permit, the fees shall be doubled, plus an additional administrative fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be assessed when the value of the construction work is less than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). If the value of the construction work is two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) or greater, the additional administrative fee assessed shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00). The payment of such double permit fee and the additional administrative fee shall not relieve any person from fully complying with the requirements of this Code in the execution of the work, nor from any other penalties prescribed herein. 
Section 109 Appeals-Deleted 
(Ord. No. 2009-09, § 1, 3-16-09) 
Chapter 33 - SCREENING WALLS AND FENCES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 707, §§ 1-7, adopted July 7, 1980, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion has been at the discretion of the editors. 
Cross reference- Fences required for toxic materials operations, Ch. 241/2; fences required for swimming pools, § 28-2; zoning, App. A. 

Sec. 33-1. - Adoption. 
    There are hereby adopted and established standards for design and construction of all screening walls or fences within the City of Groves, as follows in sections 33-2 through 33-7. 
(Ord. No. 707, § 1, 7-7-80) 
Sec. 33-2. - Compliance required. 
    All screening walls or fences which are required under the provisions of the City of Groves Zoning Ordinance No. 431 shall comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 707, § 2, 7-7-80) 
Sec. 33-3. - Construction. 
    All required screening walls or fences shall be constructed of masonry or other permanent wall or fence material. The surface of such wall or fence shall not contain any openings consisting of more than forty (40) square inches in each one (1) square foot of wall or fence surface. All passageways in such wall or fence shall be equipped with gates equal in height and screening characteristics of the wall or fence. 
(Ord. No. 707, § 3, 7-7-80) 
Sec. 33-4. - Height. 
    All required screening walls or fences shall not be less than six (6) feet nor more than eight (8) feet in height. The lower edge of said wall or fence shall not be over three (3) inches above the finished ground elevation. 
(Ord. No. 707, § 4, 7-7-80) 
Sec. 33-5. - Maintenance requirements. 
    All required screening walls or fences shall be permanently maintained in a safe and sound vertical condition. The area in front of said wall or fence shall be maintained in a clean and orderly condition free of weeds, debris, and trash. 
(Ord. No. 707, § 5, 7-7-80) 
Sec. 33-6. - Approved types of screening walls or fences. 
    The approved types of screening walls or fences are set out in Exhibit "A," attached hereto and made a part hereof, the same as if stated herein verbatim. 
(Ord. No. 707, § 6, 7-7-80; Ord. No. 83-18, § 1, 9-26-83) 
Editor's note- Exhibit "A," as mentioned above, is not set out herein but is on file and available for inspection by the public in the city clerk's office. Ord. No. 83-18, § 1, adopted Sept. 26, 1983, amended § 33-6 by changing a part of the specifications for the construction of screening walls or fences, as set out in said Exhibit "A." 
Sec. 33-7. - Violation; penalty. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined in any sum not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Ord. No. 707, § 7, 7-7-80) 
Sec. 33-8. - Appeal. 
    Any person aggrieved by any decision or judgment of the building official concerning an application for a screening fence may appeal such decision or judgment to the board of adjustment, as provided in subsection (11-102) of section 11-100 of the City of Groves Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 83-18, § 2, 9-26-83) 
Sec. 33-9. - Completion of screening fences. 
    All screening fences must be constructed and completed within thirty (30) days after the completion of the improvements as set out in the building permit. 
(Ord. No. 83-18, § 3, 9-26-83) 
PART III - APPENDICES 
APPENDIX A - ZONING[1] 
ORDINANCE NO. 431 
    AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING A COMPREHENSIVE ZONING ORDINANCE FOR THE CITY OF GROVES, TEXAS, SPECIFICALLY PROVIDING AND SETTING FORTH THE PURPOSE OF THE ZONING ORDINANCE; PROVIDING FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS, PROVIDING AN OFFICIAL ZONING MAP; PROVIDING RULES FOR INTERPRETATION; PROVIDING FOR APPLICATION FOR DISTRICT REGULATIONS; PROVIDING FOR NONCONFORMING LOTS, USES OF LAND, STRUCTURES, AND PREMISES; PROVIDING A PROPOSED SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS; PROVIDING FOR ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT, BUILDING PERMITS, CERTIFICATES OF ZONING COMPLIANCE, TEMPORARY USE PERMITS AND SPECIFIC USE PERMITS; PROVIDING FOR A BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT, AND PROCEDURE; PROVIDING FOR DUTIES OF BUILDING OFFICIAL, BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT, CITY COUNCIL AND COURTS ON MATTERS OF APPEAL; PROVIDING METHODS OF AMENDMENTS; PROVIDING FOR MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS; PROVIDING DEFINITIONS; PROVIDING FOR COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATIONS; PROVIDING FOR PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS; REPEALING ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 68 OF THE CITY OF GROVES AND ALL AMENDMENTS THERETO; PROVIDING FOR PUBLICATION BY PUBLISHING THE CAPTION ONLY, AND PROVIDING AN EFFECTIVE DATE. 
    WHEREAS, the City Council of The City of Groves, after notice and hearing as provided by law, is of the opinion that a comprehensive zoning ordinance should be adopted in accordance with the laws of the State of Texas in order to best serve the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Groves; now, therefore, 
    BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY OF GROVES: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Appendix A to this volume contains the zoning ordinance of the City of Groves, Texas, being Ordinance No. 431, adopted June 8, 1970. The ordinance is included herein as enacted, including arrangement, article designations and titles, catchlines and numbering system. However, the editors have made word changes where necessary to correct obvious errors and, in several instances, have added catchlines and catch phrases where there were none in order to facilitate indexing and reference. Such changes and additions are enclosed in brackets to indicate that they were not a part of the original text as enacted. Absence of a history note following a particular section indicates that the section derives unchanged from Ordinance No. 431; conversely, a history note enclosed in parentheses following a section indicates that the section has been amended by the ordinance indicated in such history note. 
 Ordinances amending the zoning map and pertaining to the zoning or rezoning of specific property are not included herein. 
Charter reference- Zoning ordinance and zoning board of appeals, Art. XVIII, § 7. 
Cross reference- Planning and zoning commission, § 2-14 et seq.; fire protection and prevention, Ch. 10; trailers, mobile home parks, Ch. 26; building, Ch. 28; electricity, Ch. 29; housing, Ch. 30; plumbing, Ch. 31. 

ARTICLE I. - TITLE 

Sec. 1-100. 
    This ordinance shall be known, cited, and referred to as the "City of Groves Zoning Ordinance". 
ARTICLE II. - PURPOSE OF ZONING ORDINANCE 

Sec. 2-100. 
    The zoning regulations and districts as herein established have been made in accordance with a comprehensive plan for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the City of Groves. They have been designed to lessen the congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to provide adequate provisions of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements. They have been made with reasonable consideration, among other things, for the character of the district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses, and with a view of conserving the value of building and encouraging the most appropriate use of the land throughout the City of Groves. 
ARTICLE III. - RULES FOR DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 3-100. - Rules. 
    (3-101) For the purpose of this ordinance, certain words and terms that apply to the ordinance are defined in Article Sixteen, Definitions. 
    (3-102) Words used in the present tense shall include the future, words used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and words used in the plural number shall include the singular. 
    (3-103) The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. 
    (3-104) The word "may" is permissive. 
    (3-105) The word "lot" shall include the words "piece", "premises", "tract", and "parcel", and except when specifically stated otherwise, shall mean a "building lot". 
    (3-106) The word "building" shall include any structure designed or built for the support, enclosure, shelter, or protection of persons or property of any kind. 
    (3-107) The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for", "designed for", "intended for", "maintained for", and "occupied for". 
ARTICLE IV. - INTERPRETATION OF ORDINANCE 

Sec. 4-100. - Interpretation. 
    (4-101) When interpreting and applying the provisions of this ordinance, such provisions shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, convenience, comfort, prosperity, and general welfare. 
    (4-102) Conflict with other laws. Whenever these zoning regulations require a greater width or size of yard, court, or other open spaces, or require a lower height of building or less number of stories, or require a greater percentage of lot to be left unoccupied, or impose higher standards than are required in any other statute or local ordinance or regulation, the provisions of this zoning ordinance shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute or local ordinance or regulation require or impose higher standards than are required by this zoning ordinance, the provisions of such statute or local ordinance or regulation shall govern. 
    (4-103) No building, structure, or use which was not lawfully existing at the time of adoption of this ordinance shall be, become or be made legal solely by the adoption of this ordinance. 
ARTICLE V. - EFFECT OF THE ORDINANCE 

Sec. 5-100. - Effect. 
    (5-101) All buildings erected hereafter, all uses of land or buildings established or changed hereafter, and all structural alterations, enlargements, relocations, and restorations of existing buildings occurring hereafter shall be subject to the requirements and regulations of this ordinance, and no land shall be used for and no building shall be erected for or converted to any use other than provided in the regulations prescribed for the district in which it is located, except as hereinafter provided. 
    (5-102) Where a building permit for a building or structure has been issued in accordance with law prior to the effective date of this ordinance, and provided that construction is begun within ninety (90) days of such effective date and diligently prosecuted to completion, approved plans on the basis of which the building permit has been issued and further, upon completion may be occupied under a certificate of occupancy by the use for which originally designated subject thereafter to all applicable provisions of this ordinance. 
    (5-103) No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered: 
(a)  To exceed the height; 
(b)  To accommodate or house a greater number of families; 
(c)  To occupy a greater percentage of lot area; 
(d)  To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards, or other open spaces; 
    than herein required; or in any other manner contrary to the provisions of this ordinance. 
    (5-104) No part of a yard or other open space, or off-street parking or loading space required about or in connection with any building for the purpose of complying with this ordinance shall be included as part of a yard, open space, or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other building. 
    (5-105) No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this ordinance shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this ordinance shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this ordinance. 
    (5-106) All territory which may hereafter be annexed to the city shall be considered to be zoned single family residential. Application for building permits for uses other than residential in newly annexed areas shall be referred to the Groves City Planning and Zoning Commission by the building official. The Groves City Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend denial, or in recommending approval of such building permit, the Groves City Planning and Zoning Commission may impose such requirements and conditions with respect to location, construction, maintenance and operation in addition to those expressly stipulated in this ordinance for the particular use, as they may deem necessary for the protection of adjacent properties and the public interest. The application together with the recommendations of the Groves City Planning and Zoning Commission shall then be forwarded to the city council for final authorization before issuance of a building permit. 
ARTICLE VI. - NONCONFORMING USES 

Sec. 6-100. - Nonconforming uses are regulated. 
    (6-101) A nonconforming use is a use of a premises which was lawfully established and maintained at the time of the passage or amendment of this ordinance but which, because of the application of this zoning ordinance to it, does not conform to the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. A nonconforming building or a nonconforming portion of a building shall be deemed to constitute a nonconforming use of the land upon which it is located. 
    (6-102) The use of a lot of record which is nonconforming because of lot size, area, or width less than herein required, may be used for a permitted single family dwelling or a permitted nonresidential use, the adjacent property is under the same ownership and could be replatted to make conformity possible. 
    (6-103) Nonconforming uses are regulated as follows: 
(1)  They may be continued. 
(2)  They may not be expanded nor structurally altered, except as may be required by law or ordinance; however, such uses in all districts may be extended throughout such portions of a building as are arranged or designed for such use as of the effective date of this ordinance. 
(3)  If a nonconforming use or structure is damaged or destroyed to an extent of more than sixty per cent (60%) of its fair market value by fire, explosion, act of God, or the public enemy, then any restoration or new construction shall be for a permitted or conforming use. The computing of the percentage of damage or destruction to a nonconforming use composed of a group of individual structures which are principal buildings shall be based on the fair market value of the entire development comprising the group and not the individual structure. 
    (6-104) A nonconforming use may be changed only to a use permitted within the district. 
    (6-105) If a nonconforming use of any structure or premises is discontinued and remains vacant for a period of six (6) months, the use of the same shall thereafter conform to the requirements of the district in which it is located. The board of adjustments shall have the power to grant an extension not to exceed six (6) calendar months when warranted by evidence presented. 
(Ord. No. 663, § 1, 11-13-78) 
ARTICLE VII. - DISTRICTS AND BOUNDARIES 

Sec. 7-100. - Districts. 
    (7-101) The city is hereby divided into several types of districts of such shape and area as have been deemed best suited to carry out the purposes of Articles 1011a-1011j of the Revised Civil Statutes of Texas. Within such districts, this ordinance hereby regulates and restricts the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, and use of buildings, structures, and land, as herein set forth. While the regulations in one district differ from those in other districts, all such regulations are uniform for each class or kind of building throughout each district. These districts shall be known as: 
    R-1 District: Single Family Residential District-7,500 square feet minimum lot area per dwelling unit. 
    R-2 District: One and Two Family Residential District-6,000 square feet minimum lot area per dwelling unit. 
    P-1 District: Professional District 
(Ord. No. 490, § 1, 10-9-72) 
    C-1 District: Retail Business District 
    CB District: Central Business District. 
(Ord. No. 663, § 2, 11-13-78) 
    C-2 District: General Light Commercial District. 
(Ord. No. 2008-07, § 1, 3-3-08) 
    C-3 District: General Heavy Commercial District. 
(Ord. No. 2008-07, § 1, 3-3-08) 
Sec. 7-200. - Zoning district map. 
    (7-201) The boundaries of the districts are as shown on the official zoning map, which is hereby declared to be adopted and is considered a part of this ordinance; and it shall be considered as much a part of this ordinance as if the boundaries of the districts, notations, and information shown thereon were fully contained and described herein. A copy of this map shall be kept in its original condition as a permanent record in the office of the city clerk. It shall be the duty of the zoning official to keep the official zoning map current by entering on such map any changes or amendments to the zoning ordinance and map. 
Sec. 7-300. - Rules for interpreting of district boundaries. 
    (7-301) Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following shall apply: 
(a)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets, highways or alleys; platted lot lines; city limits, shall be construed to follow such lines. 
(b)  Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsection above shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the map. 
(c)  Where the physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the official zoning map, or in other circumstances not covered by subsections (a) and (b) above, the board of adjustments shall interpret the district boundaries. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 8-100. - General requirements and provisions. 
    (8-101) The regulations applying specifically to use, building, bulk, and premises within the zoning districts are set forth in this article. Also applying to each zoning district are the regulations set forth in all other regulatory and definitive articles and sections of this ordinance. 
    (8-102) All buildings erected hereafter, all uses of land or buildings established or changed hereafter, all structural alterations, enlargements, relocations, and restorations of existing buildings occurring hereafter, shall, in addition to the other regulations of this ordinance, comply with the regulations of the zoning district in which located, except in compliance with subsection (5-102) of this ordinance. 
Sec. 8-200. - R-1 District: Single-Family Residential District, (7,200) square feet, minimum lot area per dwelling unit, minimum of twelve hundred (1,200) sq. ft. of living area. 
    (8-201) In this district no building or premises shall be used, and no building shall be erected or structurally altered, which is arranged or designed to be used for other than one or more of the following uses, provided there shall be a minimum lot area of 7,200 square feet: 
    (8-202) Minimum requirements of lot area, width, and setback shall be as follows: 
Lot 
Area Lot 
Width Front Setbacks 
Rear Side Sum of Both 7,200 sq. ft. 50' 25' 15' 
minimum 5' 10'  
(Ord. No. 2008-07, § 2, 3-3-08; Ord. No. 2012-04, § 1, 6-18-12) 
    (8-203) See Article Nine for supplementary district regulations, exceptions and parking requirements applying to the R-1 District. 
    (8-204) See Article Ten, subsections [sections] 10-400 and 10-500 for temporary use permits that may be granted by the board of adjustments and specific use permits that may be recommended by the Groves City Planning and Zoning Commission within the R-1 District under certain circumstances and conditions. 
    (8-205) 
Permitted use Parking Ratio A single-family dwelling unit 2/unit Accessory building; servants quarters, garage or carport, domestic storage None Field corps, horticulture, nursery truck gardening but not including retail sales on the premises None Model home sale office within development None Public park, playground or playfield, swimming pool, private None Railroad and utility right-of-way and substations, but not including shops and yards None Planned development projects 3/unit Tract offices and construction buildings which shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of construction work None Customary home occupations and uses customarily incident to the above when located upon the same lot or site. Such uses may include office of a physician or dentist for consultation or emergency treatment, but not for general professional practice; lawyer, engineer, architect or accountant; musician, artist's studio, dressmaking and millenery; repairs to the occupant's own motor vehicles only, so long as conducted in a manner as not to be detrimental or injurious to adjoining property None Greenhouses (maximum 400 square feet per 6,000 square feet of land) None  
(Ord. No. 579, § 1, 11-3-75; Ord. No. 626, § 1, 7-25-77; Ord. No. 84-12, § 1, 7-16-84; Ord. No. 89-04, § 1, 5-1-89; Ord. No. 2008-07, § 2, 3-3-08; Ord. No. 2012-04, § 1, 6-18-12) 
    (8-206) Height regulations. 
(a)  Dwelling unit height regulation. No building shall exceed two (2) stories in height. 
(b)  Accessory building height regulation. No accessory building shall have an eave height of more than twelve (12) feet. Any residential property owner wishing to construct a two-story accessory building must apply for a variance from the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The two-story accessory building shall have a rear and side yard setback of ten (10) feet each. The upper story shall have no openings on sides not facing the principal dwelling. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 1, 6-18-12) 
Sec. 8-300. - R-2 District: One to Four Family Residential District (6,000 square feet minimum lot area per dwelling). 
    (8-301) In this district no building or premises shall be used and no building shall be erected or structurally altered, which is arranged or designed to be used for other than one (1) or more of the following uses: provided there shall be a minimum lot area of six thousand (6,000) square feet. 
    (8-302) Minimum requirements for lot area (width and setback shall be as follows:) 
Lot 
Area Lot 
Width Setbacks Front Side Rear Single-family 
6,000 sq. ft. 50' 25' 5' 15' minimum Two-Family 
Duplex 
12,000 sq. ft. 50' 25' 5' 20% of depth of lot w/ 15' minimum  
(Ord. No. 579, § 2, 11-3-75; Ord. No. 84-12, § 2, 7-16-84; Ord. No. 03-03, § 1, 6-16-03; Ord. No. 2008-07, § 3, 3-3-08) 
    (8-303) See Article Nine for supplementary district regulations, exceptions, and parking requirements, applying to the R-2 District. 
    (8-304) See Article Ten for temporary use permits that may be granted by the board of adjustments and specific use permits that may be recommended by the Groves Planning and Zoning Commission within the R-2 District under certain circumstances and conditions. 
    (8-305) Permitted uses and parking requirements. 
Permitted Uses Parking 
Ratio Any use permitted in R-1 District ..... 2/unit Duplex (Two-family unit) ..... 3/unit  
(Ord. No. 03-03, § 1, 6-16-03; Ord. No. 2008-07, § 3, 3-3-08) 
    (8-306) Height regulations. 
(a)  Dwelling unit height regulation. No building shall exceed two (2) stories in height. 
(b)  Accessory building height regulation. No accessory building shall have an eave height of more than twelve (12) feet. Any residential property owner wishing to construct a two-story accessory building must apply for a variance from the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The two-story accessory building shall have a rear and side yard setback of ten (10) feet each. The upper story shall have no openings on sides not facing the principal dwelling. 
(Ord. No. 84-12, § 3, 7-16-84; Ord. No. 03-03, § 1, 6-16-03; Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 6-18-12) 
    (8-307) Building Area Density. The maximum combined ground floor area of any structure/structures shall not exceed forty (40) per cent of the gross area of the lot or tract of land. 
(Ord. No. 2008-07, § 3, 3-3-08; Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 6-18-12) 
Sec. 8-400. - P-1 District: Professional District. 
    (8-401) In this district, no building or premises shall be used or no building shall be erected or structurally altered, which is arranged or designed to be used for other than one or more of the permitted uses in sub-section 8-405. 
    (8-402) Minimum requirements for lot area, width and setback [shall be as follows:] 
Lot Area Lot Width Front Setback Rear Side 6,000 sq. ft. 50 ft. 25' 20' 0'  
(a)  [ Side yards. ] Where the side yards of lots in the P-1 District are abutting, a residence or Residential District, the side yard setback shall not be less than 10 feet. 
(b)  Residential development within the P-1 District. The lot area, lot width, density and setback regulations for residential structures within P-1 District shall be the same as those in the R-2 District. 
(c)  P-1 lot abuts a Residence or Residential District. A six-foot permanent screening fence shall be required when a P-1 District lot abuts a Residence or Residential District; said fence shall be constructed in conformity with city standards. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 3, 6-18-12) 
    (8-403) See Article IX for supplementary district regulations, exceptions and parking requirements applying to the P-1 District. 
    (8-404) See Article X for temporary use permits that may be granted by the board of appeals and specific use permits that may be recommended by the Groves City Planning and Zoning Commission within the P-1 District under certain circumstances and conditions. 
    (8-405) Permitted uses and parking requirements. 
Permitted Uses Parking Ratio Any use permitted in R-1 and R-2 District Clinic, medical or dental 1/200 Hospital, general but not including animal 1/3 beds Laboratory, medical or dental 1/400 Nursing homes 1/3 beds Office, general professional practice (physician, dentist, lawyer, engineer, architect, or accountant) 1/200 Optical goods, optician, optometrist 1/200  
    (8-406) Other required conditions. 
(a)  [ Site plan. ] A site plan shall be submitted to and approved by the building official prior to the issuance of a zoning permit for new construction or additions to an existing building or structure within the P-1 District. 
(b)  [ Floor area. ] The total floor area of any building or buildings on a lot in the P-1 District shall not exceed one-half of the total number of square feet in the lot. 
(c)  Height regulations. No building shall exceed three (3) stories in height. 
(Ord. No. 490, § 2, 10-9-72; Ord. No. 84-12, § 4, 7-16-84) 
Sec. 8-500. - C-1 District: Retail Business District. 
    (8-501) In this district no building or premises shall be used and no building shall be erected or structurally altered, which is arranged or designed to be used for other than one (1) or more of the following uses: 
    (8-502) Minimum requirements for lot area, width and setback [shall be as follows:] 
Lot Area Lot Width Front Setback Rear Side 5,000 sq. ft. 50' 25' 20' 0'  
(a)  [ Side yards. ] Where the side yards of lots in the C-1 District are abutting a residence, the side yard setback shall not be less than ten (10) feet. 
(b)  Residential development within the C-1 District. The lot area, lot width, density and setback regulations for residential structures within C-1 District shall be the same as those in the R-2 District. 
(c)  C-1 lot abuts a Residence or Residential District. A six-foot permanent screening fence shall be required when a C-1 District lot abuts a Residence or Residential District; said fence shall be constructed in conformity with city standards. 
(Ord. No. 490, § 3, 10-9-72; Ord. No. 663, § 3, 11-13-78; Ord. No. 2012-04, § 4, 6-18-12) 
    (8-503) See Article Nine for supplemental district regulations, exceptions and parking requirements applying to the C-1 District. 
    (8-504) See Article Ten for temporary use permits that may be granted by the board of adjustment and specific use permits that may be recommended by the Groves City Planning and Zoning Commission within the C-1 District under certain circumstances and conditions. 
    (8-505) Permitted uses and parking requirements within the district are subject to the following named uses, or similar uses: 
Permitted Uses Parking Ratio Any use permitted in the R-1, R-2, or P-1 Districts. Ambulance service (not in connection with mortuary) ..... 1/400 Appliances, sales, service and repairs ..... 1/200 Art, supply store, antiques, gallery or museum ..... 1/200 Auditorium, arena, coliseum, or theatre ..... 1/3 seats Automobile accessory and supply store ..... 1/200 Automobile service station (no major repairs) .....   
None Automobile parking lot or parking garage ..... None Bank, loan company ..... 1/200 Barber shop or beauty parlor ..... 1/200 Blue printing and similar reproduction processes .....   
1/200 Book store or lending library, commercial ..... 1/200 Business machines, sales/service ..... 1/400 Camera or photographic supplies store ..... 1/200 Candy, nut, confectionery store ..... 1/200 Caterer ..... 1/200 Christmas trees and wreaths ..... 1/200 Clothing, including formal wear and costumes ..... 1/200 Day care, nursery for children ..... 1/15 emp. Department store ..... 1/200 Drug stores ..... 1/200 Eating place, enclosed ..... 1/4 seats Floor covering sales, retail ..... 1/400 Florist shop, greenhouse (parking requirements donot include greenhouse or open stock) .....   
1/200 Food or grocery store, retail ..... 1/200 Furniture sales and service ..... 1/200 Fur shop or hat shop ..... 1/200 Gift, novelty shop ..... 1/200 Hardware stores ..... 1/200 Hobby shop or supply store ..... 1/200 Ice making and vending for bagged ice ..... None Institution, nonresidential ..... 1/400 Jewelry store ..... 1/200 Laundry and dry cleaning pickup stations and selfservice washaterias .....   
1/200 Light fixture sales ..... 1/200 Locksmith or key shop ..... 1/200 Mini-storage, attendant on duty or self-serve, with no outside storage ..... 1/1 employee Music store, phonograph records, retail sales ..... 1/400 Newspaper distribution station ..... None Office, any type ..... 1/400 Orthopedic or medical shoe sales and service .....   
1/200 Package or liquor store ..... 1/200 Paint and wallpaper store or decorators shop ..... 1/200 Pet shop ..... 1/200 Photographic, studio or store and photo processing ..... 1/200 Physical culture and health studios ..... 1/200 Plumbing fixtures sales, retail ..... 1/400 Post office ..... 1/200 Radio, television or recording studio ..... 1/200 Rehabilitation center for handicapped persons ..... 1/15 emp. Rental, repair, or servicing of articles whose saleis permitted in the same district, unless morespecifically listed elsewhere .....   
1/200 Restaurants with or without on-premise beer and wine, with optional incidental dancing. Incidental dancing means dancing in an establishment which derives less than fifty-one (51) percent of its income from the sale or service of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption, as determined by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission under section 104.06, Alcoholic Beverage Code; and in which the area used for dancing is less than twenty-five (25) percent of the gross area of the building. .....   
  
  
  
  
  
1/4 seats Retail and Wholesale Sales of Agricultural Products not raised on the premises and shrimp and fish sold from vehicles parked off-street .....   
1/200, 
2 min. Self-service gasoline pumps ..... 2/pump Sewing machine sales, retail ..... 1/200 Shoe repair shop or store ..... 1/200 Signs, illuminated or nonilluminated which directattention to a commodity or service conducted,sold or offered upon the same lot .....   
None Sporting goods store ..... 1/200 Stationery store ..... 1/200 Storage of goods or merchandise, used in, producedby or normally carried in stock in conjunctionwith permitted uses in the applicable district regulations .....   
  
1/1000 Studio for professional work or for teaching any,form of fine arts, photography, music, drama,etc. .....   
1/400 Swimming pool, commercial ..... 1/200 Tailor shop, seamstress, altering and repairing ofwearing apparel ..... 1/400 Taxidermist ..... 1/400 Telephone answering service ..... 1/200 Telephone exchange, garage, shop or service ..... 1/400 Toy stores ..... 1/200 Veterinarian, indoor soundproof of kennels only ..... 1/400 Watch repair ..... 1/200 Wholesale offices with no outside storage ..... 1/400 Utility service center ..... 1/400  
(Ord. No. 490, § 4, 10-9-72; Ord. No. 644, § 1, 1978; Ord. No. 663, § 4, 11-13-78; Ord. No. 704, § 1, 5-12-80; Ord. No. 84-12, § 5, 7-16-84; Ord. No. 86-18, § 1, 6-16-86; Ord. No. 92-02, § 1, 3-16-92; Ord. No. 93-4, § 1, 4-26-93; Ord. No. 01-02, § 1, 4-9-01; Ord. No. 03-03, § 2, 8-505) 
    (8-506) Other required conditions: 
(a)  [ Site plan. ] A site plan shall be submitted to and approved by the building official prior to the issuance of a zoning permit for new construction or additions to an existing building or structure for multiple-family or commercial uses within the C-1 District. 
(b)  [ Floor area. ] The total floor area of any building or buildings on a lot in the C-1 District shall not exceed one-half of the total number of square feet in the lot. 
(c)  Height regulations. No building shall exceed four (4) stories in height. 
(Ord. No. 84-12, § 6, 7-16-84) 
Sec. 8-600. - CB District: Central Business District. 
    (8-601) In this district no building or premises shall be used and no building shall be erected or structurally altered, which is arranged or designed to be used for other than one (1) or more of the following. 
(Ord. No. 663, § 5, 11-13-78) 
    (8-602) Minimum requirements for lot area, width and setback shall be as follows: 
Setback Lot Area Lot Width Front Side Rear 5,000 sq. ft. 50' 5' 0' 20' Except Lincoln Avenue from Coolidge to 39th Street 2,500 sq. ft. 25' 5' 0' 20'  
(a)  [ Side yard. ] Where the side yards of lots in the Central Business District are abutting a residential district, the side yard setback shall not be less than ten (10) feet. 
(b)  Residential development. The lot area, lot width, density and setback regulations for a residential structure within the Central Business District shall be the same as those in the R-2 District. 
(c)  [ Off-Street parking. ] Off-street parking shall not be required for building structures, erected or altered within the Central Business District. 
(d)  CB lot abuts a Residence or Residential District. A six-foot permanent screening fence shall be required when a Central Business District lot abuts a Residence or Residential District; said fence shall be constructed in conformity with city standards. 
(Ord. No. 663, § 5, 11-13-78; Ord. No. 2012-04, § 5, 6-18-12) 
    (8-603) See Article Nine for Supplementary District Regulations exceptions and parking requirements applying to the Central Business District. 
(Ord. No. 663, § 5, 11-13-78) 
    (8-604) See Article Ten for temporary use permits that may be granted by the board of adjustment and specific use permits that may be recommended by the Groves City Planning and Zoning Commission within the Central Business District under certain circumstances and conditions. 
(Ord. No. 663, § 5, 11-13-78) 
    (8-605) Permitted uses and parking requirements within this district are subject to the following named uses, or similar uses: 
Permitted Uses Parking Ratio Any use permitted in the R-1, R-2, P-1, or C-1 District Bakery, wholesale, retail ..... 1/200 Bookbinding ..... 1/1000 Bus station ..... None Club or Lodge ..... 1/400 Dance hall, commercial. A commercial dance hall is defined as an establishment for profit where dancing is allowed, in which the area used for dancing is more than twenty-five (25) percent of the gross area of the building, and which may derive more than fifty-one (51) percent of its income from the sale or service of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption, as determined by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission under section 104.06, Alcoholic Beverage Code. This definition shall not apply to nonprofit organizations. .....   
  
  
  
  
  
  
1/100 Eating places providing auto service ..... 1/100 Exterminator ..... 1/400 Funeral home or mortuary ..... 1/3 seats Hotel ..... 1/2 units Laboratory, research or testing ..... 1/400 Lounge, tavern or bar ..... 1/400 Manufacturing of baked goods, candy, delicatessenfood, and ice cream ..... 1/400 Motel ..... 1/unit Pawn shop ..... 1/200 Printing or publishing, including engraving or photoengraving ..... 1/400  
(Ord. No. 663, § 5, 11-13-78; Ord. No. 92-02, § 2, 3-16-92; Ord. No. 01-02, § 2, 4-9-01) 
    (8-606) Other required conditions: 
(a)  Site plan. A site plan shall be submitted to and approved by the building official for any commercial structure within the CB District, prior to the issuance of a zoning permit. 
(b)  Height regulations. No building shall exceed eighty (80) feet or six (6) stories in height. 
(Ord. No. 663, § 5, 11-13-78) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 663, §§ 5-7 amended App. A by adding a new § 8-600, amending the prior § 8-600 and renumbering it as § 8-700, and renumbering § 8-700 as § 8-800. Prior to amendment by Ord. No. 663, former 8-600 was derived from Ord. No. 431, adopted June 8, 1970, as amended by Ord. No. 443, § 1, adopted Jan. 4, 1971; Ord. No. 490, §§ 5-7, adopted Oct. 9, 1972; Ord. No. 644, § 2, adopted Jan. 9, 1978. 
Sec. 8-700. - C-2 District: General Light Commercial District.[2] 
    (8-701) In this district no building or premises shall be used and no building shall be erected or structurally altered, which is arranged or designed to be used for other than one (1) or more of the following. 
    (8-702) Minimum requirements for lot area, width and setback shall be as follows: 
Setback Lot Area Lot Width Front Side Rear 5,000 sq. ft. 50' 15' 0' 10'  
(a)  Side yards. Where the side yards or lots in the C-2 District are abutting a residential district, the side yard setback shall not be less than (10) feet. 
(b)  Rear yards. Where the rear yard of lots in the C-2 District are abutting a residential, P-1, C-1 or Central Business District, the rear yard shall not be less than twenty (20) feet. 
(c)  Residential development within the C-2 District. The lot area, lot width, density and setback regulations for a residential structure within the C-2 District shall be the same as those in the R-2 District. 
(d)  C-2 lot abuts a Residence or certain other Districts. A six-foot permanent screening fence shall be required when a C-2 District lot abuts a Residence or an R-1, R-2, P-1, C-1, or CB District lot; said fence shall be constructed in conformity with city standards. 
(Ord. No. 704, § 2, 5-12-80; Ord. No. 2012-04, § 6, 6-18-12) 
    (8-703) See Article Nine for supplementary district regulations, exceptions and parking requirements applying to the C-2 District. 
    (8-704) See Article Ten for temporary use permits that may be granted by the board of adjustment and specific use permits that may be recommended by the Groves City Planning and Zoning Commission within the C-2 District under certain circumstances and conditions. 
    (8-705) Permitted uses and parking requirements within this district are subject to the following named uses or similar uses: 
Permitted Uses Parking Ratio Any use permitted in the R-1, R-2, P-1, C-1 District or Central Business District Animal hospital, pound or shelter (parking requirement does not include outdoor kennels) 1/200 Automobile, glass, muffler, seat cover, tire and upholstery service, sales, installation and repair service, but not including tire recapping 1/400 Automobile laundry None Automobile rental or taxi storage and repair 1/400 Automobile sales, new or used None Automobile wrecker service None Bait store 1/200 Boat sales, rental storage and repair 1/400 Bowling alley 5/alley Cabinet or carpentry shop 1/400 Carting, crating, express hauling and storage 1/400 Cold storage plant 1/1000 Construction, light equipment sales, service, rental and repairs 1/400 Contractors or construction offices, shops and yards, light equipment only 1/400 Engine, motor or pump repairs 1/400 Farm equipment sales, service, repairs, feed store 1/400 Food locker, plant for consumers' use 1/400 Freight depot or terminal, railroad and/or truck 1/400 Furniture upholstery including mattress rebuilding 1/400 Glass and cutting shop 1/400 Golf course, commercially operated driving ranges, pitch and putt courses, miniature golf or other commercial amusement 1/500 Hardware industrial sales 1/400 Laundry or dry cleaners 1/200 Light welding and light metal fabrication or assembly 1/400 Linen or uniform supply, or diaper service 1/400 Lumberyard (parking does not include sheds) 1/400 Machine shops 1/400 Machine tools, sales and service 1/400 Mirror silvering 1/1000 Mobile home sales 1/400 Monument sales and incidental processing 1/1000 Motorcycle sales, repair, storage and service 1/400 Oil well supplies and machinery sales 1/15 employees Pipe storage enclosed 1/1000 Schools, commercial or trade, when not involving any danger of fire or explosion or offensive noise, vibration, dust, odor, glare, heat or other objectionable influences 1/400 Secondhand store or rummage shop 1/200 Sign advertising (which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered elsewhere than upon the same lot None Sign shop 1/400 Skating rink, commercial 1/400 Theatre, drive-in None Trailer sales or rental (for use with private passenger automobiles) 1/400 Transit vehicle, bus, and truck storage, servicing, repairs, and sales 1/1000 Venetian blinds, window shades or awnings 1/400 Warehousing establishment other than accessory use 1/1000 Water distillation 1/1.5 employees Wholesale establishment with outside storage 1/400  
(Ord. No. 704, § 3, 5-12-80; Ord. No. 86-18, § 2, 6-16-86; Ord. No. 93-4, § 2, 4-26-93; Ord. No. 2012-04, § 6, 6-18-12) 
    (8-706) Other required conditions: 
(a)  Site plan. A site plan shall be submitted to and approved by the building official for any commercial structure within the C-2 District, prior to the issuance of a zoning permit. 
(b)  Height regulations. No building shall exceed eighty (80) feet or six (6) stories in height. 
(Ord. No. 663, § 6, 11-13-78) 
Note- See the editor's note to § 8-600. 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2008-07, § 4, adopted March 3, 2008, changed the title of § 8-700 from "C-2 District: General Commercial District" to "C-2 District: General Light Commercial District." 

Sec. 8-800. - C-3 District: General Heavy Commercial District. 
    (8-801) This district is designed to provide land for a wide range of heavy commercial and industrial activities subject to limitations intended to protect nearby residential and commercial districts and to protect the permitted uses from one another; and further provided such use is not noxious of smoke, dust, or odorous fumes or gases. 
    (8-802) Minimum requirements for lot area, width and setback shall be as follows: 
Lot 
Area Lot 
Width Setbacks Front Side Rear 10,000 sq. ft. 100' 15' 25' 10'  
(a)  When abutting a residence or residential district, the side yard shall not be less than thirty-five (35) feet. 
(b)  In all cases where the side yard is adjacent to a side street, the side yard shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet. 
(c)  Residential development within the C-3 District. The lot area, lot width, density and setback regulations for residential structures within the C-3 District shall be the same as those in the R-2 District. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 7, 6-18-12) 
    (8-803) See Article Nine for supplementary district regulations and exceptions and parking requirements applying to the C-3 District. 
    (8-804) See Article Ten for temporary use permits that may be granted by the board of adjustments and specific use permits that may be recommended by the Groves City Planning and Zoning Commission within the C-3 District under certain circumstances and conditions. 
    (8-805) Parking regulations and permitted uses: 
(a)  If a use permitted in the Residential, P-1, CBD, C-1, C-2 Districts is established in the C-3 District, the parking requirements for that use shall be the same as required for that particular use in the district in which the use is specifically permitted. 
(b)  In the C-3 District, manufacturing, industrial and processing establishments, repair shops, warehouses, and storage buildings, in addition to providing off-street facilities for the loading and unloading of merchandise and goods, shall provide one (1) off-street parking space for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of general floor space, and one (1) off-street parking space for each four hundred (400) square feet of office floor space. 
(c)  In the C-3 District, no land shall be used and no building shall be erected for or converted to any use other than: 
Permitted Uses 
    Any use permitted in the R-1, R-2, P-1, CBD, C-1 and C-2 Districts, inclusive of dwelling quarters may be established in connection with any industrial plant for watchmen and caretakers employed on the premises; and provided further that any existing dwelling within the C-3 District may be repaired or altered. 
Advertising displays manufacture. 
Asphalt or asphalt products. 
Automobiles, motorcycles, trucks, trailers including parts. 
Baseball park, commercial. 
Batching or mixing plant, asphaltic or Portland cement, concrete, mortar or plaster, commercial. 
Boats, building. 
Boiler manufacturer. 
Books, binding, other than hand binding. 
Bottling works, for all beverages. 
Brick, stone, tile or clay, ceramics, glass, marble, and porcelain products. 
Brooms and brushes. 
Carpets, manufacture and cleaning. 
Cement, lime, or plaster-of-Paris. 
Cosmetics or toiletries. 
Electrical appliances, equipment assembly or similar products including electrical machinery. 
Excelsior or packing materials. 
Food products. 
Furniture manufacture. 
Gypsum. 
Heavy equipment, rental, storage, repairs or sales. 
Incineration, distillation or reduction of garbage, offal, or dead animals, fat rendering. 
Industrial cleaning. 
Machines, business, including typewriter, accounting machines, calculators, card-counting equipment, or similar products. 
Machinery, miscellaneous, including repairs. 
Machine tools, including metal lathes, metal presses, metal stamping machines, woodworking machines, or similar products. 
Metal or metal products, stamping or extrusion, treatment, finishing or processing, including enameling, japanning, lacquering, galvanizing, plating, or similar processes. 
Metal casting or foundry products including ornamental iron work or similar products. 
Musical instruments, including pianos or organs. 
Orthopedic or medical appliances, including artificial limbs, braces, supports, stretchers, or similar products. 
Paper products, including envelopes, stationery, bags, boxes, shipping containers, bulk goods, tubes, wallpaper printing, or similar products. 
Schools, commercial or trade. 
Soaps or detergents, perfumes. 
Sporting or athletic equipment. 
Steel products, heavy metal fabrication or assembly. 
Tools or hardware, including bolts, nuts, screws, doorknobs, drills, hand tools or cutlery, hinges, house hardware, locks, nonferrous metal castings, plumbing appliances or similar products. 
Toys and novelty products. 
Vehicles, children's including bicycles, scooters, wagons, baby carriages or similar vehicles. 
    (8-806) Other required conditions: 
(a)  Site plan. A site plan shall be submitted to and approved by the building official prior to the issuance of a zoning permit. 
    (8-807) A six-foot screening fence shall be installed when a C-3 District abuts a residence or any other district. 
(Ord. No. 2008-07, § 5, 3-3-08; Ord. No. 2012-04, § 7, 6-18-12) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2008-07, § 5, adopted Mar. 3, 2008, amended § 8-800 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, § 8-800 pertained to the M District: Manufacturing District, and derived from Ord. No. 490, §§ 8, 9, adopted Oct. 9, 1972; Ord. No. 663, § 7, adopted Nov. 13, 1978; Ord. No. 704, §§ 4, 5, adopted May 12, 1980; Ord. No. 83-22, § 1, adopted Nov. 7, 1983; Ord. No. 93-4, § 3, adopted Apr. 26, 1993. 
ARTICLE IX. - SUPPLEMENTARY DISTRICT REGULATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2008-07, § 6, adopted Mar. 3, 2008, amended art. IX in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, art. IX pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 443, § 2, adopted Jan. 4, 1971; Ord. No. 626, § 2, adopted July 25, 1977; Ord. No. 663, § 9, adopted Nov.r 13, 1978; Ord. No. 84-12, §§ 7-11, adopted July 16, 1984; Ord. No. 88-08, § 1, adopted May 16, 1988; Ord. No. 03-03, § 3, adopted June 16, 2003, and Ord. No. 07-03, § 1, adopted Jan. 22, 2007. 

Sec. 9-100. - Accessory buildings and portable storage units. 
    (9-101) 
(a)  No accessory building or wing shall be permitted in the front yard. 
(b)  Portable storage units (when a building permit has been issued for construction on the primary dwelling) shall be allowed in the front yard for a period not exceed three (3) months. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 8, 6-18-12) 
    (9-102) Where an accessory building or portable storage unit is adjacent to a side street, the minimum side yard setback from said property line shall be: 
(a)  With no driveway access from side street, ten (10) feet. 
(b)  With driveway access from side street, twenty (20) feet. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 8, 6-18-12) 
    (9-103) Attached to main building. Accessory buildings, portions thereof, or wings attached to the main building may extend into the required rear yard, provided that said attached structure shall have a rear setback of not less than fifteen (15) feet and a side setback equal to the required minimum side yard setback for the main building. 
    (9-104) Detached from main building. Accessory buildings detached from the main building may be permitted in the required rear yard provided: 
(a)  That they are detached from the main building or structure and separated there from by a distance of not less than ten (10) feet, and 
(b)  Then said accessory building may have a rear and side yard setback of not less than three (3) feet. 
    (9-105) Carports "attached". Only an open carport may be located not less than ten (10) feet from the front property line with a side setback equal to the required minimum side yard setback for the main building. Such carport shall not be enclosed (including screening, slatting, etc.) and shall not obscure visibility at intersecting streets. 
(Ord. No. 2008-07, § 6, 3-3-08) 
Sec. 9-200. - Servants quarters. 
    Only one (1) single-family dwelling shall be constructed on each lot within the R-1 Districts. Bona fide servants, however, may be provided with an accessory building at the rear of the property in accordance with the requirements set forth for accessory buildings. 
(Ord. No. 2008-07, § 6, 3-3-08) 
Sec. 9-300. - Reserved. 
Sec. 9-400. - Apartments. 
    All apartments shall have at minimum a six-foot privacy fence, constructed in conformity with city standards, when abutting a residence or as required by a Specific Use Permit. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 8, 6-18-12) 
Sec. 9-500. - Distance between buildings on same lot. 
    (9-501) Residential lots. The distance between a residential building and another residential building on the same lot shall not be less than twenty (20) feet. 
    (9-502) Commercial lots. The distance between a commercial building and an accessory building on the same lot shall not be less than ten (10) feet. 
(Ord. No. 2008-07, § 6, 3-3-08) 
Sec. 9-600. - Special building setback. 
    Where a building line has been established by special ordinance and such line required a greater setback than is prescribed by this ordinance in the district in which the building line is located, no building shall be erected closer to the street than the line so established. 
(Ord. No. 2008-07, § 6, 3-3-08) 
Sec. 9-700. - Side setback on street side of corner lot. 
    (9-701) Where a residence, commercial or accessory building is adjacent to a side street, the minimum side yard setback from said property line shall be: 
(a)  With no driveway access from side street, ten (10) feet; 
(b)  With a driveway access from side street, twenty (20) feet to the structure or ten (10) feet to an open carport. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 8, 6-18-12) 
    (9-702) The owner shall have the option on corner lots to face the building to either street, but has to conform to the required setback, the side setback on the side street and still maintain the required rear yard. 
(Ord. No. 2008-07, § 6, 3-3-08; Ord. No. 2012-04, § 8, 6-18-12) 
Sec. 9-800. - Minimum street frontage required for residential use. 
    Except as permitted in this ordinance, no lot shall contain any building used in whole or in part for residential purposes unless such lot abuts on an improved street for at least the minimum lot width requirement of the particular zoning district in which the lot is located, unless said lot fronts on the curve of a cul-de-sac, in which case the minimum lot frontage shall be thirty (30) feet. 
(Ord. No. 2008-07, § 6, 3-3-08) 
Sec. 9-900. - Parking and off-street loading areas. 
    (9-901) Off-street parking shall be required at the time any building or structure is erected or is enlarged or increased in capacity in accordance with the parking ratio requirements of this ordinance. 
    (9-902) Each off-street parking space shall be a rectangle nine (9) feet by twenty (20) feet exclusive of access drives or aisles, and shall be located completely on private property. Adequate ingress and egress to all parking spaces shall be provided. 
    (9-903) Off-street loading spaces required. In any district, in connection with every building or part thereof hereafter erected and having a gross floor area of three thousand (3,000) square feet or more, which is to be occupied by any use requiring the receipt or distribution by vehicles of material or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained, on the same lot with such building, at least one off-street loading space plus one additional loading space for each thirty thousand (30,000) square feet or major fraction thereof of gross floor area so used in excess of three thousand (3,000) square feet. 
    (9-904) In applying the off-street parking requirements, the floor area shall be the sum of the several floors of all enclosed buildings and structures on the lot measured from the center line of exterior walls. The floor area shall not include cellars and open and unclosed balconies, terraces, porches, stairs and parking structures. 
    (9-905) Where open land is used for sales, manufacturing, storage or other operations in a manner similar to indoor operations, such open land shall be added to the floor area in determining the number of parking spaces required. 
    (9-906) Any lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking area shall be so arranged as to direct the light away from the adjoining premises of any R Districts. 
    (9-907) Parking ratio abbreviations in the permitted use, temporary use, and specific use schedules refer to the off-street parking requirements applicable to the corresponding uses. Interpretation of off-street parking requirements is as follows: 
Parking 
Ratio Interpretation of Off-Street Parking Requirement None Off-street parking not required 1/100 1 space for each 100 sq. ft. of gross floor space 1/unit 1 space for each dwelling unit 1/guest room 1 space for each guest room 1/3 seats 1 space for each three seats within the largest auditorium (20 inches shall equal 1 seat if benches are provided) 1/3 beds 1 space for each 3 beds 1/1.5 emp. 1 space for each 1 1/2 employees 5/alley 5 spaces for each bowling lane 10/wash line 10 spaces for each washing line  
    (9-908) Residential off-street parking. The parking of a vehicle or trailer, including recreational vehicles, in the front or side yard of a residence in any district is prohibited unless the parking space is a hard surfaced area. Such hard surfaced area must be completely on private property and shall consist of rock, shell, concrete, asphalt or similar hard surface material and be not less than nine feet (9') by twenty feet (20'), but no more than fifty percent (50%) of the front and side yards combined. This hard surfaced driveway must connect the parking space with a public street or alley, permitting ingress and egress of an automobile or other vehicle. 
    "Front yard" is defined as the area between the side property lines of the residential lot, beginning at the front property line and extending to the front building line of the structure. 
    "Side yard" is defined as the area on either side of the structure between the front and rear of the structure and from the side of the structure to the side property line. 
(9-909)  Additional requirements for parking and storage of recreational vehicles. In addition to meeting the requirements of the foregoing subsection (9-908) Residential off-street parking, a residential owner or occupant shall be allowed to park and store the owner or occupant's own uninhabited recreational vehicle (i.e., trailer, camper, tent trailer, boat and trailer, and similar vehicle) on a lot in any district, so long as the recreational vehicle is parked entirely on the property of owner or occupant and not permanently connected to water and sewer service. Such vehicle is required to be maintained in a manner as not to be detrimental or injurious to adjoining property; and said vehicle shall have a current registration and meet all requirements to legally travel on any public street or highway. 
(9-910)  A variance or exception to the percentage limitation for the hard surfaced area, and/or the location of a recreational vehicle entirely inside the property line, may be granted by a four-fifths (4/5) vote of the board of adjustment under the provisions of article XI. Board of Adjustment Procedure of this zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2008-07, § 6, 3-3-08; Ord. No. 2010-03, § 1, 3-15-10; Ord. No. 2016-05, § 1, 6-27-16) 
Sec. 9-1000. - Projection into required yards. 
    Open and unenclosed building projections such as outside stairways and fire escapes, balconies, terraces or porches, awning, eave and roof extensions, and ornamental features may project into the required yards for a distance not to exceed four (4) feet. In no case shall such projections be located closer than three (3) feet from any lot line. 
(Ord. No. 2008-07, § 6, 3-3-08) 
Sec. 9-1100. - Site plan. 
    (9-1101) A site plan is a plan of development drawn to scale indicating: 
(1)  The location and arrangement of buildings on subject property. 
(2)  Building setbacks and yards. 
(3)  Landscaping and/or walls and fences for screening purposes. 
(4)  Off-street parking areas and design of ingress and egress to and from abutting streets. 
    (9-1102) When a site plan is required. A zoning permit shall not be issued until a site plan of development has been approved by the building official. 
    (9-1103) For any specific use permit application, a site plan shall be submitted to and reviewed by the Groves City Planning and Zoning Commission prior to being approved by the building official for the purpose of issuing a zoning permit. 
    (9-1104) For any temporary use permit application, a site plan shall be submitted to and reviewed by the board of adjustment prior to being approved by the building official for the purpose of issuing a zoning permit. 
    (9-1105) The reviewing body (the Groves City Planning and Zoning Commission) may recommend disapproval of a site plan, or in recommending approval of a site plan may require revisions of the proposed arrangement of buildings, streets, parking areas, and ingress and egress. They may recommend the installation of storm sewers, storm sewer inlets, sidewalks, paving, platting of streets, protective screening and/or additional open space for rights-of-way or other public use. 
    (9-1106) Disapproval, approval or conditional approval of a site plan together with all recommendations or revisions shall be indicated on the site plan together with the date of review and the signature of the chairman of the reviewing body and the building official. This site plan shall be the official copy and kept on file together with the date of review and the signatures of the chairman of the reviewing body and the building official. This site plan shall be the official copy and kept on file together with all previous site plans. 
    (9-1107) A duplicate copy of the official site plan disapproved, approved or conditionally approved, shall be given to the applicant together with all the recommendations of the reviewing body. 
    (9-1108) The purpose of site plan approval is to determine compliance with this ordinance and to promote the orderly and harmonious development of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2008-07, § 6, 3-3-08) 
Sec. 9-1200. - Special rule for double frontage lots. 
    Double frontage lots shall provide the required front yards on both streets, except where it is intended to back a structure upon a major thoroughfare; in such case, the required rear yard shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet and shall not be occupied by an accessory structure. 
(Ord. No. 2008-07, § 6, 3-3-08) 
Sec. 9-1300. - Signs. 
    The following types of signs may be permitted in certain districts or areas as indicated below, provided such signs do not exceed the maximum area and height standards set forth: 
Type District (9-1301a) Advertising sign: A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment, conducted, sold or offered elsewhere than upon the same lot, and which does not exceed fifty (50) square feet in area and ten (10) feet in height. C-2, C-3 (9-1301b) Billboard/Pylon sign: A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment, conducted, sold or offered elsewhere than upon the same lot. All signs shall be located so as no part of the sign encroaches or projects over adjoining or public properties. C-1, C-2 or C-3 on Hwy. 73/87 (9-1302) Bulletin sign: An accessory board or sign erected by a church, community center, school, public agency or institution on its own premises for announcement purposes, and which does not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area and six (6) feet in height. In any district (9-1303) Business signs: An accessory sign which directs attention to a profession, business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered on the same lot. All signs are to be located so as no part of the sign shall be located on or projecting over public property. P-1, C (9-1304) Real estate sign "residential": A sign directing attention to the sale, lease, rent or trade of land and/or residence and not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in area and six (6) feet in height. In any district (9-1305) Real estate sign "commercial": A sign directing attention to the sale, lease, rent or trade of the land or building upon which it is erected or attached and not exceeding fifty (50) square feet in area and twenty-five (25) feet in height. In any district  
(Ord. No. 2008-07, § 6, 3-3-08; Ord. No. 2012-04, § 8, 6-18-12) 
Sec. 9-1400. - Reserved. 
Sec. 9-1500. - Head-in parking space construction. 
    (9-1501) No person, firm or corporation shall hereafter construct or permit construction of a head-in parking space for motor vehicles which abuts on a public street, unless a permit shall first be issued by the building official. 
    (9-1502) No permit shall be issued by the building official for the construction of head-in parking space or area which abuts upon a public street, unless that space or area is at least twenty-one (21) feet in depth measured from the property line. 
    (9-1503) Head-in parking space as used herein shall mean a space designated for the parking of a motor vehicle in a manner other than with the side of the vehicle parallel to the curb or street right-of-way line. 
    (9-1504) Provided that an exception to the foregoing provisions may be granted by a four-fifths (4/5) vote of the board of adjustment after a hearing to determine if a strict enforcement of this section would not preserve the surrounding property value and would cause hardship to the individual property owner and further, that the public benefit would be preserved by granting an exception. 
(Ord. No. 2008-07, § 6, 3-3-08) 
Sec. 9-1600. - Exceptions when property is acquired by city under eminent domain. 
    When property is acquired by the city under its power of eminent domain, either by condemnation or involuntary sale, resulting in the use of the remainder of the property being in violation of the zoning ordinance, the property owner shall be allowed to continue to use the remainder of the property, as a noncomplying use, as it was being used prior to such acquisition by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2008-07, § 6, 3-3-08) 
Sec. 9-1700. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. 2016-05, § 2, adopted June 27, 2016, repealed § 9-1700 entitled "Parking and storage of recreational vehicles", which derived from Ord. No. 2008-07, § 6, adopted Mar. 3, 2008. See § 9-909 for similar provisions. 
ARTICLE X. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2008-07, § 7, adopted Mar. 3, 2008, amended art. X in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, art. X pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 443, § 4, adopted Jan. 4, 1971; Ord. No. 490, §§ 10, 21, adopted Oct. 9, 1972; Ord. No. 579, §§ 5, 7, adopted Nov. 3, 1975; Ord. No. 626, §§ 3, 8, 9, adopted July 25, 1977; Ord. No. 84-12, §§ 12-14, 16-21, adopted July 16, 1984; Ord. No. 87-24, § 1, adopted May 18, 1987; Ord. No. 88-04, § 1, adopted Apr. 18, 1988; Ord. No. 98-11, § 1, adopted Aug. 31, 1998, and Ord. No. 03-03, § 4, adopted June 16, 2003. 

Sec. 10-100. - Administration and enforcement. 
    A building official shall administer and enforce this ordinance. He may be provided with the assistance of such other persons as the city council may direct. 
(a)  If the building official shall find that any of the provisions of this ordinance are being violated, he shall notify in writing the persons responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings, or structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures or of additions, alterations, or structural changes thereto; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by this ordinance to insure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions. 
(Ord. No. 2008-07, § 7, 3-3-08) 
Sec. 10-200. - Building permits required. 
    (10-201) [Building permit required.] No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered without a required permit therefore, issued by the building official. No building permit shall be issued except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, except after written order from the board of adjustment. 
    (10-202) Application for building permit. All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by plans in duplicate, drawn to scale showing the actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon; the exact sizes and locations on the lot of buildings already existing, if any; and the location and dimensions of the proposed building or alteration. The application shall include such other information as lawfully may be required by the building official, including existing or proposed building or alteration; existing or proposed uses of the building and land; the number of families, housekeeping units, or rental units the building is designed to accommodate; conditions existing on the lot; and such other matters as may be deemed necessary to determine conformance with, and provide for the enforcement of this ordinance. 
(1)  One (1) copy of the plans shall be returned to the applicant by the building official, after he shall have marked such copy either as approved or disapproved and attested to same by his signature on such copy. The second copy of the plans, similarly marked, shall be retained by the building official. 
    (10-203) Expiration of building permit. 
(1)  If the work described in any building permit has not begun within six (6) months from the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall expire; it shall be cancelled by the building official and written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected. 
(2)  If the work described in any building permit has not been substantially completed within two (2) years of the date of the issuance thereof, said permit shall expire and be cancelled by the building official and written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected, together with notice that further work as described in the cancelled permit shall not proceed unless and until a new building permit has been obtained. 
(Ord. No. 2008-07, § 7, 3-3-08) 
Sec. 10-300. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-400. - Temporary use permits. 
    (10-401) A temporary use permit shall be required before the following temporary uses can be permitted in the district or districts indicated: 
Parking 
Ratio Temporary Use District None Automobile parking lot; for a special event R 1/500 Carnival or circus R, C None Christmas trees and wreaths, retail R None Retail and wholesale of agricultural products not raised on the premises and sold from vehicles parked off-street, not over 500 square feet of retail and wholesale storage and sales area R, C  
    (10-402) A temporary use permit is an exception to the zoning ordinance and allowable where the facts and conditions prescribed and detailed in the ordinance as those upon which a temporary use permit may be granted are determined by the board of adjustments to exist. 
    (10-403) The applicant, in applying to the board of adjustment for a temporary use permit or exception, shall simply demonstrate that he meets the requirements of the particular use and district and need not show unnecessary hardship. 
    (10-404) Deleted. 
    (10-405) The purpose of the regulations described in the subsection is to allow the proper integration into the city of uses which may be suitable only in specific locations in a zoning district and only for limited periods of time. 
    (10-406) Application for a temporary use permit shall be made by the property owner or certified agent thereof to the board of adjustment on forms prescribed for this purpose by the city council. Temporary use permits, revocable, conditional and valid for a term period not to exceed twelve (12) months, may be issued by the board of adjustments for any of the uses or purposes for which such permits are required or permitted by the terms of this ordinance. Granting of a temporary use permit does not exempt the applicant from complying with the requirements of the building code or other ordinances. 
    (10-407) The fee to cover administrative costs of a temporary use permit application shall be as established by the city council, no part of which shall be refundable. 
    (10-408) In considering any application for a temporary use permit, the board of adjustment shall give due regard to the nature and condition of all adjacent uses and structures. The board of adjustment may deny an application for a temporary use permit, and, in granting or renewing a temporary use permit, the board of adjustment may impose such requirements and conditions with respect to location, construction, maintenance, and operation, in addition to those expressly stipulated in this ordinance for the particular use, as they may deem necessary for the protection of adjacent properties, and the public interest. 
    (10-409) Provided that the board of adjustment finds: 
(1)  That the proposed structure or use conforms to the requirements and intent of this ordinance and the comprehensive plan; 
(2)  That any additional conditions stipulated by the board of adjustment as deemed necessary in the public interest have been met; and 
(3)  That such use will not under the circumstances of the particular case constitute a nuisance or be detrimental to the public welfare of the community; the board of adjustment shall issue a temporary use permit therefor. 
    (10-410) Following the issuance of a temporary use permit by the board of adjustment, the building official shall issue a building permit and ensure that development is undertaken and completed in compliance with said permits. 
(Ord. No. 2008-07, § 7, 3-3-08) 
Sec. 10-500. - Specific use permits. 
    (10-501) A specific use permit shall be required before the following specific uses can be permitted in the district or districts indicated. 
Parking 
Requirements Specific Use District None Cemetery or mausoleum R 1/3 seats Church or other place of worship including parish houses and Sunday schools, but excluding rescue missions, or temporary revivals [with on-premise parking allowed for operable modes of transportation (vans or buses)] In any district 1/200 City, county, state and federal government administrative buildings R 1/400 City fire and police station R None City, county, state and federal government garage, maintenance yard, or similar government establishment R None Concession stand within a park, playground or playfield R 1/1.5 emp. Earth moving and excavations, depositing of construction materials, rock, sand or stone on ground C-3 1/1.5 emp. Electrical power generating station C-3 1/1.5 emp. Fertilizer production C-3 1/1.5 emp Gas compressor or regulator station R 1/1.5 emp. Grain, milling or processing, elevators C-3 1/1.5 emp. Hatchery C-3 1/3 beds Institution, correctional, detention, penal or for use of insane, feeble-minded, alcoholic or narcotic patients on a minimum site of 15 acres R 1/3 beds Institution for children and aged; nonprofit R None Mining, including exploration for or by production of gas or oil, extraction of clay, gravel or sand; quarrying of rock or stone In any District None Private automobile parking lot with hard surface (paved surface) and screening fence R-1, R-2, P-1 1/400 Private club, as defined in Article 666-15(e) of the Penal Code of the State of Texas; and taverns C-2 1-400 Public library or museum R None Radio or television broadcasting transmitter or tower, microwave or relay tower In any District 2 per space Recreational Vehicle Park C-2, C-3 1/3 beds Sanitarium on a site of 10 acres or more R 1/1.5 emp. Schools; elementary, high, public, private, or denominational In any District 1/1.5 emp. School nursery, kindergarten, or day care for children R 1/200 Shopping center on a site of 5 acres or more R 1/400 Telephone exchange, but not including garage shop or service R 2/unit Mobile home parks R-2, P-1 and C 2/unit Apartment projects and/or condominium projects R-2, P-1 and C None Purchase of aluminum cans C-2 and C-3 1/400 Studio for teaching any form of dancing, twirling, gymnastics and/or karate R 1/1.5 emp. Tire recapping or vulcanizing shop C-3 1/1.5 emp. Pharmaceutical products C-3 1/1.5 emp. Railroad yards, shops or equipment C-3  
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 9, 6-18-12) 
    (10-502) A specific use permit is an amendment to the district regulations of the zoning ordinance that permits the permanent establishment of a specific use within a zoning district in which such specific use may be established. 
    (10-503) The building official shall not issue a building permit for such uses that are hereafter created, changed, converted or enlarged, either wholly or in part, until a specific use permit has been obtained in accordance with the amendment procedures set forth in section 14 [Article Fourteen.] 
    (10-504) The purpose of the regulations described in this subsection is to allow the proper integration into the city of uses which may be suitable only in specific locations in a zoning district. 
    (10-505) Application for a specific use permit shall be made by the property owner or certified agent thereof to the Groves City Planning and Zoning Commission on forms prescribed for this purpose by the city council. Such application shall be accompanied by a site plan set forth in Article Nine. Specific use permits, revocable, conditional or valid for a term period may be issued for any of the uses or purposes for which such permits are required or permitted by the terms of this ordinance. Granting of a specific use permit does not exempt the applicant from complying with the requirements of the building code or other ordinances. 
    (10-506) The fee to cover administrative and processing costs of a specific use permit application shall be as established by the city council. 
Cross reference- For such fee, § 2-29. 
    (10-507) In considering any application for a specific use permit, the Groves City Planning and Zoning Commission may give due regard to the nature and condition of all adjacent uses and structures. The Groves [City] Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend disapproval of an application for a specific use permit, and, in recommending approval of a specific use permit, the Groves City Planning and Zoning Commission may impose such requirements and conditions with respect to location, construction, maintenance and operation, in addition to the regulations of the district in which the particular use is located, as they may deem necessary for, the protection of adjacent properties and public interest, 
    (10-508) Provided that the Groves City Planning and Zoning Commission finds: 
(1)  That the proposed structure or use conforms to the requirements and intent of this ordinance and the comprehensive plan of the city; 
(2)  That any additional conditions stipulated by the Groves City Planning and Zoning Commission as deemed necessary in the public interest have been met; and 
(3)  That such use will not under the circumstances of the particular case constitute a nuisance or be detrimental to the public welfare of the community; the Groves City Planning and Zoning Commission shall make a favorable recommendation in behalf of the application to the city council. 
    (10-509) Every specific use permit granted by the city council shall be considered as an amendment to the zoning ordinance as applicable to such property. In granting such permit, the city council may impose conditions which shall be complied with by the grantee for the use of the buildings on such property pursuant to said specific use permit. 
    (10-510) Following the passage of a specific use permit ordinance by the city council, the building official shall issue a building permit and shall insure that development is undertaken and completed in compliance with said permits. 
(Ord. No. 2008-07, § 7, 3-3-08) 
Sec. 10-600. - Planned development projects. 
    (10-601) Any person wishing to develop a townhouse project, or zero lot line project or extend an existing project within the corporate limits of the City of Groves shall submit a written request, preliminary plat, and specification of the project to the City of Groves Planning and Zoning Commission for approval. 
    (10-602) Upon approval of the preliminary plat by the city council, the developer shall prepare and submit the final plat and required documents to the planning and zoning commission and city council for final approval. 
    (10-603) The developer of a planned development project shall comply with the provisions of the subdivision control ordinance in preparing plans and specifications for the project. 
(Ord. No. 2008-07, § 7, 3-3-08) 
Sec. 10-700. - Construction and use to be as provided in applications, plans and building permits. 
    Building permits issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the building official authorize only the use, arrangement and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications. Any other use, arrangement or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed violation of this ordinance, and punishable as provided by Article Eighteen hereof. 
(Ord. No. 2008-07, § 7, 3-3-08) 
Sec. 10-800. - Mobile home/recreational vehicle (RV) park. 
    (10-801) A specific use permit shall be required before any Recreational Vehicle Park can be developed within the corporate limits of the City of Groves. 
    (10-802) Parking on public streets. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any mobile home or recreational vehicle on any street, highway, alley, sidewalk, or other public place in the city for a longer period than three (3) hours. 
    (10-803) Parking outside Mobile Home/Recreational Vehicle Parks. No mobile home or recreational vehicle shall be parked for use or occupancy on any tract of ground within the city limits of the City of Groves except in a duly authorized Mobile Home Park or a Recreational Vehicle Park, provided, however: 
(a)  That the building official may permit the parking, use and occupancy of a mobile home or recreational vehicle outside of a duly authorized Mobile Home/Recreational Vehicle Park for a period of time not exceeding ten (10) days, when such mobile home or recreational vehicle is occupied by persons employed in the operation of a temporary recreational, amusement, or civic activity. Such temporary parking, use and occupancy of said mobile home or recreational vehicle shall be permitted only when the mobile home or recreational vehicle is parked on the same premises on which the activity is located and only when adequate sanitary facilities are available upon the premises for the use of the occupants of the said mobile home or recreational vehicle; 
(b)  The board of adjustment may grant variances from this section for hardship cases in accordance with the provisions of subsection 11-203(1)(a)(6). 
    (10-804) Any person wishing to expand an existing Mobile Home Park or develop a Recreational Vehicle Park subdivision within the corporate limits of the City of Groves shall first submit a written request for a specific use permit and a preliminary plan to the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council as provided in Section 10-500 and Article XIV of the Zoning Ordinance. 
    (10-805) From the date of approval of the specific use permit by the city council, the developer of a Recreational Vehicle Park shall have one (1) year to commence construction and two (2) years to complete said park; otherwise the specific use permit shall terminate and shall be void. 
    (10-806) Minimum standards for a Recreational Vehicle Park. The developer shall comply with the provisions as set forth in Chapter 26, Recreational Vehicle Parks, and Appendix "B," Subdivision Control Ordinance of the Code of Ordinances, City of Groves, Texas. 
    (10-807) Permitted uses in Recreational Vehicle Park. Upon issuance of a specific use permit by the city council, no changes shall be made to the approved plot plan and the following uses shall be permitted in the Recreational Vehicle Park: 
(1)  Recreational Vehicle Occupancy. 
(2)  Accessory uses providing services to the occupants of the Recreational Vehicle Park. Such uses may include recreational facilities and central or community garages, storage building and washaterias, provided these accessory uses are approved by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 2008-07, § 7, 3-3-08; Ord. No. 2012-04, § 9, 6-18-12) 
Sec. 10-900. - Apartment projects and/or condominium projects. 
    (10-901) A specific use permit shall be required before any apartment project and/or condominium project may be developed within the corporate limits of the City of Groves. 
    (10-902) Any person wishing to develop an apartment project and/or condominium project, or in the case of an existing apartment project and/or condominium project, wishing to extend and/or expand the project within the corporate limits of the City of Groves shall first submit a written request for a specific use permit, a site plan and typical floor plan for the project to the city planning and zoning commission for approval. 
    (10-903) The developer of an apartment project and/or condominium project shall comply with the following provisions in preparing the site plan and typical floor plan for the project: 
(1)  Lot Area: A minimum of twenty-five thousand (25,000) sq. ft. and fifty (50) ft. wide shall be required. 
(2)  Living area: A minimum living area of one thousand (1,000) sq. ft. per family unit, excluding garage and/or carport space shall be required. 
(3)  Building area: The maximum ground floor building area shall not exceed thirty (30) per cent of the gross area of the lot or tract of land. 
(4)  Setbacks: 
(a)  A front building setback line of twenty-five (25) feet. 
(b)  A side building setback line of ten (10) feet. 
(c)  A rear building setback line of twenty-five (25) feet. 
(5)  Height regulations: No building shall exceed three stories in height. 
(6)  Screening fences: When required by the city council, a six-foot permanent screening fence or wall shall be constructed in conformity with city standards. The type and location of said fence shall be determined by the city council. 
(7)  Parking: At least two (2) off-street parking spaces for each apartment unit shall be provided for within the project. 
(8)  Drainage: The ground surface in all parts of the project shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface water in a safe efficient manner so as not to permit water to stand and become stagnant or to flow to neighboring property. 
(9)  Fire protection: Proper fire protection shall be provided for by the developer of the project. 
(10)  Accessory structures: Accessory structures (carports and storage buildings) when detached from the main building may be permitted in the required side and rear yards provided: 
(a)  That they are detached from the main building or structure and separated there from by a distance of not less than ten (10) feet, and 
(b)  [That] said accessory structures have a rear and side yard setback of not less than five (5) feet. 
    (10-904) Upon approval of the project by the planning and zoning commission, the same shall be submitted to the city council for final approval of the specific use permit. Upon approval by the city council, the developer shall have one (1) year to commence construction of the project, otherwise the specific use permit shall terminate and shall be voided. 
(Ord. No. 2008-07, § 7, 3-3-08) 
ARTICLE XI. - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT; PROCEDURE 

Sec. 11-100. - [Generally.] 
    [(11-100.01) Established; composition; appointment, term, removal of members; filling of vacancies. ] A board of adjustment is hereby established which shall consist of five (5) members to be appointed by the city council, each for a term of two (2) years. Members of the board of adjustment may be removed from office by the city council for cause upon written charges and after public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled by resolution of the city council for the unexpired term of the member affected. Provided, further, there shall be four (4) alternate members appointed to the board of adjustment who shall serve in the absence of one or more regular members when requested to do so. All cases to be heard by the board of adjustment will always be heard by a minimum number of four (4) members. These alternate members shall serve for the same period as the regular members and any vacancies shall be filled in the same manner and shall be subject to removal as the regular members. 
(Ord. No. 591, § 1, 5-17-76) 
    (11-101) Proceedings of the board of adjustment. 
(1)  The board of adjustment shall adopt rules necessary to the conduct of its affairs, and in keeping with the provisions of this ordinance. Meetings shall be held at the call of the chairman, or in his absence, the acting chairman may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings shall be open to the public. 
(2)  The board of adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be a public record and be immediately filed in the office of the building official. 
    (11-102) Appeals; hearing; notice. 
(1)  Any person aggrieved, or any official or department of the government body of the city affected by any decision or judgment of the building official concerning interpretation or administration of this ordinance, may appeal such decision or judgment to the board of adjustment. Such appeals shall be taken within twenty (20) days by filing with the building official and with the board of adjustment a notice of appeal accompanied by a fee as established by the city council, specifying the grounds thereof. The building official shall forthwith transmit to the board of adjustments, all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(2)  The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of appeal, give public notice thereof as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. 
    (11-103) Stay of proceedings. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the building official from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board of adjustment after the notice of appeal is filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board of adjustment or by a court of record on application, on notice of the building official from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
Sec. 11-200. - The board of adjustment; powers and duties. 
    The board of adjustment shall have the following powers and duties: 
    (11-201) Administrative review. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the building official in the enforcement of this ordinance. 
    (11-202) Exceptions; conditions governing applications, procedures. 
(1)  To hear and decide only such exceptions or temporary use permits as the board of adjustment is specifically authorized to pass on by the terms of this ordinance; to decide such questions as are involved in determining whether exceptions should be granted; and to grant exceptions with such conditions and safeguards as are appropriate under this ordinance, or to deny exceptions when not in harmony with the purpose and intent of this ordinance. An exception or temporary use permit shall not be granted by the board of adjustment unless and until: 
(a)  A written application for an exception together with fee is submitted, accompanied by an accurate legal description, maps, site plans, drawings and any necessary data, indicating the section of this ordinance under which the exception is sought and stating the grounds on which it is requested. 
(b)  Notice shall be given of such time and place of such public hearing by one (1) publication in the official newspaper at least fifteen (15) days prior to such hearing, and also to the owners of property located within one hundred (100) feet of the property for which the change is requested; Provided, however, that the board of adjustment may continue any matter before it and require such other notice as it deems necessary and proper. 
(c)  The public hearing shall be held. Any party may appear in person, or by agent or attorney. 
(d)  The board of adjustment shall make a finding that it is empowered under the section of this ordinance described in the application to grant the exception, and that the granting of the exception will not adversely affect the public interest. 
(2)  In granting any exception, the board of adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this ordinance. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the exception is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance and punishable under Article Eighteen of this ordinance. The board of adjustment shall prescribe a time limit within which the action for which the exception is required shall be begun or completed, or both. Failure to begin or complete, or both, such action within the time limit set shall void the exception. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 9, 6-18-12) 
    (11-203) Variances; conditions governing applications, procedures. 
(1)  To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variances from the terms of this ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance would result in unnecessary hardship. Variance from the terms of this ordinance shall not be granted by the board of adjustment unless and until: 
(a)  A written application for variance together with fee is submitted, accompanied by an accurate legal description, maps, site plans, drawings and any necessary data, demonstrating: 
(1)  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure, or building involved and which are not applicable to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district; 
(2)  That literal interpretation of the provisions of this ordinance would deprive the applicant of the right commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the terms of this ordinance; 
(3)  That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant; 
(4)  That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this ordinance to other lands, structures or buildings in the same district; 
(5)  No nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings in the same district, and no permitted use of lands, structures or buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for the issuance of a variance; 
(6)  May grant approval, up to a period of two (2) years, for hardship cases to place an inhabited mobile home on the back of any lot subject to the prior approval of the property owners within two hundred (200) feet. The permit must be reviewed for renewal and is also subject to review at any time. Fees for such permit will be thirty-nine dollars ($39.00) per year. 
(b)  Notice of public hearing shall be given as in subsection (11-202) (1) (b) above. 
(c)  The public hearing shall be held. Any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(d)  The board of adjustment shall make findings that the requirements of subsection (11-203) (1) (a) above have been met. 
(e)  The board of adjustment shall further make a finding that the reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of the variance, and that the variance is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building or structure. 
(f)  The board of adjustment shall further make a finding that the granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this ordinance, and will not be injurious to the neighborhood, or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
(2)  In granting any variance, the board of adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this ordinance. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance and punishable under Article Eighteen of this ordinance. 
(3)  Under no circumstances shall the board of adjustment grant a variance to allow a use not permissible under the terms of this ordinance in the district involved, or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of this ordinance in said district. 
    (11-204) Decisions of the board of adjustment. 
(1)  In exercising the above-mentioned powers, the board of adjustment may, so long as such action is in conformity with the terms of this ordinance, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirements, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirements, decisions, or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have powers of the administrative official from whom the appeal is taken. 
(2)  The concurring vote of four (4) of the members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the building official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this ordinance, or to effect any variation in the application of this ordinance. 
Sec. 11-300. - Appeals from the board of adjustment. 
    Any person or persons, or any board, taxpayer, department, board or bureau of the city aggrieved by any decision of the board of adjustment may seek review by a court of record of such decision, in the manner provided by the laws of the State of Texas. 
ARTICLE XII. - DUTIES OF BUILDING OFFICIAL, BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT, CITY COUNCIL AND COURTS ON MATTERS OF APPEAL 

Sec. 12-100. - [Questions of interpretation and enforcement.] 
    It is the intent of this ordinance that all questions of interpretation and enforcement shall be first presented to the administrative official, and that such questions shall be presented to the board of adjustment only on appeal from the decision of the building official, and that recourse from the decision of the board of adjustment shall be to the courts as provided by the laws of the State of Texas. 
Sec. 12-200. - [Duties of city council.] 
    It is further the intent of this ordinance that the duties of the city council in connection with this ordinance shall not include hearing and deciding questions of interpretation and enforcement that may arise. The procedure for deciding such questions shall be as stated in this section and this ordinance. Under this ordinance the city council shall have the duties of: 
(a)  Considering and adopting or rejecting proposed amendments or the repeal of this ordinance, as provided by law, and 
(b)  Of establishing a schedule of fees and charges as stated in Article Thirteen below. 
ARTICLE XIII. - SCHEDULE OF FEES, CHARGES AND EXPENSES 

Sec. 13-100. - [Establishment of schedules.] 
    The city council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and expenses, and a collection procedure for building permits, amendment applications, appeals and other matters pertaining to this ordinance. The schedule of fees shall be listed in the ordinance or posted in the office of the building official, and may be altered or amended only by the city council. 
Sec. 13-200. - [Payments of fees prerequisite to issuance of permits, etc.] 
    No permit, amendment, special exception or variance shall be issued unless or until such costs, charges, fees or expenses have been paid in full, nor shall any action be taken or public hearing be held unless or until preliminary charges and fees have been paid in full. 
ARTICLE XIV. - AMENDMENTS 
    The governing body may, from time to time, amend this ordinance by changing the boundaries of districts or by changing any other provision thereof whenever the public necessity and any convenience and general welfare require such amendment. 

Sec. 14-100. - Application. 
    (14-101) Who may initiate action. Amendments may be initiated by the city council or the Groves Planning and Zoning Commission or by an application from one or more property owners or certified agent of the property affected by the proposed amendment. 
    (14-102) Application fee. Each application by a property owner shall be accompanied by a fee as established by the city council, to cover administrative and processing costs. If the applicant withdraws his application prior to publication of public hearing by the city council, half of the fee will be refunded. 
(Ord. No. 663, § 10, 11-13-78) 
Cross reference- For such fee, see § 2-29. 
    (14-103) Accompanying data. An application for an amendment shall be accompanied by an accurate legal description, maps, site plans, drawings or any data necessary to demonstrate that the proposed amendment is in general conformance with the comprehensive plan of the city and that public necessity, convenience and general welfare require the adoption of the proposed amendment. 
Sec. 14-200. - Processing of application. 
    (14-201) Upon filing of the application, the planning and zoning commission shall review the application with the applicant at a work session for compliance with this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 663, § 11, 11-13-78) 
    (14-202) After receiving the application, the planning and zoning commission may request the city council to hold a joint public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 663, § 11, 11-13-78) 
    (14-203) Upon receiving the planning and zoning commission request, the city council shall set a date and time for a joint public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 663, § 11, 11-13-78) 
    (14-204) Notice of joint public hearing. Notice shall be given of such time and place of said joint public hearing by one publication in a newspaper of general circulation at least fifteen (15) days prior to such hearing and written notice of such hearing shall be sent to the owner of the property or his agent and to all owners of real property lying within two hundred (200) feet of the property on which the change in classification is proposed, such notice to be given not less than ten (10) days before the date set for hearing, to all such owners who have rendered their said property for city taxes as the ownership appears on the last approved city tax roll. Such notice may be served by depositing the same, properly addressed and postage paid, in the city post office. Where property lying within two hundred (200) feet of the property proposed to be changed is located in territory which was annexed to the city after the final date for making the renditions which are included on the last approved city tax roll, notice to such owners shall be given by one publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least fifteen (15) before the time of hearing. Failure of owners to receive notice of hearing shall in no way affect the validity of action. 
(Ord. No. 663, § 11, 11-13-78) 
    (14-205) The planning and zoning commission shall meet either at the conclusion of said joint public hearing or at a later date and make their recommendation to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 663, § 11, 11-13-78) 
    (14-206) The city council shall take no action on the application until after it has received a recommendation from the planning and zoning commission. 
(Ord. No. 663, § 11, 11-13-78) 
    (14-207) The city council may, by simple majority vote, recommend disapproval of an application for amendment of the zoning ordinance; or, in recommending approval of an amendment to the zoning ordinance, the city council may impose such requirements and conditions or changes as it may deem necessary pursuant to Article One of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 663, § 11, 11-13-78) 
    (14-208) A vote of three-fourths of the city council is required in order to adopt proposed amendments that have been recommended for disapproval by the Groves City Planning and Zoning Commission or to adopt proposed amendments that have been recommended for approval by the Groves City Planning and Zoning Commission against which a written protest has been filed with the city secretary, duly signed and acknowledged by any one (1) of the following: 
(1)  The owners of twenty (20) per cent of the land included in the proposed amendment. 
(2)  The owners of twenty (20) per cent of the land immediately adjacent to the land included in the proposed amendment and extending two hundred (200) feet therefrom. 
(3)  The owners of twenty (20) per cent of the land directly opposite the land included in the proposed amendment and two hundred (200) feet from the street frontage of such opposite land. 
(Ord. No. 663, § 11, 11-13-78) 
    (14-209) Effect of denial of application. In case an application for amendment to the zoning ordinance is denied by the city council, said application shall not be eligible for reconsideration for one year subsequent to such denial. A new application affecting or including all or part of the same property must be substantially different from the application denied, in the opinion of the Groves City Planning and Zoning Commission, to be eligible for consideration within one (1) year of the denial of the original application. 
(Ord. No. 663, § 11, 11-13-78) 
Sec. 14-300. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 663, § 12, enacted Nov. 13, 1978 repealed former § 14-300, derived from Ord. No. 431, enacted June 8, 1970, pertaining to the actions by the city council; public hearings; required vote; application approval or denial. 
ARTICLE XV. - PROVISIONS OF ORDINANCE DECLARED TO BE MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS 

[Sec. 15-100.] -   
    In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals and general welfare. Whenever the requirements of this ordinance are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinances, deed restrictions or covenants, the most restrictive or that imposing the higher standards shall govern. 
ARTICLE XVI. - DEFINITIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2008-07, § 8, adopted March 3, 2008, amended article XVI in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, article XVI pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 84-12, § 22, adopted July 16, 1984. 

Sec. 16-100. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this ordinance, certain terms or words used herein shall be interpreted as follows: 
    The word person includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation as well as an individual. 
    The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular. 
    The word shall is mandatory, the word may is permissive. 
    The words used or occupied include the words intended, designed or arranged to be used or occupied. 
    The word lot includes the words plot or parcel. 
    Access street. An existing public thoroughfare from which a townhouse project has access. 
    Accessory building. 
(a)  In a residential district, a subordinate building, attached to or detached from the main building, without separate utilities, not used for commercial purposes, and not rented, and/or containing servants quarters, a washroom, a storage room for domestic storage only and space for one (1) or more automobiles. 
(b)  In other districts, a subordinate building, the use of which is incidental to and used only in conjunction with the main building. 
    Accessory use. A use subordinate to the principal use of a building or lot and serving a purpose customarily incidental to the principal use. 
    Agent of owner. Any person who can show certified written proof that he is acting for the property owner. 
    Alley. A minor public thoroughfare having a right-of-way width of not less than twenty-five (25) feet and a paving width of not less than twenty-five (25) feet. 
    Apartment. A room or suite of rooms in an apartment house arranged, designed or occupied as a residence by a single-family and having a minimum of three hundred (300) square feet of living area per adult and providing facilities for cooking and personal hygiene and not considered a hotel/motel. 
    Apartment house. Any multiple-family dwelling or building or portion thereof, which is designed, built, rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied as three (3) or more apartments or which is occupied as the home or residence of three (3) or more families living independently of each other and maintaining separate facilities for cooking and separate facilities for personal hygiene. Minimum of one thousand (1,000) square feet of living area per apartment shall be required. 
    Basement. A story whose floor is more than twelve (12) inches, but not more than half of its story height below the average level of the adjoining ground (as distinguished from a "cellar" which is a story more than one-half (1/2) below such level). A basement or cellar, when used as a dwelling, shall be counted as a story for purposes of height measurement. 
    Beginning of construction. The incorporation of labor and material within the foundation of the building or buildings. 
    Building. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, used or intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals or property. When such a structure is divided into separate parts by one (1) or more un-pierced walls extending from the ground up, each is deemed a separate building. 
    Building official. The building inspector or other official appointed by the city council to enforce the zoning ordinance. 
    Building line. A line parallel or approximately parallel to a lot line or street line and beyond which buildings may not be erected. 
    Building, main. A building in which is conducted the principal use of the site on which it is located. In any residential district any and all dwellings shall be deemed to be main buildings on the site on which they are located. 
    Clinic, medical. An institution or station for the examination and treatment of ill and afflicted out-patients. 
    Common open space. Private property under common ownership and limited to the use of the owners or occupants of the lots which is designated for recreation area, private park, play lot area, plaza area, building setbacks (in addition to or in excess of those minimum setbacks required herein) and ornamental areas open to general view and having convenient pedestrian access within the townhouse project. 
    Condominiums. Where one (1) or more single dwelling units are individually owned, and undivided interest is held in the common areas and facilities that serve the project. 
    Convalescent home. Any structure used for or occupied by persons recovering from illness or suffering from the infirmities of old age. 
    Court. An open, unoccupied and unobstructed space, other than a yard, on the same lot with a building or group of buildings. 
    Coverage of a lot or maximum allowable building area. The ratio of gross floor area of the first floor of a building or of a group of buildings on the same lot to the area of the lot, expressed as percentage. 
    Day nursery. A place where children are left for care between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. 
    Density. A maximum number of family units permitted on a lot. 
    Detached structure. Any building, accessory building or structure that is not physically attached to any other building or structure by any means. 
    District or zoning district. A portion of the territory of the city within which certain uniform regulations and requirements or various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this ordinance. 
    Dwelling. Any building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively as the residence or sleeping place of one (1) or more persons, but not including a tent, trailer or mobile home. 
    Dwelling, single-family. A building designed for or used exclusively for residence purposes by one (1) family or housekeeping unit. Minimum of one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet of living area. 
    Dwelling, duplex or two-family. A building designed for or used exclusively for residence purposes by two (2) families or two (2) housekeeping units. Minimum of one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet of living area per family. 
    Dwelling, multiple-family. A building or portion thereof designed for or used by three (3) or more families or housekeeping units. Minimum of one thousand (1,000) square feet of living area per family. 
    Dwelling unit or units. A single unit or units providing complete, independent living facilities for one (1) or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. Minimum of one thousand (1,000) square feet of living area per unit. 
    Family. Any number of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit and in which not more than three (3) individuals are unrelated by blood, marriage, or adoption. 
    Floor area of a building. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building or buildings, measured from the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two (2) buildings in square feet. 
    Garage apartment, one- or two-family. A two-story building with the upstairs designed for and used exclusively for residence purposes by one (1) or two (2) families. Minimum of one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet of living area per family. The ground floor designed for and used exclusively for automobile parking and/or domestic storage. 
    Grade, existing. The average level of the original surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the building. 
    Hotel. A building occupied as the more or less temporary abiding place of individuals who are lodged with or without meals, in which as a rule the rooms are occupied for hire, and in which there are more than twelve (12) sleeping rooms, a public room for the accommodation of more than twelve (12) guests and a general kitchen. 
    Interior street. A public street within and designated primarily to serve only a townhouse project and not other properties outside the project. 
    Lot. One (1) piece, parcel or tract of land which collectively meets all of the following requirements at the time of filing for a zoning permit: 
(1)  Is located within a single block. 
(2)  Has frontage on an accepted and improved public street. 
(3)  Is occupied or utilized or designated by its owner, owners or developers to be occupied, developed or utilized as a unit for a principal use and uses accessory thereto, together with such open spaces as are required by this ordinance. 
(4)  And of which a plat has been recorded in the office of the county clerk. 
    Lot, area of. The area of the lot shall be the net area of the lot and shall not include portions of streets and alleys. 
    Lot depth. The mean horizontal distance between the front line and rear lot line of a zoning lot. 
    Lot line. A boundary of a lot. 
    Lot line, front. The street right-of-way at the front of a lot. 
    Lot line, side. The lot line which is not a front lot line or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a thoroughfare other than an alley is an exterior side lot line as opposed to an interior side lot line. 
    Lot line, rear. The lot line opposite and most distant from the front. 
    Lot width. The mean horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot. 
    Mobile home park. A parcel of land under single ownership which has been planned and improved for the placement of mobile homes for transient use, supplementary structures and accessory uses not prohibited by this ordinance. 
    Mobile homes. Any vehicle or similar portable structure having no foundation other than wheels or jacks or skirtings and so designed or constructed as to permit occupancy for dwelling or sleeping purposes. Mobile homes are considered to be structures for the purpose of this ordinance when they are parked in a mobile home park. 
    Motel. A building or group of buildings, including either separate units or a row or rows of units which: (a) contain living or sleeping accommodations primarily for transient occupancy; and (b) have individual entrances. 
    Nursing home. Any premises where more than three (3) persons are lodged and furnished with meals and nursing care. 
    Off-street parking space. A hard-surfaced area not less than one hundred eighty (180) square feet, enclosed or unenclosed, with a hard-surfaced driveway connecting parking space with the public street or alley, and permitting ingress and egress of an automobile. An off-street parking space shall not occupy any public land. 
    Open space. Area included in any side, rear or front yard or any other unoccupied space on a lot that is open and unobstructed to the sky. 
    Recreational Vehicle Park. A parcel of land which has been planned and approved, for the placement and occupancy of recreational vehicles, and accessory uses not prohibited by this Ordinance. 
    Screening wall. A barrier of stone, brick, concrete block, pierced brick, solid wooden fence, or other permanent material of equal character at least six (6) feet in height where the solid area equals at least seventy-five (75) per cent of the wall surface. 
    Servants quarters, bona fide. Living quarters located on the same lot as the main building for the family of a servant employed on the premises who received at least fifty (50) per cent of his total income from the occupant of the main building. 
    Setback line. That line which is parallel to and the minimum allowable horizontal distance from a given point or line of reference, such as a lot line, to the minimum required building line. 
    Sign. Any structure or part thereof, or any device attached to, painted on or represented on a building or other structure, upon which is displayed or included any letter, work model, banner, decoration, device, or representation used as, or which is in the nature of, an announcement, direction, advertisement or other attention directing device. 
    Sign, area of. The total exterior surface computed in square feet of a sign, having but one exposed exterior surface; the aggregated exposed exterior surface computed in square feet of a sign having more than one (1) such surface. 
    Story. That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the ceiling next above it. 
    Street. Any thoroughfare other than an alley. 
    Street line. A dividing line between a street and an abutting lot, tract or parcel of land. 
    Structure. Anything constructed, the use of which required permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having a permanent location on the ground. 
    Structural alteration. Any change in the structural members of a building, such as walls, columns, beams or girders. 
    Townhome. A single-family housing unit with reduced rear and side yards, having an enclosed garden court or area and located on an individual lot. 
    Townhouse. A structure on an individual lot which is one of a series of dwelling units designed for single-family occupancy, which dwelling units are structurally connected or immediately adjacent to and abutting each other without side yards between individual dwelling units. 
    Townhouse project. A development in which it is proposed to partition or subdivide land into individual lots and construct townhouses and/or townhomes which may be individually owned. 
    Trailer coach. Trailer coach means a transportable, single-family dwelling unit which is or may be mounted on wheels suitable for year-round occupancy and containing the same water supply, waste disposal and electrical conveniences as immobile housing. 
    Yard. An open unoccupied space other than a court, on the lot in which a building is situated and which is unobstructed from the ground to the sky. 
    Yard, front. An open, unoccupied space on a lot facing a street and extending across the front of a lot between the side yard lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the street line and the main building. 
    Yard, rear. An open space unoccupied and unobstructed extending across the rear of a lot from one side lot line to the other side lot line and being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the main building. 
    Yard, required front. An open space extending the full width of a lot between the front lot line and the front setback, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as specified elsewhere in this ordinance. 
    Yard, required rear. An open space extending the full width of the lot between the rear lot line and the rear setback line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as specified elsewhere in this ordinance. 
    Yard, required side. An open space extending from the minimum front yard setback line to the minimum rear yard setback line between the side yard setback line and the nearest side lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as specified elsewhere in this ordinance. 
    Yard, side. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a building, situated between the building and side line of the lot and extending through from the front yard to the required rear yard. Any lot line not the rear line or a front line shall be deemed a side line. 
    Zoning map, official. The zoning map or maps of the city, attested together with all amendments subsequently adopted. 
    Zoning permit. A document issued by the building official authorizing buildings, structures or uses consistent with the terms of this ordinance and for the purpose of carrying out and enforcing its provisions. 
(Ord. No. 2008-07, § 8, 3-3-08; Ord. No. 2012-04, § 10, 6-18-12) 
ARTICLE XVII. - COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATIONS 

[Sec. 17-100.] 
    Whenever a violation of this ordinance occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such complaint stating fully the causes and basis thereof shall be filed with the building official. He shall record properly such complaints. Immediately investigate and take action thereon as provided by this ordinance. 
ARTICLE XVIII. - PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION 

Sec. 18-100. 
    Violation of the provisions of this ordinance or failure to comply with any of its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this ordinance or fails to comply with any of its requirements upon conviction thereof shall be fined not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered as a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 01-02, § 3, 4-9-01) 
Sec. 18-200. 
    The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent or other person who commits, participates in, assists In, or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. 
Sec. 18-300. 
    Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
ARTICLE XIX. - REPEALING CLAUSE 

Sec. 19-100. 
    Zoning Ordinance No. 68 and all amendments thereto is hereby expressly repealed. 
ARTICLE XX. - PUBLICATION 

Sec. 20-100. 
    This ordinance shall be published by publishing the caption hereof for three (8) successive days in the Port Arthur News, the official newspaper of the City of Groves, within ten (10) days after the passage thereof. 
ARTICLE XXI. - EFFECTIVE DATE 

Sec. 21-100. 
    This ordinance shall be effective from and after its passage and publication of the caption only as required by the City Charter. 
PASSED, APPROVED AND ADOPTED THIS 8TH DAY OF JUNE, 1970. 
/s/ A. A. Lee 
      MAYOR, the City of Groves   ATTEST: 
/s/ C. R. Nash 
      CITY CLERK, the City of Groves   
APPENDIX B - SUBDIVISION CONTROL ORDINANCE[1] 
ORDINANCE NO. 509 
    AN ORDINANCE REGULATING ALL PHASES OF SUBDIVIDING ANY ADDITION LOCATED WITHIN THE CITY LIMITS OF THE CITY OF GROVES, AND SETTING STANDARDS FOR PLAT MAPS, STREETS, DRAINAGE, WATER AND SEWER IMPROVEMENTS, AND ALL OTHER MATTERS PERTAINING TO THE DEVELOPMENT OF LAND AND TO SUBDIVISIONS WITHIN THE CITY LIMITS OF THE CITY OF GROVES; PROVIDING A PENALTY; PROVIDING FOR PUBLICATION BY PUBLISHING THE CAPTION ONLY; AND PROVIDING AN EFFECTIVE DATE. 
    BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY OF GROVES: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Appendix B to this volume contains the subdivision control ordinance of the City of Groves, Texas, being Ordinance No. 509, adopted July 16, 1973. The ordinance is included herein as enacted, including arrangement, catchlines and numbering system. However, the editors have made word changes where necessary to correct obvious errors and, in several instances, have added catchlines and catch phrases where there were none in order to facilitate indexing and reference. Such changes and additions are enclosed in brackets to indicate that they were not a part of the original text as enacted. Absence of a history note following a particular section indicates that the section derives unchanged from Ordinance No. 509; conversely, a history note enclosed in parentheses following a section indicates that the section has been amended by the ordinance indicated in such history note. 

Section 1. - General provisions. 
(A)  This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Subdivision Control Ordinance" of the city. 
(B)  The purpose of this ordinance is to provide for the orderly, safe and healthful development of the area within the city and to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the community. 
(C)  This ordinance is adopted under the authority of the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, including particularly Chapters 231, Acts of the 40th Legislature, Regular Session, 1927, as heretofore or hereafter amended, and the provisions of Section 4 of the Municipal Annexation Act, as heretofore or hereafter amended, the city plan commission does hereby adopt the following rules and regulations governing the subdivision of land within the city limits of Groves, Texas, as ordained by the City Council of the City of Groves, Texas. 
(D)  No person shall create a subdivision of land within the corporate limits of the city without complying with the provisions of this ordinance. All plats and subdivisions of any such land shall conform to the rules and regulations set forth herein. 
Section 2. - Definitions. 
    Certain words and phrases in this ordinance shall have the meanings ascribed to them unless a different meaning is plainly required by context. Except as may be specifically limited by context, words used in the singular shall include the plural and words used in the plural shall include the singular. 
    The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is directory. Words and terms not expressly defined are to be construed according to definition of such words or terms as appear in the city's zoning ordinance or, lacking definition therein, then according to their customary usage in the practice of municipal planning and engineering. 
(1)  City official: Any person, elective or appointive, or any board or committee authorized or constituted by city ordinance or state law to act in behalf of the municipality. 
(a)  City: The municipal corporation of the City of Groves. 
(b)  City Council: The governing body of the city. 
(c)  Plan Commission: The planning commission of the city. 
(2)  City plan: The comprehensive plan for the city and its environs as adopted by the city council or as may subsequently be adopted or amended. 
(3)  Engineer: A person duly authorized under the provisions of the Texas Engineering Registration Act to practice the profession of engineering. 
(a)  Surveyor: A licensed state land surveyor or a registered public surveyor, as authorized by the state statutes to practice the profession of surveying. 
(4)  Street or alley: A public or private way set aside as a permanent right-of-way for the movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or to provide access to abutting property. 
(a)  Major street: Any street designated on the adopted city plan as thoroughfare, boulevard, freeway, highway, expressway, parkway or scenic route or any other traffic artery having regional continuity, or any route carrying or designated to carry fast-moving or a large volume of vehicular traffic. 
(b)  Collector street: A street which carries traffic from local streets to the system of major streets, including the principal entrance street or streets into a subdivision development, and streets designed primarily to provide traffic circulation within or between one or more subdivisions. 
(c)  Local street: A street exclusively or primarily providing access to abutting properties. 
(d)  Cul-de-sac: A local street having but one outlet to another street, and terminated on the opposite end by a vehicular turn-around. 
(e)  Alley: A public or private way designed primarily for vehicular travel to provide access to or from the rear or side of property otherwise abutting on a street. 
(5)  Subdivider: An individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership, or corporation dividing or proposing to divide land so as to effect a subdivision of land hereunder for himself, or for itself, or for another. 
(6)  Subdivision: The division of any lot, tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots or sites for the purpose of sale or of building development, whether immediate or future. The term includes resubdivision, but does not include the division of land for agricultural purposes in parcels or tracts of five (5) acres or more and not involving any new street, alley or easement of access. When appropriate to context, the term "subdivision" shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided. 
(a)  Preliminary plat: A map, drawing or chart on which is shown the subdivider's proposed arrangement of streets, lots, easements, and other public spaces in the subdivision which he intends to submit in form for recording. 
(b)  Final plat: A map, drawing or chart prepared according to the provisions of this ordinance, and containing all engineering and legal data, dedications, and certificates necessary to the recording of same in the maps and plats records of the county. 
Section 3. - Preliminary plat. 
    The preliminary plat shall be accompanied by a filing and examining fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) plus an additional one dollar ($1.00) per lot. A preliminary plat (six copies) for any proposed subdivision shall be submitted to the city plan commission for approval before the preparation of the final plat for record. Such plat shall be submitted to the plan commission, through the office of the director of public works, at least seven (7) days prior to the meeting at which approval is to be asked. 
    The preliminary plat shall be drawn to a scale of two-hundred (200) feet to the inch, or larger, and shall contain, or be accompanied by, the following information: 
(A)  Location and length of boundary lines. 
(B)  Orientation of area being subdivided in relation to adjacent areas and principal streets. 
(C)  Proposed name of subdivision (which must not be so similar to that of an existing subdivision as to cause confusion). 
(D)  Location and width of existing and proposed streets within the subdivision and immediately adjacent to it. 
(E)  The alignment of proposed streets with existing city streets. 
(F)  The width, depth, and location of all lots. 
(G)  The location of building lines. 
(H)  Location, width, and purpose of all easements. 
(I)  Utilities on and adjacent to the tract. Sizes of existing sewer and water mains. 
(J)  Topography shown by contour lines on one foot vertical interval, U.S.C. & G. Datum. 
(K)  Adjacent subdivisions and tracts shown (dashed lines). 
(L)  North point, scale, and date. 
(M)  Clearly marked "Preliminary Plat." 
Section 4. - Final plat. 
    After the preliminary plat has been approved, a final or record plat with a duplicate original and ten (10) copies shall be prepared and submitted to the office of the public works department, accompanied by a filing fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). The plat shall be drawn on mylar in India ink at a scale of one hundred (100) feet to the inch or larger, unless otherwise directed by the city plan commission; and shall show or be accompanied by the following information: 
(A)  The name of the subdivision and adjacent subdivisions, the names of streets, and the numbers of lots and blocks. 
(B)  An accurate boundary survey of the property by a duly licensed or registered civil engineer, or land surveyor, with closure information bearings and distances, referenced to section corners and showing the lines of adjacent lands and lines of adjacent streets, their names and widths. Also, the location of all permanent survey monuments. 
(C)  Location of lots, streets, public highways, alleys, parks, and other features, with accurate dimensions in feet and decimals of feet, with the length of radii and of arcs of all curves, and with all other information necessary to reproduce the plat on the ground. 
(D)  The location of building lines on front and side streets, and the location and purpose of all easements. 
(E)  The relation of streets and alleys of the subdivision to adjacent and projected streets and alleys. 
(F)  North point, scale, and date. 
(G)  Keymap, at small scale, showing area being subdivided in relation to adjacent areas and principal streets. 
(H)  An affidavit of ownership, and certificates from all taxing agencies having jurisdiction showing taxes paid on current basis. 
(I)  Statement by owner dedicating streets, right-of-way, and any sites for public use, together with two (2) copies of deed restrictions. 
(J)  The final plat shall be accompanied by two (2) complete sets of engineering drawings and specifications for streets, drainage and utilities, prepared by a registered engineer. 
(K)  The final plat shall be accompanied by letters of approval from the necessary state or other agencies, utility companies covering proposed utility installations and easements, and Drainage District No. 7 covering outfall drainage, if applicable. 
(L)  After approval by the plan commission, the final plat shall be submitted to the city council for approval. 
(M)  A certificate of approval to be signed by the chairman of the plan commission and the city council shall be placed on the face of the plat. 
(N)  Upon final approval by the city council of all improvements, street pavement, sanitary sewer, water lines, fire hydrants and drainage, within the subdivision, the final plat and dedication deed, with restrictions, shall be recorded in the county clerk's office in Jefferson County, by the city clerk. All cost incurred in the filing of the final plat and dedication deed, with restrictions, shall be paid by the developer of the subdivision. 
(O)  The City Manager or his/her authorized agent may approve and issue an amending plat (replat), which may be recorded and is controlling over the preceding plat without vacation of that plat, to relocate one or more lot lines between one (1) or more adjacent lots if: 
1.  The owners of all affected lots join in the application for amending the plat; 
2.  The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions; 
3.  The amendment does not increase the number of lots; 
4.  The replat does not require the creation of any new street or the extension of municipal facilities; 
5.  The city manager or his/her authorized agent shall not disapprove the replat and shall be required to refer any replat which he refuses to approve to the planning and zoning commission if the person or persons making the application requests in writing that the planning and zoning commission act on the replat. 
(Ord. No. 745, § 1, 7-20-81; Ord. No. 01-05, § 1, 7-2-01; Ord. No. 2012-05, § 1, 6-18-12) 
Section 5. - General requirements and design standards. 
(A)  Street arrangement. 
(1)  Conformity to major street plan. Provision must be made for the extension of main thoroughfares as shown on the major street plan for the city. Secondary streets must provide for free circulation within the subdivision. 
(2)  Relation to adjoining streets and land. The street system for the subdivision, except in unusual cases, and at the recommendation of the plan commission, and with the approval by the city council must connect with streets already dedicated in adjacent subdivisions. Where no adjacent connections are platted, the streets must be, in general, reasonable projections of streets in the nearest subdivided tract; and must be continued to the boundaries of the tract being subdivided, so that future subdivisions may connect thereto. Maximum distance between streets which are to align with existing or future planned city streets shall be one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) feet. 
(3)  Widths. Widths of the major streets shall conform to the major street plan of the city. Minimum width of right-of-way for roads or streets shall be sixty (60) feet. 
(4)  Dead-end streets. Streets designed to leave one end permanently closed shall not exceed six hundred sixty (660) feet in length and shall be provided at the closed end with a turn-around. The street right-of-way for the turn-around shall have a minimum diameter of eighty (80) feet; the surfaced portion of the road at the turn-around shall have a minimum diameter of sixty (60) feet. Developers shall install four-inch diameter concrete posts, four (4) inch diameter pipe post, or four-inch creosote posts on twelve (12) feet, six (6) inch maximum centers with standard Armco, or approved equal, guard rail and three (3), three-inch bracket sealed reflectors at ends of all dead-end streets in the subdivision. 
(5)  Intersections. Street intersections shall preferably be at right angles and at never less than sixty (60) degrees. 
(6)  Street names. Street names shall be submitted by the office of the city manager in accordance with the city's street naming system. 
(7)  Street markers. Aluminum signs on galvanized posts (anchored) shall be installed as necessary for convenient identification of the streets and at each intersection. Signs must meet city standards. 
(8)  Street lights. Street lights shall be provided as, and the plans therefor shall be approved by the city council. The lights shall be mounted on ornamental poles of the type approved by the city and shall be installed at the expense of the developer. 
(B)  Lots and blocks. 
(1)  Block length. No block shall exceed one thousand (1,000) feet in length. All block corners shall be established on the ground by concrete monuments. 
(2)  Lot sizes. Lot sizes shall conform to those set forth in the city zoning ordinance. Lot corners shall be marked on the ground by one-half-inch by twenty-four-inch long iron pipe driven flush with ground. 
(3)  Lot shape. In general, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines. 
(4)  Building lines. Building lines shall conform to city zoning requirements. 
(5)  Utility easements. A minimum easement of ten (10) feet for utilities is required; except easements shall be twenty (20) feet, minimum, if more than one utility is to be located therein. 
(6)  Drainage easements. When drainage easements are necessary, they shall be designated for drainage and utility purposes. 
(C)  Water supply and wastewater disposal. 
(1)  Water and wastewater facilities. Each developer shall agree, as a condition of approval of a plat, that the Subdivider will install at his own cost, water and sewer lines to connect with the City's water and wastewater system. Water and wastewater system improvements shall be in accordance with Texas State Department of Health Requirements. 
(2)  Water and sewers. The city council may refuse to approve a plat unless it is apparent that proper water and sewage facilities will be completed within a reasonable time. 
(D)  Improvements. 
(1)  Conditions to final approval. As a condition to final approval of the plat and of the subdivision, the city council shall require completion of street construction and utilities. In lieu of completion of such work, the city council may accept bond in the amount and with the security satisfactory to the city manager, providing and securing to the city the actual construction and installation of such improvements and utilities, including sanitary sewers, water lines, fire hydrants, drainage, within a period of time to be specified by the city council. 
(2)  Inspection. Inspection of improvements shall be by the director of public works or his representatives. 
    After completion of improvements, the subdivider's engineer shall certify that improvements have been made in accordance with his plans and specifications, and/or modifications thereto, and request inspection and approval of facilities by the director of public works, or his representatives. Upon inspection and approval of facilities by the director of public works, and the receipt of certificate from subdivider's engineer, the subdivision shall be presented to the council for final acceptance. 
(E)  Variances. 
(1)  [ Authorization by city council. ] When a subdivider shows that a provision of the regulations would cause unnecessary hardship if strictly adhered to; and where in the opinion of the plan commission, a departure may be made without destroying the spirit of the regulations, the city plan commission may recommend to the city council, and the city council, at its sole discretion, authorize a variance. 
(Ord. No. 745, §§ 2, 3, 7-20-81) 
Section 6. - Minimum street requirements. 
(A)  Streets with curb and gutter sections. 
(1)  Curb and gutter sections shall be used with concrete pavement, only, and shall require the installation of storm sewers. 
(2)  Minimum width back-to-back of curb shall be thirty-one (31) feet. Greater width shall be required on major thoroughfares to conform with the city's master street plan. 
(3)  Height of standard curb above gutter shall be in accordance with city standard. 
(4)  Minimum gradient on gutters shall be 0.20%. Minimum fall around curb return shall be 0.10 feet. 
(5)  Storm sewer inlets shall be installed in such a manner that storm water is not carried more than four hundred (400) feet from the high point of the gutter to a storm sewer opening. 
(6)  Storm sewer inlets shall have throat opening of not less than 1.5 square feet and shall be sized for contributing area. 
(7)  Minimum run-off used in calculating drainage structures shall be in accordance with city standards. 
(8)  Drainage across streets by means of "valley" gutters shall be prohibited. 
(9)  Storm sewer and inlet leads having less than 1.0 feet cover at street crossings shall be reinforced concrete pipe. 
(10)  General specifications for construction within the City of Groves are on file at the city hall. 
(B)  Minimum requirements for concrete pavement. 
(1)  All subgrade is to be accurately shaped prior to placing base or pavement thereon, and shall be compacted to provide for uniform density capable of supporting the pavement loads imposed thereon. Unstable subgrade is to be carefully stabilized by the addition of suitable material or by removing unstable area and placing therein a suitable subgrade material. 
(2)  The pavement shall be six (6) inch, uniform thickness; and curbs to be constructed monolithic with the pavement, or with three-eighths ( 3/8 ) inch dowels at twelve (12) inch centers. 
(3)  Concrete to have a minimum of five and one-half (51/2) sacks of cement per cubic yard of concrete. 
(4)  Concrete to have a flexural strength of six hundred (600) pounds per square inch at twenty-eight (28) days, or core test with compressive strength of three thousand (3,000) pounds per square inch. 
(5)  All slabs are to be provided with acceptable load transmission device at expansion joints, with expansion joints at approximately sixty (60) foot intervals. Expansion joints to be placed at all structures and at curb returns at street intersections. 
(6)  Contraction joints to have a maximum spacing of twenty (20) feet. 
(7)  When completed the concrete shall be kept moist for a period of not less than three (3) days and longer, if necessary; or by spraying with approved commercial-type moisture sealer; and shall be protected from the elements in a satisfactory method. 
(8)  Backfill shall be of suitable selected material and shall be placed and tamped until firm and solid. Layer of backfill between tamping operations shall not exceed six (6) inches. Backfilling shall follow immediately after the concrete forms have been removed. 
(9)  Concrete pavement shall be reinforced with either welded wire mesh or deformed steel rod reinforcing material. When wire mesh is used, said wire mesh shall be no smaller than six (6) gauge (0.192" diameter) in cross section, nor have a center line to center line dimension in excess of six (6) inches. Reinforcing wire mesh shall be placed in the forms prior to placing of the concrete. Sheets of wire mesh shall overlap each other on ends and edge a minimum of six (6) inches and shall be securely fastened at the ends and edges with wire ties on a maximum of two (2) foot centers. As the concrete is placed, the wire mesh shall be pulled up into the concrete so that the mesh is at an average elevation of one and one-half (11/2) inches above the bottom of the slab cross section. Deformed steel rods, when used, shall be a minimum of three-eighths ( 3/8 ) inch diameter. Rods shall be installed on twenty-four (24) inch centers each way. 
(C)  Testing. Necessary testing of subgrade and concrete pavement, to prove that these items meet requirements shall be done by the Southwestern Testing Laboratories or other commercial testing laboratory acceptable to the city council, cost of such testing shall be borne by the subdivider. 
(D)  Inspection. Inspection of construction shall be at the direction of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 745, § 4, 7-20-81) 
Section 7. - Water distribution-Minimum requirements. 
(A)  Layout and sizing of mains shall conform with the city's long-range plan. 
(B)  System to provide for fire flow with minimum of six (6) inch mains to serve fire hydrants. 
(C)  Fire hydrants to be located as required by the State Fire Insurance Board and shall be equipped with a valved "lead." 
(D)  Fire hydrants to be located on corners of blocks, if possible. 
(E)  Minimum system pressure to be forty (40) psig under peak domestic consumption of one hundred fifty (150) G.P.C.P.D. 
(F)  Minimum house connections to be three fourths (3/4) inch pipe. 
(G)  A satisfactory flushing connection shall be provided at the end of all dead-end lines. 
(H)  All sanitary features, construction and location to conform to suggested state health department requirements. 
(I)  All materials to be used in the water distribution system shall be new materials and shall meet the requirements of the American Waterworks Association. 
(J)  Fire hydrants shall rest on a concrete block or base not less than four (4) inches thick and fifteen (15) inches square, and the back side opposite the pipe connection shall be backed with concrete between the hydrant and the vertical wall of the trench to prevent the hydrant from blowing off the line. The size of this concrete shall be not less than fifteen (15) inches wide by fifteen (15) inches high, the thickness to be determined by the space between the hydrant and the vertical wall of the trench, but in no instances less than six (6) inches thick. The "weep holes" shall be kept clear of this concrete block. Hydrants shall be set truly vertical. 
(K)  Water mains shall be tested hydrostatically and evaluation of leakage made from time and pressures as follows: 
(1)  One hundred (100) p.s.i. test for twenty-four (24) hours, or 
(2)  One hundred twenty-five (125) p.s.i. test for sixteen (16) hours, or 
(3)  One hundred fifty (150) p.s.i. test for eight (8) hours, the high (one hundred fifty (150) p.s.i.) test being preferred. 
    Bacteriological test shall be performed with city assistance in accordance with Texas State Department of Health requirements. Tests shall be performed without cost to the city. 
Section 8. - Sanitary sewage system-Minimum requirements. 
(A)  Sanitary sewer lines shall have a minimum diameter of eight (8) inches and a slope of .25%, and shall be vitrified clay (pre-molded joint) or equal, approved by the public works department. 
(B)  Sanitary sewer pipe shall be covered not less than 3.0 feet. 
(C)  Manholes on laterals are to be located at points of change in grade, size, or directions, and at junctions with other lines, and at "dead-ends" of lines. 
(D)  Manhole spacing on sewer to be a maximum of four hundred (400) feet, with manholes at points of change in grade, size, or directions, and at junctions with other lines. 
(E)  General specifications for construction within the City of Groves are on file at the department of public works and shall be complied with. 
(F)  Sanitary sewer lines shall be tested for infiltration as directed by the director of public works. Air test, hydrostatic test, etc., shall be performed in accordance with current test standards without cost to the city. The city reserves the right to evaluate quality standards from data developed from information by televiewing lines. If the city chooses to use this method, the city will pay for television survey. 
Sec. 9. - Planned development projects. 
(A)  Any person wishing to develop a townhouse project or a zero lot line project shall comply with the requirements as set forth in this section in preparing the plat, plans and specifications for the project. 
(B)  Access: 
(1)  All projects shall have direct access from at least one improved, dedicated street accepted by the city. 
(2)  All lots shall immediately abut and have direct access to an access street, an interior street or an alley. 
(3)  Interior streets shall meet one of the following: 
(a)  Minimum right-of-way width of sixty (60) feet and a minimum twenty-seven-foot wide concrete pavement with no parking on street. 
(b)  Minimum right-of-way width of sixty (60) feet and a minimum thirty-five-foot wide concrete pavement with parking permitted. 
(4)  Alleys shall have a right-of-way width of at least twenty-five (25) feet and shall be developed with a twenty-five-foot wide concrete pavement. However, where an alley provides access to head-in automobile parking spaces along both sides, the alley must have a right-of-way width of not less than thirty (30) feet. 
(C)  Density: 
(1)  No townhouse project shall have a greater density than fifteen (15) lots per gross acre. 
(2)  No zero lot line project shall have a greater density than ten (10) lots per gross acre. 
(D)  Lot area: One thousand eight hundred (1,800) square feet for townhouses and three thousand two hundred (3,200) square feet for zero lot line dwellings. 
(E)  Lot width: Twenty (20) feet for townhouses and forty (40) feet for zero lot line houses, except that lots siding on a corner or upon a plat boundary of the project shall not be less than thirty (30) feet for townhouses and fifty (50) feet for zero lot line dwellings. 
(F)  Building setback lines: 
(1)  Front: 
(a)  A front building setback line of twenty (20) feet on lots fronting on an access street. 
(b)  A front building setback line of ten (10) feet on all other lots. 
(2)  Rear: 
(a)  A rear building setback line of twenty (20) feet on all lots backing on an access street and said lots shall be denied direct driveway access to the access street, and on all lots backing on lots in a recorded plat used or intended to be used for single family detached dwelling units. 
(b)  All lots without a rear drive access shall have a minimum rear setback of ten (10) feet. 
(3)  Sides: 
(a)  A side building setback of ten (10) feet on all lots siding on a corner or siding upon a plat boundary of the project. 
(b)  No side building setback line shall be required on all other townhouse lots and on all zero lot lines there shall be no minimum on one side and ten (10) feet on the opposite side. 
(G)  Open space: 
(1)  A minimum of four hundred (400) square feet of open space shall be provided for each lot. 
(2)  Where townhouse lots and dwelling units are designed to face or front each other upon an open or common access court rather than upon a street. This open court shall be a minimum forty (40) feet wide and said court shall not include vehicular drives or parking areas. 
(3)  When computing the required open space, the required front or side setbacks, streets, alleys or other public right-of-ways of any kind, vehicular drives, parking areas, drainage easements and utility easements shall not be included. 
(4)  Common open space is not required but may be permitted. If common open space is provided, it shall be permanently maintained by the homeowners association. 
(H)  Sidewalks. A sidewalk of concrete or other permanent material having a width of at least four (4) feet shall be constructed along the front of each lot. If the required sidewalk is constructed within public street right-of-way, it shall not have a width more than four (4) feet and shall be constructed to city standards. 
(I)  Easements: 
(1)  Aerial easements, if any, may not be located along the frontage of any lot. 
(2)  Utility easements and drainage easements shall be as required in subsections 5(B)(5) and 5(B)(6) of this ordinance. 
(3)  Private easements: 
(a)  Townhouse projects without a homeowner association must provide for a perpetual maintenance easement of four (4) feet in width along each side of adjacent lot lines and parallel thereto. 
(b)  Zero lot line dwellings shall be constructed against the lot line on one side of a lot, and no windows, doors, or other openings shall be permitted and on the adjacent lot the developer must provide for a perpetual wall maintenance easement of four (4) feet in width along such wall. 
(c)  When required by the city council, a two-foot wide private easement shall be provided for the placement of a six-foot high screening fence. The location and type of screening fence shall be determined by the city council. The screening fence shall be permanently maintained by the homeowners association. 
(J)  Dwelling height. No dwelling structure shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height or two (2) stories. 
(K)  Parking: 
(1)  At least two (2) off-street parking spaces (covered or uncovered) shall be provided for on each lot. 
(2)  In addition to the above requirement, one (1) additional parking space shall be provided for each lot within the project. Said additional space may be parallel parking on public street or tandem parking on individual driveways connecting such lots with the adjacent street. Parking on or over sidewalks shall not be credited toward the parking requirements. 
(L)  Dwelling floor area: 
(1)  Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum living area of nine hundred (900) square feet. 
(2)  The developer shall submit typical floor plans which shall show the general layout of the units, open courtyard and garages. 
(M)  The following data shall be shown on the preliminary plats: 
(1)  Density: Lots per gross acre; 
(2)  The number and size of each type unit; 
(3)  Number and type of parking spaces. 
(N)  Homeowners association. If applicable, a copy of the articles of incorporation of a nonprofit homeowners association assuring that all common open space and screening fences, and/or walls shown on the final plat shall be permanently held in common ownership by each original or successive lot owner through mandatory membership in said association. The association is to have continuing responsibility for the maintenance of all common open space and screening wall and said responsibility is to be assured by the annual assessment of each lot owner to establish a maintenance fund sufficient for such maintenance. Said copy of the articles of incorporation of a nonprofit homeowners association shall be submitted along with the final plat and other documents required by this ordinance for approval. 
(O)  All other requirements pertaining to concrete paving, drainage systems, water lines, sanitary sewer lines and street lighting shall conform to the requirements as set forth in this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 84-13, § 1, 7-30-84) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 84-13, §§ 1, 2, adopted July 30, 1984, deleted former App. B, §§ 9, 10, pertaining to townhouse and townhome requirements and mobile home parks type "B," and enacted new §§ 9, 10, pertaining to mobile home subdivisions and planned development projects. 
Sec. 10. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2012-05, § 2, adopted June 18, 2012, deleted § 10, entitled "Mobile home subdivisions", which derived from: Ord. No. 84-13, § 2, adopted July 30, 1984. 
Section 11. - Maintenance bond. 
    To insure that all improvements, streets, drainage, water, sewer, are constructed in accordance with specifications and to guarantee that they will be properly maintained by the subdivider for a period of one (1) year from the date of final completion of all of the subdivision improvements and subsequent formal acceptance by the city, the subdivider shall provide a bond, in an amount and with the security acceptable to the city manager, payable to the City of Groves. 
Section 12. - Maintenance and services. 
    In any subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved and filed for record in the Jefferson County Deed Records, nor in which subdivision, the standards herein stipulated have not been complied with in full, the city, shall issue no building, repair, plumbing, or electrical permit; and the city shall not repair or maintain any street; and the city shall not sell or supply water or sanitary sewer service therein. 
Section 13. - Subdivision development procedures. 
(1)  The subdivider shall pay all costs providing the subdivision with streets, water, sanitary sewer, and drainage in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the plan committee and the city council. 
(2)  The subdivider shall pay to the city an inspection fee of five (5) per cent of the total cost of the development to ensure compliance with the plans and specifications. 
(3)  Method of payment and determination of contractor. 
(a)  The developer may, before any work is started in the subdivision in regard to laying of water or sewer lines, request the city council to solicit bids for the account of the developers. These bids shall be solicited in accordance with the requirements and specifications presently in force in regard to work done by the city, and shall include a one hundred (100) per cent material payment bond and a one hundred (100) per cent performance bond by contractor. 
(b)  The bids, if received by the city, shall be awarded during an official meeting of the city council. The developer shall award the contract to the bidder accepted by the city council as the lowest, responsible bidder, quality considered. 
(c)  If the city solicits bids, the developer shall, within ten (10) days, deposit with the city secretary a certified check, cashier's check, or bank officer's check made payable to the City of Groves in an amount equal to the awarded contract bid, plus five (5) per cent inspection fee. 
(d)  Upon completion of the work and acceptance of said work by the developer and the city, the city shall pay to the contractor the sum so deposited by the developer. 
(4)  It is further agreed that the City of Groves has the option to do any or all of the contract work itself, and the actual cost of said work will be paid by the developer. 
(5)  It is further agreed by and between the parties thereto that the developers will only be responsible for laying such lines as are necessary to adequately serve the subdivision under development. In the event the city desires any excess lines, then the city will be responsible for any excess cost over and above what would be adequate lines for the subdivision; for example, if an eight-inch intro-subdivision sewage trunk line would be adequate to serve within a proposed subdivision but the city wanted twelve-inch intra-subdivision lines laid in the subdivision so that the city could connect to municipal trunk lines and thereby render services to other property in the vicinity of the subdivision, then, and if in that event, the city required the developer to lay a twelve-inch intra-subdivision line, then the city would be responsible for the difference between the cost of purchasing the eight-inch line and the cost of purchasing and laying the twelve-inch line. 
(6)  It is further agreed by and between the parties that the city assumes the obligation to maintain and operate such utility system; and shall have complete control, management, and operation of said lines during the term of this section; and shall have the right to tap in or cut said lines in any manner that shall be expedient to the city. 
(Ord. No. 84-13, § 3, 7-30-84; Ord. No. 2012-05, § 3, 6-18-12) 
Section 13.1. - Development of small tracts of land, Class A subdivisions, specifications, requirements, reimbursement procedures. 
(A)  All improvements shall be constructed in accordance with specifications outlined in the subdivision ordinance of the city. 
(B)  The city will provide [or will do] the following: 
(1)  Feasibility study. 
(2)  Preparation of preliminary plat, if requested. 
(3)  Receive bids and award contracts, if requested. 
(4)  Inspect and supervise construction. 
(C)  Property owners will provide the following: 
(1)  An application signed by all property owners in the project accompanied by a five hundred dollar ($500.00) deposit for initiation of preliminary studies and estimates. 
(2)  A certified survey of the boundaries of the project. 
(3)  Each property owner shall provide all right-of-way and easements for project. 
(4)  Each property owner shall provide proof of ownership to accompany any dedications of right-of-way. 
(5)  The owner shall provide all improvements at no cost to the city. Improvements are defined as streets, roadways, drainage, storm sewer, water, sanitary sewer, electrical, telephone, T.V. cable service and street lighting. 
(E)  No rebates or "pay back" to property owners will be made for improvements. 
(F)  The procedures for development of a project under this ordinance are as follows: 
(1)  Upon receipt of an application and deposit the city will initiate a preliminary study to determine project feasibility. 
(a)  The initiation fee will be credited to project development cost if the project is started within ten (10) months. 
(b)  If preliminary studies indicate that development is not feasible, the five hundred dollar ($500.00) deposit will be returned or refunded. 
(c)  Determination of feasibility will be made by the city staff. 
(2)  The developer may, before any work is started in the subdivision in regard to infrastructure, request the city council to solicit bids for the account of the developers. These bids shall be solicited in accordance with the requirements and specifications presently in force in regard to work done by the city, and shall include a one hundred (100) per cent material payment bond and a one hundred (100) per cent performance bond by contractor. 
(3)  The bids, if received by the city, shall be awarded during an official meeting of the city council, The developer shall award the contract to the bidder accepted by the city council as the lowest, responsible bidder, quality considered. 
(4)  If the city solicits bids, the developer shall, within ten (10) days, deposit with the city secretary a certified check, cashier's check, or bank officer's check made payable to the City of Groves in an amount equal to the awarded contract bid, plus five (5) per cent inspection fee. 
(5)  Upon completion of the work and acceptance of said work by the developer and the city, the city shall pay to the contractor the sum so deposited by the developer. 
(6)  It is further agreed that the City of Groves has the option to do any or all of the contract work, and the actual cost of said work will be paid by the developer. 
(7)  It is further agreed by and between the parties that the city assumes the obligation to maintain and operate such utility system; and shall have complete control, management, and operation of said lines during the term of this section; and shall have the right to tap in or cut said lines in any manner that shall be expedient to the city. 
(8)  Upon completion of preliminary studies which have found the project feasible, property owners or developer will place fifty (50) percent of estimated construction costs in escrow and final development plans will be prepared. 
(9)  All required right-of-way and easements shall be dedicated to public use at this time. 
(10)  Total project funding will be provided to the city by the property owners prior to the city contracting for improvements. Funding will include project contingency. 
(11)  Performance bonds will be required at the discretion of the city. 
(12)  All improvements shall meet current city standards. 
(13)  Variance may be considered by the city council on the recommendation of the city staff. 
(G)  Reimbursement procedures in Class A subdivisions. 
(1)  If the subdivision submitted by the developer and approved by the council is in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, the city council may, at its sole discretion, enter into a contract with the developer to reimburse the developer for all expenditures made in laying water and sewer lines and concrete streets and storm sewers within that Class A subdivision; subject to, and in accordance with, the applicable provisions of the foregoing Section 13.0. Subdivision Development Procedures. and the following additional provisions: 
(1)  Upon the completion of all of the water, sanitary sewer lines, concrete streets and storm sewers, within the said subdivision, it is agreed that the City of Groves shall purchase all of said water and sanitary sewer and concrete streets and storm sewers lines located within the said subdivision; and the City of Groves shall pay for said water, sanitary sewer lines and concrete streets and storm sewers as follows: 
(a)  Said payment shall be made from water and sewer charge revenues received by city from sales and service within the boundaries of the subdivision and payments shall be made annually on, or before, November 1 st of each calendar year for the previous calendar year on the basis of fifty (50) per cent of the revenues received. The said fifty (50) per cent of the income so received shall be applied to the payment of the cost of the lines and streets until same are paid in full, including engineering fees equal to six (6) per cent of the construction contract cost; but in no event shall payments continue for a period longer than twenty (20) years from the date of the dedication of the subdivision even though within said time the fifty (50) per cent of the revenues received from services and charges within said subdivision is not sufficient to repay the cost in full. 
(b)  Upon payment of the above-mentioned sums of money or upon termination of the contract period, whichever is prior in time, it is hereby agreed that the developers, their heirs or assigns shall execute any and all quit claim deeds necessary to convey said lines and streets to the city. 
(2)  It shall be further agreed by and between the parties thereto that the developers will only be responsible for laying such lines and streets as are necessary to adequately serve the subdivision under development. In the event the city desires any excess lines, then the city will be responsible for any excess cost over and above what would be adequate lines and streets for the subdivision; for example, if an eight-inch line intro-subdivision sewage trunk line would be adequate to serve within a proposed subdivision but the city wanted twelve-inch intra-subdivision lines laid in the subdivision so that the city could connect to municipal trunk lines and thereby render services to other property in the vicinity of the subdivision, then, and if in that event, the city required the developer to lay a twelve-inch intra-subdivision line, then the city would be responsible for the difference between the cost of purchasing the eight-inch line and the cost of purchasing and laying the twelve-inch line. 
(3)  It shall be further agreed between the parties thereto that the city shall assume the obligation to maintain and operate such utility system; and shall have complete control, management, and operation of said lines during the term of this contract; and shall have the right to tap in or cut said lines in any manner that shall be expedient to the city. 
(4)  It shall be further agreed between the parties thereto that the sole consideration for the developer executing this contract shall be the remuneration the developer will receive from the city for the cost of all water lines, sewer lines, streets and storm sewers, constructed within said subdivision; and developer would not develop the above-described property without this written guarantee on the part of the city to reimburse said developer for the costs expended by the developer. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06, § 2, 3-25-13; Ord. No. 2013-07, § 2, 4-22-13) 
Section 13.2. - Development of small tracts of land, Class B subdivisions; specifications; requirements. 
(A)  To be considered under the guidelines of this section, the property must be shown on the accompanying map, which is referred to, incorporated herein and made a part hereof for all purposes. 
(1)  Amber Estates (Class B Subdivision). A tract of land containing 4.439 acres of land out of Lot 2, Block 5, Range "C", of Port Arthur Land Company Subdivision, in Jefferson County, Texas, as the same appears upon the map or plat thereof, on file and of record in Volume 1, Page 22, Map Records of Jefferson County, Texas. 
(B)  All improvements shall be constructed in accordance with specifications outlined in the subdivision ordinance of the city, except for the following: 
(1)  Street right-of-way width to be determined by the city council, upon recommendation by the city manager or his/her authorized agent. 
(2)  Construction of roadways shall be determined by the city manager or his/her authorized agent. Design requirements shall be determined and approved based on the functional classification of the roadway. Some components used in the development of pavement design may include but are not limited to: anticipated traffic loads, type of thoroughfare and adjacent or intersecting roadways. 
(3)  Roadside drainage to be open ditches. 
(C)  The property owner/owners will provide the following: 
(1)  An application signed by all property owners in the project, and accompanied by a five hundred dollar ($500.00) deposit, for initiation of preliminary studies and estimates. 
(2)  A certified survey of the boundaries of the project and proof of ownership. 
(3)  Each property owner/owners shall provide all rights-of-way and easements. 
(4)  Each owner/owners shall provide all improvements at no cost to the city. Improvements are defined as roadway construction, open drainage ditches, six-inch water main, eight-inch sanitary sewer main, electrical, gas, telephone, TV cable service and street lighting. Each owner/owners shall also pay for the services of an engineering firm, survey company and a testing laboratory, selected by developer or the director of public works, to perform civil drawings, drainage calculations, drainage requirements, storm water permitting, preparation of the final plat and to test the subbase, base and final street surface. 
(5)  Method of payment and determination of contractor. 
(a)  The developer may, before any work is started in the subdivision in regard to laying of water or sewer lines, request the city council to solicit bids for the account of the developers. These bids shall be solicited in accordance with the requirements and specifications presently in force in regard to work done by the city, and shall include a one hundred (100) per cent material payment bond and a one hundred (100) per cent performance bond by contractor. 
(b)  The bids, if solicited by the city, shall be awarded during an official meeting of the city council. The developer shall award the contract to the bidder accepted by the city council as the lowest, responsible bidder, quality considered. 
(c)  The developer shall within ten (10) days, deposit with the city secretary a certified check, cashier's check, or bank officer's check made payable to the City of Groves in an amount equal to the awarded contract bid, plus five (5) per cent inspection fee. 
(d)  Upon completion of the work and acceptance of said work by the developer and the city, the city shall pay to the contractor the sum so deposited by the developer. 
(e)  No rebates or "payback" to property owners will be made for improvements. 
(f)  The city will provide [or do] the following; 
1.  Feasibility study. 
2.  A preliminary plat. 
3.  Receive bids if requested. 
4.  Award bids if requested. 
5.  Inspect and supervise construction. 
6.  Will apply the five hundred dollars ($500.00) toward the total inspection fee, if the project is started within ten (10) months of deposit. 
(6)  Variances and amendments to the map may be considered by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 780, § 2, 8-16-82; Ord. No. 784, § 1, 9-13-82; Ord. No. 95-15, § 1, 11-20-95; Ord. No. 05-05, § 1, 6-27-05; Ord. No. 2010-08, § 1, 8-16-10; Ord. No. 2012-05, § 5, 6-18-12; Ord. No. 2013-02, § 1, 1-14-13; Ord. No. 2013-06, § 1, 3-25-13; Ord. No. 2016-08, § 1, 8-22-16) 
Note- Formerly codified as § 13.1 which was renumbered by Ord. 2013-06 as § 13.2. 
Section 14. - Enforcement for violations. 
    In behalf of the City of Groves, the city attorney shall, when directed by the city council, institute appropriate action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this ordinance. 
Section 15. - Conflict with other ordinances. 
    Whenever the standards and specifications in this ordinance conflict with those contained in another ordinance, the most stringent or restrictive provision shall govern. 
Section 16. - Separability clause. 
    Should any portion or part of this ordinance be held for any reason invalid or unenforceable, the same shall not be construed to affect any other valid portion hereof, but all valid portions hereof shall remain in full force and effect. 
Section 17. - Penal provisions. 
    Any person violating any provision of this ordinance within the corporate limits of the City of Groves, Texas, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction, shall be fined an amount not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00). Each day that such violation exists shall constitute a separate offense and be punishable as such hereunder. 
Section 18. - Publication. 
    This ordinance shall be published by publishing the caption thereof, within ten (10) days after the passage thereof, for three (3) successive days in The News, the official newspaper of the City of Groves. 
Section 19. - Effective date. 
    This ordinance shall be effective from and after its passage and publication of the caption only as required by the City Charter. 
PASSED, APPROVED and ADOPTED by the City Council of The City of Groves at a regular meeting held on the 16th day of July, A.D., 1973. 
/s/ Sylvester Moore 
      Mayor   ATTEST: 
/s/ Robert C. Trim 
      City Clerk       The foregoing ordinance, including all the provisions thereof, is hereby approved as to form and legality. 
/s/ Earl Black 
      City Attorney   
APPENDIX C - STANDARDS FOR DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF WATER AND SEWER SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS, DRAINAGE, STREET, SIDEWALK, DRIVEWAY AND TRAFFIC SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS[1] 
ORDINANCE NO. 510 
    AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING CITY STANDARDS FOR DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF WATER AND SEWER SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS, DRAINAGE, STREET, SIDEWALK, DRIVEWAY AND TRAFFIC SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS FOR THE CITY OF GROVES; PROVIDING A PENALTY; PROVIDING FOR PUBLICATION BY PUBLISHING THE CAPTION ONLY; AND PROVIDING AN EFFECTIVE DATE 
    BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY OF GROVES: 
    SECTION 1: That there is hereby adopted and established standards for design and construction of water and sewer system improvements, drainage, street, sidewalk, driveway and traffic system improvements for The City of Groves; such standards for design and construction are fully set forth in Exhibit "A", attached hereto and made a part thereof, the same as if stated herein verbatim. 
    SECTION 2: Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined in any sum not to exceed $200.00. 
    SECTION 3: This ordinance shall be published for three (3) successive days in The News, the official newspaper of The City of Groves, within ten (10) days after the passage hereof. 
    SECTION 4: This ordinance shall be effective from and after its passage and publication of the caption only as required by the City Charter. 
    PASSED, APPROVED and ADOPTED by the City Council of The City of Groves at a regular meeting held on the 16 day of July, 1973. 
/s/ Sylvester Moore 
      Mayor   ATTEST: 
/s/ Robert C. Trim 
      City Clerk       The foregoing ordinance, including all the provisions thereof, is hereby approved as to form and legality. 
/s/ Earl Black 
      City Attorney   EXHIBIT "A" 
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS FOR ALL WATER AND SEWERAGE SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS, PUBLIC BUILDING IMPROVEMENTS AND OTHER GENERAL CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS 
1.  Texas Highway Department. 
    The City of Groves, Texas, hereby adopts the 1962 Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction as adopted by the State Highway Department of Texas, January 2, 1962, to be used to prepare specifications for specific projects to be accomplished in the City of Groves. All reference to the "Texas Highway Department" shall be deleted when preparing city standard specifications. 
2.  American Public Works Association. 
    The City of Groves, Texas, hereby adopts the "Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction", 1967 Edition. These standard specifications are to be used to prepare specifications of specific projects to be accomplished in the City of Groves, and will require updating and modification on a continuing basis to reflect conditions and requirements within this city. 
3.  American Water Works Association. 
    The AWWA prepared and published standard specifications for water and sewerage system operations, maintenance, construction and improvements and the City of Groves hereby recognizes the AWWA as an authority in this field, and approves the use of this organizations' standard specifications within the City of Groves on related projects and work. 
4.  Statement of policy. 
(a)  It is the intention of the city council of the City of Groves that the standard specifications of the above three recognized authorities be made available for use by the City of Groves on all types of work, projects, operation, and maintenance in water and sewer system improvements, public works, public buildings and other general construction projects. 
The respective department heads, i.e., director of public works, are charged with the responsibility to modify, adapt and keep on a current basis, these standard specifications for use by the city. Current editions of all specifications used by the city standard specifications will be kept on hand and clearly marked approved by the department head. These standard specifications (as changed by the city), shall be presented with and made a part of the formal plans and specifications for a project when it is presented for public approval by the city council. 
(b)  It is also adopted as a city policy that the departments of water and sewer, public works, and planning, are hereby charged with the maintenance of these standard specifications, and standard engineering drawings included herein as the "city standards" and are hereafter charged with the maintenance and updating of these "city standards" and the development of new standards in the future. 
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS FOR WATER SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS 
    The specifications shown below are considered to be the minimum standards required by the City of Groves for subdivision of land for residential, commercial and/or industrial development, for city force account projects, and for contracts let by the City of Groves and for the City of Groves by other governmental agencies. 
1.  Design criteria. 
All water lines shall be six (6) inches in diameter or larger and installed in a looped system for residential development. For multi-family, commercial and/or industrial development an eight (8) inch line with a looped system shall be required as a minimum. The director of public works may require larger diameter water lines where the engineering design dictates more volume due to consumption and/or fire protection demands. 
Fire hydrants are to be located as required by the State Fire Insurance Board and shall be equipped with valved "lead". The director of public works, city engineer, and the fire marshal shall approve the water line layout and fire hydrant locations for each development based upon consumption and protection requirements. Fire hydrants shall be placed from two (2) to four (4) feet behind curb lines with steamer connections running parallel with the street line. 
2.  Guidelines. 
The city will use as guidelines for water system installation, those requirements set out in the Texas State Department of Health book "Design Criteria for Water Systems." 
3.  Materials. 
The standard material for water line installation in the City of Groves shall be asbestos-cement pipe with cement lined cast iron fittings and valves. Concrete lined steel pipe or cast iron water lines will be specified for street, roadway, drainage ditch crossings where required by the city public works director. 
4.  Coordination with city. 
The water superintendent shall determine all special water meter locations, locations of points where taps will be made to the city's water system, the cost to the developer for any work to be performed by city forces and any other special requirements related to new development. The issuance of a building permit does not constitute an agreement by the city nor an acknowledgment of the city that water service can and will be provided a development. 
5.  Installation. 
Water lines will generally be located on the front of residential lots and in open areas of multifamily, commercial and/or industrial developments to provide good access to water meters, valves and fire hydrants. 
6.  Tests. 
Water mains shall be tested hydrostatically and evaluation of leakage made from time and pressures as follows: (1) 100 p.s.i. test for 24 hours, or (2) 125 p.s.i. test for 16 hours, or (3) 150 p.s.i. test for 8 hours, the high (150 p.s.i.) test being preferred. Bacteriological test shall be performed with city assistance in accordance with Texas State Department of Health requirements. Tests shall be performed without cost to the city. 
GUIDELINES FOR THE DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION, TESTING AND INSPECTION OF SANITARY SEWER SYSTEMS 
A.  Design. 
1.  Maximum depth of sewers. No main or trunk sanitary sewer line shall have a depth greater than 12 feet below average ground elevation through which the line passes, unless specifically permitted as a special condition to the plans and/or specifications for a particular project. Such special condition shall indicate that all factors of cost, service, and other pertinent engineering facts justify a line of greater depth. 
2.  Minimum depth of sewers. 
a.  No main or trunk sanitary sewer line shall have a depth of cover less than 3 feet below average ground elevation through which the line passes. 
b.  In the event local ground conditions exist, which prevent compliance with the above specified depth, a minimum depth of less than 3 feet may be used if approved by the superintendent of water and sewer. 
3.  Minimum size of sewers. Design of sanitary sewer mains shall be based on a flow capacity of 4500 gallons per acre per day, but in no case shall be of a size less than 8 inches. 
4.  Manholes. 
a.  Manholes shall be placed at all change ingrade or alignment and maximum spacing of manholes shall not exceed 400 feet under normal conditions. Should existing conditions such as street gutters, underground lines, etc., prevent specified spacing, a maximum spacing of 600 feet may be used if approved by superintendent of water and sewer. 
b.  All manholes shall conform to standards adopted and approved by the public works department; such standards to be attached to, and become a part of, these specifications. All manholes shall be coated inside with an acid resistant material; 1/8 inch epoxy, duracrete, or approved equal. 
c.  Sewer lines entering or leaving manholes shall be designed to snugly fit pre-formed or field-drilled openings in manholes. All openings through walls of manholes shall be coated with epoxy material specified above. 
5.  Detention time for sewerage. Detention time for sewerage on any new system to any existing lift station and/or sewer system shall not exceed one hour. In no case shall detention time exceed two hours from any new system to existing treatment plant without approval by the superintendent of water and sewer; unless another method is provided to prevent sewerage from becoming septic. 
6.  Joint deflection. Maximum joint deflection shall be in accordance with ASTM standards applicable to the type of pipe specified. 
B.  Materials. 
1.  No sanitary sewer line of concrete or Orangeburg, shall be acceptable to the city. The city reserves the right to accept or reject any type pipe and/or jointing material as it deems necessary for good construction. 
2.  Jointing material shall be in accordance with ASTM standards applicable to the type of pipe specified. 
3.  Inside diameters of sanitary sewer pipe shall be as indicated on plans and/or specifications within tolerances specified in ASTM standards applicable to the type of pipe specified. 
4.  The city reserves the right to reject any materials delivered to the job site in a damaged condition, or any material not complying with specifications. 
C.  Testing. 
1.  The city reserves the right to require contractors to submit alternate bids on sewer work based on the method of testing to be used. Alternate bids will be submitted on the following methods of testing. 
a.  Exfiltration and/or infiltration. 
b.  The City of Groves standard air test. The city may accept or reject any or all bids as it deems necessary. 
2.  Allowable exfiltration and infiltration rates on sanitary sewer lines being tested shall not exceed 200 gallons per inch of diameter per mile per day. Regardless of the method of testing required, no more than 1200 feet of pipe shall be installed under any one operation before testing. 
3.  If any section of line fails to meet required tests, contractor shall provide continuous photographs of entire section to determine areas where corrective work needs to be done to place the line in proper shape. 
4.  All exfiltration tests, if required, shall be performed under a line head of 6 feet to the top of the pipe. 
5.  Exfiltration and/or infiltration tests, if required, shall be performed upon the completion of each section as specified above under a method agreed upon by the city and contractor, but in no case shall be less than the 200 gallon basis. 
D.  Inspection. 
1.  All contracts for design, construction, inspecting and testing of sanitary sewer work entered into by the city shall designate responsibility for furnishing inspectors on the project. The number of inspectors, if furnished by the city's consulting engineers, shall be approved by the department of public works. 
2.  No major item of sanitary sewer work shall be performed under contract in the absence of a qualified inspector furnished by the city or their consultants. 
3.  All inspectors on sanitary sewer work, whether furnished by the city or their consultants, shall have had not less than three (3) years experience in the field of water and/or sewer line construction. 
4.  All work shall be performed in accordance with and as directed by the city engineer, director of public works and sewer superintendent. 
E.  Award of contract. 
1.  Prior to award of any contract, the city manager and staff shall review plans and procedures contract documents, etc., to determine adequacy of design and acceptability of proposed facility. 
2.  No contract shall be awarded by the city until such time as all permits, easements, or right-of-way necessary for construction have been acquired or are in the process of condemnation. 
3.  Any proposed easements to be secured by the city exempting previously platted subdivisions shall have the following minimum widths. 
a.  10 feet for any easement proposed to contain only one utility. 
b.  20 feet for any easement proposed to contain two or more utilities. 
F.  Plans and specifications. 
    Plans and specifications for sanitary sewer construction shall be approved by the public works department prior to presentation to city council for acceptance. 
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS FOR STREET CONSTRUCTION 
    Included herein are the Minimum Standard City of Groves Street Construction Standards and Specifications. 
1.  All streets constructed in Groves shall conform to the details and requirements shown on the "Standard Street Cross Sections" and the master street and highway plan for Groves, unless specifically changed and permitted herein. 
2.  All reinforced concrete pavements shall have minimum thickness of six (6) inches and shall be designed to support the traffic loads and conditions required by the master street plan for Groves. Reinforcing wire mesh of 6 gage by 6 gage or approved equivalent reinforcing bar steel shall be used as a minimum unless design requirements are higher. Standard pavement and joint details approved by the City of Groves shall be followed. A comprehensive strength of 3,000 pounds per square inch within 28 days is required for all concrete. The subgrade must be undisturbed native soil with a maximum of two (2) inches of compacted sand cushion below the concrete pavement. Curbs can be placed monolithically or by dowell anchor bars or pins. Curb design will follow existing city standard design, and shall be placed to provide a minimum grade of 0.20%. 
3.  Flexible base streets shall, when permitted in writing by the director of public works, conform to these requirements. The base shall be twenty-four (24) feet wide and eight (8) inches thick compacted to a 95% Proctor Density. The sub-base material shall be shaped, rolled and compacted to a 90% Proctor Density prior to placing any base material. Surface course and prime course of twenty-two (22) feet in width shall be applied during the year only between April and October. The transverse slope on the surface will be from one-fourth (1/4) to one-half (1/2) inch per foot. There will be an eight (8) foot shoulder provided between the edge of the base and ditch slope. Base material for flexible base streets can be sandshell admixture, crushed stone of proper gradation, blast furnace slag and sand-admixture or other materials meeting the Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, Texas Highway Department, adopted 1962. 
4.  Design of street section: 
a.  A residential street with a paved width of thirty-one (31) feet shall be used. 
b.  A secondary collector street with a paved width of thirty-seven (37) feet shall be used when serving three (3) or more thirty-one (31) foot residential streets or their equivalent. 
c.  Secondary collector street sections shall be required where connections are made to major streets and highways and at important entrance and exit routes for subdivisions. 
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS FOR DRAINAGE SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS 
[1.]  The specifications shown below are considered to be the minimum standards required by the City of Groves for subdivision of land for residential, commercial and/or industrial development, for city force account projects and for contracts let by the City of Groves and for the City of Groves by other governmental agencies. 
A.  Storm sewer facilities shall be designed in accordance with curves available from the director of public works and the city engineer. Special problem areas will require additional consideration as established by the director of public works and city engineer. 
B.  Inlets and leads shall be sized to provide adequate entry to other facilities. 
C.  Minimum lead size shall be 15" diameter and minimum slope for 15" lead shall be 0.25% and for 18" lead shall be 0.20%. 
D.  A minimum velocity in pipe flowing full or half full shall be 2.5 feet per second. 
E.  Roughness assumptions, Manning "n": 
(1)  Main ditches, "n" = 0.030 
(2)  Lateral ditches, "n" = 0.035 
(3)  Storm sewers, "n" = 0.013 
(4)  Concrete-lined ditches, "n" = 0.015 
2.  Design criteria-Drainage pump stations: 
A.  Pump station capacity=Comply with D. D. No. 7 and city engineering department. 
B.  Pump station design to balance power source to achieve approximately 50% electrical and 50% natural gas, diesel oil or gasoline-driven units. 
C.  Maximum use must be made of existing borrow areas in site selection of future pump station locations. 
3.  Construction criteria: 
A.  All reinforced concrete pipe shall meet the minimum requirements of the American Society for Testing Materials: "C-76", Reinforced Concrete Culvert Storm Drain and Sewer Pipe. No nonreinforced concrete pipe will be permitted except by special written permission of the director of public works and in no case will nonreinforced concrete pipe be permitted under roadways and/or pavements, adjacent to structure foundations and at depths greater than three (3) feet. Reinforced concrete pipe shall be considered to be the standard storm sewer construction material. 
B.  Precast concrete box pipe may be used when approved in writing by the director of public works, and supported by engineer testing data provided by the developer, contractor and/or owner. 
C.  Bridges, culverts, and all concrete work shall conform to minimum Texas Highway Department Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, adopted by the State Highway Department of Texas, January 2, 1962. 
D.  Corrugated metal pipe with special sizes, shapes and coatings, vitrified clay pipe (extra strength) and other materials for drainage structures may be used for special materials for special applications and shall have the written approval of the director of public works to be used within the City of Groves. 
4.  Other drainage design and specification requirements shall be submitted to the director of public works, who shall determine the standards and requirements for and by the City of Groves for a specific problem and/or project. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Appendix C of this volume contains the standards for design and construction of water and sewer system improvements, drainage, street, sidewalk, driveway and traffic system improvements for the City of Groves, Texas, being Ordinance No. 510, adopted July 16, 1973. The ordinance, including "Exhibit A" is included herein as enacted. The drawings and examples referred to herein are not included in this appendix but are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
 Absence of a history note following a particular section indicates that the section derives unchanged from Ordinance No. 510; conversely, a history note enclosed in parentheses following a section indicates that the section has been amended by the ordinance indicated in such history note. 

CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 
Note- This is a chronological and/or numerical listing of the laws of the municipality used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws and any omitted materials are not reflected in this table. 
Ordinance 
Number Date Article 
and/or 
Section Section 
This Code 9 6-18-53 1 2-1 20 8-27-53 1 10-16 10-17 2 10-18 10-26 3 10-19 10-22 4 10-20 5 10-23 6 10-21 7 10-24 8 10-25 10-27 25 10-22-53 1 3-12 34 3-11-54 1 27-3 35 3-25-54 2 19-1 19-5 3 19-6 4 19-1 5 19-8 19-11 6 19-3 7 19-9 62 10-28-54 9-13 66 12-1-54 1 2-2 66 11-23-54 2 2-3 68 2-10-65 App. A 70 3-14-55 1, 2 2-56 3 2-57 4 2-58 71 4-25-55 2 25-165 79 11-7-55 1, 2 16-13 3 16-14 84 12-19-55 1 27-16 4- 27-63- 7 27-66 8 27-62 10 27-67 11 27-68 12 27-69 27-70 88 3-26-56 1- 27-45 3 89 5-7-56 1 App. A 4a 2 App. A 3 90 5-21-56 1 22-2 108 6-3-57 2 28-1 3 28-2 5 28-20 118 11-4-57 5(c) 31-69 6(a) 31-72 6(c)- 31-73- (g) 31-77 6(f) 31-8 II 2 31-4 III 5 31-59 IV 1 31-315- 31-317 31-329 2 31-309- 31-313 3 31-314 4 31-319 5 31-318 6 31-320 31-324- 31-326 7 31-327 8 31-321 9 31-322 31-323 10 31-340 31-341 11 31-336 31-337 12 31-338 13 31-339 14 31-342 15 31-328 16 31-348- 31-352 17 31-359 18 31-360 19 31-366 20 31-369- 31-373 21 31-367 31-368 22 31-330 23 31-353 132 2-24-58 1 19-12 135 4-7-58 1 20-1 136 4-7-58 1 25-150 139 6-30-58 1 4-6 141 4-29-54 1 27-1 147 11-24-58 1 17-79 149 11-24-58 2 17-80- 17-82 3 17-84 150 11-24-58 1 2-44 3 2-45 2-46 4 2-48 2-49 5 2-47 151 1-6-59 1 17-1 2 17-14 3 17-48 4 17-49 6 17-16 17-17 17-27 17-28 8 17-18- 17-22 9 17-3 12 17-46 17-51 13- 17-52- 21 17-60 22 17-47 23 17-61 17-62 24 17-63 17-64 25- 17-65- 28 17-68 29 17-2 31 17-30 165 5-18-59 2 25-127 169 8-10-59 1 11-1 173 10-12-59 1 2-50 177 10-26-59 1 13-13 3 13-14- 13-16 4 13-17 13-18 183 12-21-59 1 5-12 2 5-15 3 5-15 5-16 7 5-14 192 3-14-60 1 17-15 2 17-29 3 17-31 4 17-23- 17-26 5 17-50 6 17-32- 17-35 195 3-14-60 2 6-18- 6-20 3 6-22 6-35 6-36 4 6-37- 6-39 6-41 5 6-34 6-38 6 6-4 7 6-2 8 6-5 198 1-25-60 1 5-30 2 5-31 5-32 3 5-32 198 5-9-60 1, 2 App. A 9 199 5-9-60 1 App. A 1 202 5-10-60 1 4-6 205 8-1-60 1 App. A 9 207 8-15-60 1 6-21 235 12-18-61 1 4-1 2 4-7 243 4-23-62 1 27-57 27-58 249 7-2-62 1 5-81 3 5-85 4 5-86 5-88 5 5-83 5-84 6 5-82 8 5-62 5-64 5-65 9 5-65 5-68 10 5-67 5-69 11 5-56 12 5-54 13 5-90 14 5-87 262 11-30-62 1 28-13 2 28-15 3 28-14 270 5-20-63 1 7-2 1(a) 7-5 2 7-3 7-4 3 7-10 4 7-5- 7-7 5 7-8 6 7-9 7 7-14 8 7-15 9 7-12 10 7-17 11 7-18 12 7-11 13 7-13 7-16 272 8-12-63 1 2-14- 2-23 4 2-28 273 8-12-63 3 2-24- 2-27 286 2-10-64 1 21-93 2 21-96 3 21-106 4 21-108 21-109 5 21-112 6 21-113 7 21-111 8 21-114 9(a) 21-97 21-98 9(b) 21-99 9(c) 21-100 10 21-115 11 21-107 288 3-23-64 1 App. A 9A 289 3-27-64 1 3-26 2 3-27 3-28 3 3-29 289A 4-6-64 1 App. A 5 291 4-20-64 1 22-48 2 22-49 296 6-29-64 1 16-23 2 19-2 3, 4 16-27 5 16-25 300 9-1-64 1 21-128 3 21-129 4 21-130 308 11-16-64 1 22-60 2 22-61 3-5 22-62 6 22-64 7-9 22-63 10 22-64 11 22-65 309 2-8-65 1 10-1 2 10-3 312 4-5-65 1.1 31-1 1.2 31-2 1.4 31-3 2.1 31-6 2.2 31-7 3.1 31-21 31-23 31-24 31-26 3.2- 31-27- 3.6 31-31 4.1 31-42- 31-44 4.2- 31-45- 4.4 31-47 5.1 31-58 5.2 31-59 5.3 31-61- 31-63 5.4 31-66 5.5 31-60 5.6 31-64 5.7 31-65 5.8 31-67 5.9 31-68 6.1 31-5 7.1 31-89 7.2 31-94 7.2a 31-90 7.3 31-92 7.4 31-93 7.5 31-91 7.6 31-96 7.6a 31-97 7.7 31-98 7.8 31-99 7.8a 31-100 7.8b 31-101 7.9- 31-302- 7.12 31-305 7.13 31-106 7.13a 31-107 7.14- 31-108- 7.19 31-113 7.26 31-95 8.2- 31-120- 8.8 31-126 8.9 31-127 8.9a 31-128 8.10 31-129 9.1- 31-135- 9.10 31-144 10.1- 31-150- 10.6 31-155 11.1- 13-161- 11.16 13-176 12.1- 31-182- 12.4 31-185 12.5 31-186 12.5a 31-187 12.6- 31-188- 12.11 31-193 13.1- 31-194- 13.3 31-196 14.1 31-202 14.1a 31-203 14.2 31-204 14.3 31-205 15.1- 31-211- 15.11 31-221 16.1- 31-227- 16.8 31-234 17.1- 31-240- 17.20 31-259 18.1- 31-265- 18.11 31-275 18.12 31-277 18.13 31-276 19.1 31-70 19.2 31-71 20.1- 31-283- 20.6 31-288 20.8 31-289 21.1- 31-295- 21.4 31-298 22.2 31-78 22.4 31-9 22.5 31-10 313 4-19-65 1 4-5 325 9-13-65 1 10-17 326 9-13-65 1 5-43 5-44 327 9-20-65 1 27-28 328 9-20-65 1 12-1 2 12-4- 12-6 12-8 12-10 3 12-12 4-6 12-14 7 12-2 9 12-15 10 12-16 11 12-13 12 12-7 13 12-12 14 27-27 337 12-1-65 2 25-118 25-121 3 25-119 345 5-31-66 1 25-96 346 8-31-66 101 29-1 102- 29-3- 107 29-8 201-209 29-2 301 29-20 29-21 303 29-23 304 29-22 304(a) 29-65 305 29-24 306 29-25 401 29-62 402 29-66 403(a) 29-64 403(b) 29-63 29-68 404 29-68 405 29-70 406 29-67 501 29-36 502A 29-37- 29-39 502B 29-40 503 29-41 504 29-51 504(a)(b) 29-48 504(c) 29-50 602 29-72 602(a) 29-73 602(b) 29-74 603 29-76 604 29-75 605 29-77 606- 29-78- 608 29-80 701 29-168 702- 29-171- 705 29-174 706 29-170 707- 29-175- 710 29-178 801 29-92 801(a) 29-91 802 29-93 803(a)(b) 29-136 803(c) 29-145 803(d) 29-142 803(e) 29-143 803(f) 29-150 803(g) 29-141 803(h) 29-146 803(i)- 29-137- (k) 29-139 803(l) 29-147 803(m) 29-149 803(n) 29-140 803(o) 29-148 803(p) 29-144 804 29-162 804(A) 29-156 804(B)(a) 29-157 804(B)(b) 29-158 804(B)(c) 29-159 29-160 804(B)(d) 29-161 902 29-107 29-129 902(a)- 29-108- (k) 29-118 902(l) 29-121 902(m) 29-119 902(n) 29-122 902(o) 29-120 902(p)- 29-123- (u) 29-128 902(w) 29-130 903 29-94 904(a) 29-95 904(b) 29-95 904(c) 29-95 904(d)- 29-96- (g) 29-99 905 29-169 908 29-101 1002 29-71 353 9-19-66 1 27-1 2 27-14 3 27-15 27-18- 27-20 27-23 27-25 27-26 3(d) 27-17 4 27-14 5 27-24 27-29- 27-32 356 9-19-66 1 4-6 362 2-6-67 1 14-37 2 14-38 14-39 3 14-40 4 14-41 5 14-42 14-43 363 2-20-67 1 28-19 3 28-17 4 28-16 5 28-18 364 2-20-67 1 22-22 2 22-24 22-25 3 22-23 4 22-26 22-27 5 22-31- 22-33 6 22-34 7 22-36 22-37 8 22-28 22-30 9 22-29 10 22-35 369 8-7-67 1 27-27(a) 378 11-13-67 1 28-19 2 28-15.1 380 12-7-67 1 App. A, § 3(11) 383 1-8-68 1 2-66 2 2-65 3-6 2-67-2-70 384 2-5-68 1 29-118 387 4-1-68 1 2-4 388 4-1-68 1, 2 26-1, 26-2 3 26-11 4 26-4 5 26-9 6 26-7 7 26-13 8 26-8 9 26-10 10 26-5 11 26-14 12 26-12 13 26-6 14 26-14 15 26-3 393 8-19-68 1 Adopting Ordinance 2(3)       Rpld 4-6(b), (h), (i) 2(4) 5-15 2(5) 5-47 2(6) 19-2 2(7) 19-4 2(8) 19-6(h) 397 9-16-68 1 27-29(a) 398 9-16-68 1 27-27 404 12-9-68 1 27-29(a) 405 12-9-68 1 27-28 406 12-9-68 1 5-15 409 3-17-69 1-3 28-21 410 3-31-69 1 6-2 412 4-14-69 1 2-15 2 29-66 3 29-91 4 29-124 413 5-12-69 1       Rpld 2-4 414 5-28-69 1 27-27 418 9-8-69 1-6 5-96-5-101 425 12-22-69 1 31-68 2 31-74 3 31-99 4-6 31-114-31-116 7 31-128 8 31-130 9 31-309-31-427 426 2-9-70 1 28-13 428 4-13-70 1-3 22-71-22-73 429 5-11-70 1       Rpld 2-50(b) 430 5-11-70 1 App. A, § 15 2 App. A, § 19 431 6-8-70 App. A 439 9-28-70 1 27-30 443 1-4-71 1 App. A, (8-605) 2 App. A, 9-1700 3       Rpld App. A, 9-1800 (9-1801)-(9-1806) 4 App. A, (10-501) 5       Rpld App. A, 10-800 (10-801)-(10-805)       Added App. A, 10-800 (10-801)-(10-812) 6 App. A, (10-813) 444 2-1-71 1 5-54(b) 2 5-54 (note) 445 2-15-71 1-3 25-12.1(a) (e) 446 3-1-71 1 4-6(h) 453 8-16-71 1-3 10-6(a)-(c) 454 8-30-71 1 12-6(c) 2 12-6 (note) 455 8-30-71 1, 2 29-102(a), (b) 459 9-27-71 1 29-91 2 29-91 (note) 464 12-2-71 1 28-21 465 12-7-71 1 4-6(h.1) 466 12-20-71 1 6-3 2 6-18 3 6-22 469 2-14-72 1 14-40(b) 2       Rpld 14-40(c) 3 14-40 (note) 471 2-28-72 1 27-32 472 2-28-72 1 5-63(a) 2 5-84 3 5-63 (note) 5-84 (note) 473 2-28-72 1 6-3, 6-18, 6-22 2 6-3 3 6-18 4 6-22 5 6-3 (note) 6-18 (note) 6-22 (note) 475 3-13-72 1       Added 4-6(i) 476 4-10-72 1 29-118 477 4-24-72 1 4-9 478 5-9-72 1 28-13 2       Added 28-22 rnbd as 28-15.2 3 30-1 4       Added 30-2 482 7-31-72 1 27-24 488 10-9-72 1 27-27 489 10-9-72 2-48 490 10-9-72 1 App. A, § 7-101 2 App. A, § 8-400: §§ 8-401-8-406 3 App. A, § 8-502(b) 4 App. A, § 505 5 App. A, § 8-602(b) 6 App. A, § 8-602(c) 7 App. A, § 8-605 8 App. A, § 8-705(a) 9 App. A, § 8-705 10 App. A, § 10-501 11 App. A, § 10-602 12 App. A, § 10-603 13 App. A, § 10-604 14 App. A, § 10-605 15 App. A, § 10-600 16 App. A, § 10-805 17 App. A, § 10-806(4)(D) 18 App. A, § 10-806(7)(A) 19 App. A, § 10-806(12) 20 App. A, § 10-807(3)(F) 21 App. A, § 10-900, §§ 10-901-10-904 495 11-20-72 1 Added 23-5 498 12-18-72 1, 2 Added 23-6(a), (b) 499 2-12-73 1 6-3(2)(a) 500 2-26-73 1 23-6(b) 501 5-7-73 1 2-29 2 2-30 502 5-21-73 1 24-147 504 6-18-73 1 5-48 2 5-63 507 7-2-73 1-5 16-51-16-55 509 7-16-73 1-19 App. B 510 7-16-73 1-4 App. C 514 8-31-73 1-3 27-27-27-29 516 9-24-73 2-49 519 10-8-73 1       Rpld 4-6(h.1) 523 11-19-73 1 28-1 2 28-13 3 28-19.1 4 28-19.2 5 28-18 6       Rpld 28-20 524 1       Rpld 31-1-31-10, 31-21-31-31, 31-42-31-47, 31-58-31-78, 31-89-31-116, 31-120-31-130, 31-135-31-144, 31-150-31-155, 31-161-31-176, 31-182-31-196, 31-202-31-205, 31-211-31-221, 31-227-31-234, 31-240-31-259, 31-265-31-277, 31-283-31-289, 31-295-31-298, 31-309-31-332, 31-337-31-343, 31-349-31-351, 31-357, 31-363- 31-366, 31-372- 31-375, 31-381-31-389, 31-395-31-400, 31-406-31-411, 31-417-31-423, 31-429-31-431, 31-437 2-27       Added 31-1-31-5 525 11-19-73 1 30-1 2 30-2(a) 3 30-2(b) 4       Rnbd 30-2(a), (b) as 30-2(c), (d) 526 12-17-73 1 27-25 2 27-27 3, 4 27-28, 27-29 5 27-32 527 12-17-73 1       Rpld 25-12.1 (a)-(c) 528 12-17-73 1 25-100(b) 529 1-14-74 1 4-6(j) 530 3-11-74 1 4-6(k) 531 3-11-74 1       Rpld 4-6(j) 532 3-25-74 1 4-6(m) 533 3-25-74 1 4-6(l) 534 3-25-74 1, 2 28-21(4) 535 3-25-74 1 App. A, § 10-806(4)(D)(b) 2 App. A, § 10-807(3)(F)(b) 3 App. A, § 10-806(4)(D) (b), § 10-807(3)(F)(b) (notes) 537 4-8-74 1 27-25 538 4-8-74 1 5-13 2 5-19 3 5-81 4 5-89 5 5-90 6, 7 5-93, 5-94 8 5-2 544 8-26-74 1 27-7 550 11-4-74 1       Rpld 4-6(1) 554 11-18-74 1 28-13 555 11-18-74 1 23-6(a) 556 11-18-74 1 4-7 559 3-10-75 1       Added 5-3 560 3-24-75 1 27-16 561 4-7-75 1 25-170 562 4-21-75 1, 2 6-1 3 6-3 563 5-5-75 1 10-16 564 5-5-75 1 2-18 565 5-5-75 1 25-87 567 6-2-75 1-3 2-39-2-41 568 6-30-75 1-3       Added 27-57-27-59 4       Rpld 27-57-27-70 5, 6       Added 27-60, 27-61 570 8-11-75 1 4-6(n) 571 8-11-75 1, 2 29-36, 29-37 3 29-51 4 29-63 5, 6 29-66, 29-67 7 29-91 8 29-100 9 29-103 574 8-25-75 1 27-28 579 11-3-75 1 App. A, § 8-205 2 App. A, § 8-302 3, 4 App. A, §§ 9-1302, 9-1303 5 App. A, § 10-501 6 App. A, § 10-812 7 App. A, § 10-903 581 12-16-75 2 4-9 582 12-16-75 2 4-7 585 1-26-76 2 4-7 586 1-26-76 2-4 4-9 588 3-22-76 1 4-6(o) 591 5-17-76 1 App. A, § 11- 100.01 596 8-9-76 1 27-27 597 8-9-76 1 23-6(a) 600 9-20-76       Rpld 4-6(i) 601 10-4-76 1 4-6(o) 606 11-1-76 1       Rpld 4-6(e) 607 11-1-76 1 29-157 2 29-158 3       Rpld 29-162 611 1-10-77 1 4-6(p) 626 7-25-77 1 App. A, § 8-205 2 App. A, § 9-1700 3 App. A, § 10-501 4-6 App. A, §§ 10-601-10-603 7 App. A, § 10-604(6) 8 App. A, § 10-903(6) 9 App. A, § 10-903(10) 629 8-22-77 1 27-29 630 8-22-77 1 27-28 631 8-22-77 1 27-27 632 8-22-77 1 27-59 633 8-22-77 1-3 25-107 635 9-19-77 Art. 1, §§ A-D 101/2-1-101/2-4 Art. 2 101/2-5 Art. 3, §§ A-G 101/2-6-101/2-12 Art. 4, §§ A-D 101/2-20-101/2-23 Art. 5, §§ A-C 101/2-30-101/2-32 Art. 6, § A 101/2-13 637 10-8-77 1 23-13 2, 3       Rpld 28-15, 28-15.1 4       Rpld 28-16 5 28-17 6 28-19 7       Rpld 28-19.2 8       Rpld 28-21 638 10-31-77 1 23-5(b)(1) 640 12-12-77 1-6 28-2 644 1-9-78 1 App. A, § 8-805 2 § 8-605 648 2-20-78 1-6 App. B, § 13.1 650 6-12-78 1 12-13 651 6-26-78 1 4-6(g) 653A 8-7-78 1 23-6(a) 658 8-21-78 1 2-29 661 10-2-78 1 4-6(r) 663 11-13-78 1 App. A, § 6-105 2 App. A, § 7-101 3 App. A, § 8-502(c) 4 App. A, § 8-505 5-7 App. A, §§ 8-600- 8-800 8       Rpld App. A, §§ 9-300, 9-400 9 App. A, § 9-800 10 App. A, § 14-102 11 App. A, § 14-200 12       Rpld App. A, § 14-300 667 4-2-79 1 25-152.1 675 8-6-79 1 27-27 676 8-6-79 1 27-29 680 9-17-79 1 23-7 684 10-1-79 1 2-30 688 11-12-79 1       Rpld 4-6(r) 694 2-4-80 1       Added 4-6(r) 695 2-18-80 1 4-6(s) 696 2-18-80 1       Rpld 4-6(r) 698 3-31-80 1, 2 30-1, 30-2 699 3-31-80 1       Rpld 28-1 2, 3 28-13, 28-14       Rpld 28-15.2, 28-17-28-19.1 700 3-31-80 1, 2 32-1, 32-2 701 3-31-80 1-4 31-1-31-4 702 3-31-80 2-80 27-50-27-56.22 703 3-31-80 3, 8-12 27-47-27-49 7 27-28.1 704 5-12-80 1-5 App. A, 8-800 705 6-23-80 1 23-6(a) 706 6-23-80 1 23-7 707 7-7-80 1-7 33-1-33-7 711 7-21-80 1 13-16 716 9-15-80 1 4-6(n) 720 9-29-80 1 4-6(r) 723 10-13-80 1 5-47 2 5-63 724 10-27-80 1 27-28 726 11-24-80 1 28-14(g) 728 11-24-80 1 27-56.9 2       Rpld 27-56.10 3, 4 27-56.11, 27-56.12 729 11-24-80 1 30-2(b) 732 12-22-80 1       Rpld 4-6(k) 733 12-22-80 1 4-6(r) 734 12-22-80 1 4-6(o) 735 12-22-80 1 25-129 736 1-19-81 1 4-6(k) 738 2-2-81 1 4-6(b) 739 2-2-81 1 4-6(r) 740 3-2-81 1 4-6(o) 741 4-13-81 1 29-66 2 29-91 3 29-99 743 7-6-81 1 27-24 2 27-32 745 7-20-81 1 App. B, § 4 2 App. B, § 5(C)(2) 3 App. B, § 5(D)(1) 4 App. B, § 6(A)(3) 749 8-3-81 1 27-27 756 10-12-81 1 27-16 2 27-59 761 11-23-81 1 4-6(e) 764 1-18-82 1 21-41 765 1-18-82 1       Rpld 4-6(r) 766 3-15-82 1       Added 4-6(r) 767 3-29-82 1       Added 4-6(t) 774 7-1-82 1-4 27-87- 27-90 780 8-16-82 1 App. B, § 13.1(title) 781 8-16-82 1 101/2-5 2 101/2-7 3 101/2-21(e) 4 101/2-31(d) 784 9-13-82 1 App. B, § 13.2(A)(note) 785 9-13-82 1 27-14 2 27-27 796 11-8-82 1 12-13 2 12-13.1 802 12-20-82 1       Rpld 4-6(e) 83-01 1-31-83 1 11-32 83-03 3-14-83 1 5-4 83-04 3-14-83 1 Ch. 29, Art. III Div. 2(note) 83-05 3-14-83 1 28-13 2 28-14(b) 83-06 3-14-83 1 31-1 2 31-2(d) 3 31-3 4 31-5 83-07 3-14-83 1-6 29-36- 29-41 7-10       Rpld 29-47- 29-50 11 29-52 12 29-63 13 29-66(f) 14 29-91 15 29-99 16 29-103 17 29-120 18 29-125 19       Rpld 29-127 20 29-129 83-11 8-1-83 1 27-29 83-12 8-1-83 1 27-28 83-14 8-15-83 1 16-56 83-15 8-29-83 1 28-14(b)(b) 83-18 9-26-83 1 33-6 2, 3 33-8, 33-9 83-22 11-7-83 1 App. A, § 8-800 (8-805)(c) 83-24 12-5-83 1-3 241/2-21- 241/2-23 4-8 241/2-41- 241/2-45 9-13 241/2-24- 241/2-28 84-03 1-30-84 1, 2       Rpld App. A, §§ 9-1400, 9-1600 84-04 1-30-84 1 22-60 84-11 7-16-84 1       Rpld 26-1- 26-15       Added 26-1- 26-5, 2-10, 26-11, 26-15 84-12 7-16-84 1 App. A, § 8-205 2 App. A, § 8-302 3 App. A, § 8-306 4 App. A, § 8-406(c) 5 App. A, § 8-505 6 App. A, § 8-506(c) 7 App. A, § 9-101 8 App. A, § 9-102 9 App. A, § 9-103 10 App. A, § 9-104 11 App. A, § 9-700 12 App. A, § 10-501 13 App. A, § 10-600 14 App. A, § 10-800 15 App. A, § 10-900 (title) 16, 17 App. A, § 10-900 (10-901), (10-902) 18 App. A, § 10-900 (10-903)(intro.) 19 App. A, § 10-900 (10-903)(3) 20 App. A, § 10-900 (10-903)(5) 21 App. A, § 10-900 (10-904) 22 App. A, § 16-100 84-13 7-30-84 1-2 App. B, §§ 9, 10 3 App. B, § 13(B)(1)(b) 84-15 8-13-84 1 27-25(a) 84-23 12-17-84 1(a) 4-7(b) 1(b) 4-9 3 4-7(b), 4-9 85-01 1-14-85 1       Rpld 4-6(a), (f) 85-03 2-11-85 1 6-3(2)(a) 85-23 12-16-85 1       Rpld 4-6(s) 86-06 2-24-86 1 28-13, 28-14 86-07 2-24-86 1 29-47- 29-49 2 29-66 3 29-91 86-08 2-24-86 1 30-1, 30-2 86-09 2-24-86 1 31-1- 31-4 86-10 2-24-86 1 32-1, 32-2 86-11 2-24-86 1 101/2-1 2 101/2-31(e) 86-12 2-24-86 1 2-29 2 2-30 86-13 2-24-86 1       Rpld 22-48, 22-49 86-15 4-21-86 1 10-1, 10-2, 10-10- 10-13 86-17 6-2-86 1 3-26 86-18 6-16-86 1 App. A, § 8-505 2 App. A, § 8-705 86-21 7-28-86 1       Rpld 4-6(r) 86-32 12-15-86 1       Rpld 7-1- 7-18 86-33 12-15-86 1-8, 10 91/2-1- 91/2-9 87-01 1-12-87 1       Rpld 4-6(k) 87-03 2-23-87 1 101/2-1- 101/2-13 101/2-20- 101/2-23 101/2-30- 101/2-34 87-04 3-9-87 1 1-5 87-05 3-9-87 1       Rpld 2-1 2, 3 2-44, 2-45 4 2-47 5 2-50(a) 6 2-57 87-06 3-9-87 1 4-5 2 4-8 3       Rpld 4-10- 4-18 87-07 3-9-87 1, 2 5-95, 5-96 87-08 3-9-87 1 Ch. 8(title) 8-1, 8-2 2       Rpld 8-3 87-09 3-9-87 1       Rpld 9-10 87-10 3-9-87 1       Rpld 11-13- 11-21 87-11 3-9-87 1 16-1 2, 3 16-10, 16-11 4 16-22 5       Rpld 16-22- 16-9, 16-12, 16-17- 16-21, 16-23, 16-24, 16-26, 16-27, 16-29, 16-30 87-12 3-9-87 1       Rpld 19-2 87-13 3-9-87 1       Rpld 20-2 2 20-3, 20-4 87-14 3-9-87 1       Rpld 21-58, 21-99, 21-128- 21-130 2       Rnbd 21-131 as 16-54.1 87-15 3-9-87 1 23-5(a)(1)-(4) 2       Rpld 23-2- 23-4, 23-5(b)(3) 87-16 3-9-87 1       Rpld 24-8, 24-13, 24-14 87-17 3-9-87 1(1) 25-1 1(2)-(4)       Rpld 25-8- 25-10 1(5)       Rpld 25-12 1(6)       Rpld 25-14 1(7)       Rpld 25-16(a) 1(8)       Rpld 25-17 1(9), (10)       Rpld 25-29 25-30 1(11)       Rpld 25-32 1(12)       Rpld 25-33(a) 1(13)       Rpld 25-34 1(14)       Rpld 25-49 1(15)-(17)       Rpld 25-51- 25-53 1(18)       Rpld 25-55- 25-57 1(19), (20)       Rpld 25-59, 25-60 1(21)       Rpld 25-72 1(22)       Rpld 25-73- 25-75 1(23)       Rpld 25-76 1(24)       Rpld 25-78 1(25)       Rpld 25-80 1(26)       Rpld 25-83 1(27)       Rpld 25-84(b) 1(28)-(30)       Rpld 25-85- 25-87 1(31)-(32)       Rpld 25-94, 25-95 87-17 3-9-87 1(33)-(35)       Rpld 25-104- 25-106 1(36), (37)       Rpld 25-119, 25-120 1(38), (39)       Rpld 25-125, 25-126 1(40)       Rpld 25-128 1(41)       Rpld 25-151 1(42), (43)       Rpld 25-152.1, 25-153 1(44)       Rpld 25-165(a) (1)-(6) 1(45), (46)       Rpld 25-167, 25-168 1(47)       Rpld 25-171 1(48), (49)       Rpld 25-200, 25-201 1(50)       Rpld 25-203 87-18 3-9-87 1 29-91 2, 3 29-99, 29-100 4       Rpld 29-103 5-7 29-107- 29-109 8-10 29-111- 29-113 11, 12 29-117, 29-118 13 29-121 14 29-128 87-19 3-9-87 1 4-6(u) 87-24 5-18-87 1 App. A, § 10-501 87-26 6-15-87 1       Rpld 4-6(d) 87-30 8-10-87 1 27-27 87-31 8-10-87 1 27-28 87-35 9-21-87 1-3 8-4 87-37 10-5-87 1 28-14(j) 87-40 12-14-87 1       Rpld 4-6(p) 88-01 2-8-88 1 4-6(a) 88-02  3-21-88 1       Rpld 4-6(q) 88-03  4- 4-88 1       Rpld 4-6(b) 88-04  4-18-88 1 App. A, § 10-501 88-06  5- 2-88 1 14-4 88-08  5-16-88 1 App. A, § 9-1600 88-09  6-13-88 1 4-6(v) 88-10  6-13-88 1-5 1-5 88-12  7-11-88 1 10-1 88-13  7-11-88 1 28-13 2 28-14(k) 88-14  7-11-88 1 31-1 2, 3 31-2(a), (e) 4 31-3 88-15  7-11-88 1 32-1 2 32-2(a) 88-17  7-25-88 1       Rpld 4-6(c) 88-19  8- 8-88 1 4-6(w) 88-27 10-31-88 1-3 25-183 88-29 12-13-88 1-7 6-1-6-7 8-11 6-18-6-21 12, 13 6-34, 6-35 14 6-38 15, 16 6-41, 6-42 89-02  2- 6-89 1       Rpld 4-6(t) 89-04  5- 1-89 1 App. A, § 8-205 89-05  6-26-89 1 23-5(b)(1) 89-08  8- 7-89 1-5 11-32-11-36 89-10  8-21-89 1 27-27 89-16 10-30-89 1 29-91 2, 3 29-102, 29-103 4       Rpld 29-126 5 29-136-29-139 90-02  4-16-90 1       Rpld 4-6(w) 90-04  4-30-90 1 4-6(t) 90-05  6-11-90 1 12-1 2 12-14 90-08  8- 6-90 1 4-5 90-11  8- 9-90 1 27-27 90-18 11-12-90 1 12-13(b) 91-01  1-21-91 1 5-5 91-02  3- 4-91 1 27-27(d) 91-03  3- 4-91 1 12-20 91-13  8- 5-91 1 4-6(s) 91-15  8- 5-91 1 27-29 91-16  8- 5-91 1 27-28(a) 2 27-28.1 91-19  9-16-91 1 17-81 2 17-84 92-02  3-16-92 1 App. A, 
§ 8-505 2 App. A, 
§ 8-605 (Mo.)  6-22-92 25-147 92-04  7- 6-92 1       Rpld 21-35, 
21-38-21-40 2 21-36 3 21-37 4 21-41 5 21-42 92-09  8-31-92 1 27-29 92-10  8-31-92 1 27-28(a) 2 27-28.1(a)(1) 92-13 11- 9-92 1 28-14(f)(a) 93-03  3-15-93 1 27-47(b), (e) 93-04  4-26-93 1-3 App. A, §§ 8-505, 
8-705, 8-805 93-05  5-24-93 1 5-63(b) 93-08  7-19-93 1       Rpld 18-1, 18-2 93-10  8- 2-93 1 27-27(a)-(c) 93-14  8-16-93 1-19 17-91-17-109 93-15  8-30-93 1       Rpld 29-19-29-25       Added 29-19-29-30 2 29-36, 29-37, 
29-47 3 29-91, 29-95 4       Rpld 29-123, 
29-130       Added 29-126 5       Rpld 29-168-29-178 94-01  2-28-94 1 25-147 94-06  8- 1-94 1 27-29 94-07  8- 1-94 1 27-28 2 27-28.1 94-11  9-26-94 1-4       Added 16-71-16-74 94-13  9-26-94 1 4-6 94-15 11-10-94 1       Rpld 29-36-29-41, 
29-47-29-49       Added 29-36-29-46, 
29-50, 29-51 94-16 12- 5-94 1 5-15 95-07  7-31-95 1, 2       Added 22-12 95-08  8-28-95 1 27-28(a) 2 27-28.1(a) 95-12 10- 9-95 1-4       Added 241/2-29 95-13 11- 6-95 1 27-25(a) 95-15 11-20-95 1 App. B, § 13.2(B)(2), 
(C)(3), (D)(4) 95-17 12-18-95 1       Added 27-34, 27-35 96-02  2-12-96 1-12       Added 93/4-1-93/4-12 96-03  3-25-96 1       Added 27-4, 27-5 96-11  9-23-96 2-7       Added 31-2.1 96-12  9-23-96 1-12       Added 27-101-27-112 96-13  9-23-96 1-4       Added 27-121-27-124 97-07  8-25-97 1 27-29 97-18 12-29-97 1 4-6 98-01  2- 9-98 1 28-13, 28-14 98-02  2- 9-98 1 29-28 2 29-36-29-43 3 29-66 4 29-91, 2-95, 
2-96, 29-125       Rpld 29-103 98-03  2-9-98 1 31-1-31-4 98-04  2-9-98 1 32-1, 32-2 98-11  8-31-98 1 App. A, § 10-500 98-17 11- 2-98 1 27-24 2 27-32 3       Added 27-36 99-01  1-25-99 1-4 16-71-16-74 99-02  1-25-99 1, 2       Added 16-32 99-04  4-19-99 1 93/4-3 2 93/4-4(2)d. 99-05  4-19-99 1       Rpld 12-1-12-20 2       Added 12-1-12-18 99-06  4-19-99 1       Rpld 27-27(c)       Rnbd 27-27(d)       as 27-27(c) 99-09  7-12-99 1       Rpld 14-37-14-43       Added 14-37-14-45 99-12  8-23-99 1       Added 7-1-7-12 99-16  8-31-99 1-3       Added 8-5 00-03  3- 6-00 1       Added 2-31 00-04  3- 6-00 1       Added 9-15 00-06  4- 3-00 1 4-6 00-08  6-12-00 1 27-56.6 2 27-56.19 00-11  9-18-00 1 17-79-17-85 00-15  9-28-00 1, 2 27-27 3, 4 27-28 5 27-28.1 6, 7 27-29 00-19 11-13-00 1 28-14 00-20 11-13-00 1 12-10 2 12-15 01-01  2-12-01 1, 2 4-6 01-02  4- 9-01 1 App. A, § 8-505 2 App. A, § 8-605 3 App. A, § 18-100 01-03  4- 9-01 1       Rpld 21-52-21-59 21-65-21-73 01-05  7- 2-01 1 App. B, § 4 01-12  9-24-01 1       Rpld 21-79-21-82 01-16 12-17-01 1-4 16-71-16-74 01-17 12-17-01 1       Added 01-19 12-17-01 1 28-13, 28-14 2       Added 28-22, 28-23 3       Added 28-24, 28-25 02-01  1-14-02 1       Rpld 27-57-27-61       Added 27-57-27-59 02-02  3-11-02 1       Added 22-74-22-85 02-10  9-19-02 1 27-28 2 27-28.1 3 27-29 03-01  4- 7-03 1-3       Added 8-6 03-03  6-16-03 1 App. A, §§ 302, 305 2 App. A, § 8-505 3       Added App. A, § 9-105 App. A, § 9-701 4 App. A, § 10-501 03-05  8-25-03 1       Added 28-26-28-33 03-06  8-25-03 1 28-14 2 28-23 04-01  1-12-04 1 12-6, 12-9 12-12 2 27-27 04-03  6-28-04 1 12-12 04-05  8-23-04 1       Rpld 93/4-1-93/4-12 2       Added 93/4-1-93/4-12 04-10  9-20-04 1 27-27 04-11  9-20-04 1       Added 27-28.2 04-12  9-20-04 1       Added 27-25.1 04-13 12-13-04 1       Rpld 29-1-29-8 29-19-29-30 29-36-29-43 29-50, 29-51 29-62-29-80 29-91-29-102 29-107-29-129 29-136-29-139 29-156-29-161       Added 29-1-29-39 05-01  1-10-04 1       Rpld 16-71-16-74       Added 16-71-16-76 05-03  5- 2-05 1-6       Added 18-1-18-6 05-04  5- 2-05 1 14-1 05-05  6-27-05 1 App. B, § 13.2 05-10  9-19-05 1 27-27 05-11  9-19-05 1 27-28.2 06-03  1-23-06 1-4       Rpld 27-121-27-124       Added 27-121-27-123 06-04  1-23-06 1, 2       Rpld 7-1-7-12       Added 7-1-7-12 06-11  6-12-06 1       Added 16-80-16-83 06-16  9-18-06 1 27-27 06-17  9-18-06 1 27-28.2 06-18  9-18-06 1 27-28 06-19  9-18-06 1 27-29 06-20 10-16-06 1 2-16, 2-18 06-22 12-11-06 1 5-63 2       Rpld 5-81-5-95       Added 5-81-5-95 2007-03  1-22-07 1 App. A, § 9-800 2007-10  5-14-07 1       Added 27-16(c) 2007-11  5-14-07 1 13-13 2 13-15 2007-15  8-20-07 1       Rpld Ch. 101/2, Arts. I-III Art. I, 
§§ A-D       Added Ch. 101/2, Art. I, §§ 101/2-1-101/2-4 Art. II       Added Ch. 101/2, Art. I, §§ 101/2-5 Art. III, 
§§ A-G       Added Ch. 101/2, Art. II, §§ 101/2-21-101/2-27 Art. IV, 
§§ A-D       Added Ch. 101/2, Art. III, §§ 101/2-51-101/2-54 Art. V, 
§§ A-D, 
E       Added Ch. 101/2, Art. IV, §§ 101/2-76-101/2-80 2007-22 11-12-07 1       Added 16-52(n) 2008-04  1-21-08 1 Ch. 16, Art. IV, §§ 16-71-16-76 2008-07  3- 3-08 1 App. A, § 7-100 2 App. A, § 8-200(title) App. A, § 8-202 App. A, § 8-205 3 App. A, § 8-302 App. A, § 8-305       Added App. A, § 8-307 4 App. A, § 8-700(title) 5 App. A, § 8-800 6 App. A, Art. IX 7 App. A, Art. X 8 App. A, Art. XVI 2008-17  9-29-08 1 27-27 2008-18  9-29-08 1 27-28.2 2008-19  9-29-08 1 27-28 2008-20  9-29-08 1 27-29 2008-22 10-13-08 1 Ch. 29, Arts. I-VII 2008-23 10-13-08 1       Rpld Ch. 30, §§ 30-1, 30-2       Added Ch. 30, Arts. I-V 2009-02  2- 2-09 1 4-6 (title)       Added 4-6(x) 2, 3       Added 4-10 2009-03  3- 2-09 1       Rpld Ch. 10, Art. I, §§ 10-1, 10-2       Added Ch. 10, Art. I, §§ 10-1, 10-2 2009-04  3- 2-09 1       Rpld Ch. 28, Art. II, §§ 28-13, 28-14       Added Ch. 28, Art. II, §§ 28-13, 28-14 2       Rpld Ch. 28, Art. III, §§ 28-22, 28-23       Added Ch. 28, Art. III, §§ 28-22, 28-23 2009-05  3- 2-09 1       Rpld Ch. 14, Art. II, §§ 14-37-14-45       Added Ch. 14, Art. II, §§ 14-37-14-45 2009-06  3-16-09 1       Added 5-20-5-22 2009-07  3-16-09 1       Added 27-6 2009-08  3-16-09 1       Rpld Ch. 31, §§ 31-1-31-5       Added Ch. 31, §§ 31-1, 31-2 2009-09  3-16-09 1       Rpld Ch. 32, §§ 32-1, 32-2 2010-03  3-15-10 1       Added App. A, § 9-900(9-908), (9-909) 2010-08  8-16-10 1 App. B, § 13.2 (note) 2010-10  9-27-10 1, 2 27-28, 27-28.1 3 27-29 2011-01 1-17-11 1       Dltd 16-71-16-76       Added 16-71-16-76 2011-03 4-25-11 1 17-49 2011-04 5-9-11 2       Added 16-90-16-92 2011-07 7-18-11 1       Rpld 6-1-6-42       Added 6-1-6-25 2011-08 7-18-11 1       Added 15-1 2011-11 9-12-11 1       Dltd 28-2 2 28-14 3 28-23 2011-12 9-12-11 1 29-21(1) 2011-13 9-12-11 1       Rpld 31-1, 31-2       Added 31-0-31-2 2011-14 9-26-11 1 27-28 2 27-28.1 3 27-29 2011-20 12-19-11 1       Added 27-37 2012-04 6-18-12 1 App. A, §§ 8-202, 8-205, 8-206 2 App. A, §§ 8-306, 8-307 3       Added App. A, § 8-402(c) 4 App. A, § 8-502(c) 5 App. A, § 8-602(d) 6 App. A, §§ 8-702(d), 8-705 7 App. A, §§ 8-802(a), 8-807 8 App. A, §§ 9-100-9-102       Added App. A, § 9-400 App. A, §§ 9-701, 9-702 App. A, § 9-1300 9 App. A, §§ 10-501, 10-800 App. A, § 11-202(1)(b) 10 App. A, § 16-100 2012-05 6-18-12 1 App. B, § 4(O) 2       Dltd App. B, § 10 3 App. B, § 13 4       Dltd App. B, § 13.1 5       Rnbd App. B, § 13.2       as App. B, § 13.1 2012-06 6-18-12 1       Rpld 26-1-26-15       Added 26-1-26-83 2012-09 9-24-12 1, 2 27-27, 27-28 3, 4 27-28.1, 27-28.2 5 27-29 2013-02  1-14-13 1 App. B, § 13.1 2013-03  3-11-13 1 16-13 2013-06  3-25-13 1       Rnbd App. B, § 13.1       as App. B, § 13.2       Added App. B, § 13.1 2013-07  4-22-13 2 App. B, § 13.1 2013-09  6-17-13 1       Dltd 6-1-6-25       Added 6-1-6-25 2013-12  8-26-13 1 13-13 2013-17  9-23-13 1-3 27-25-27-26 4       Added 27-26.1 5, 6 27-28, 27-28.1 7 27-29 2014-07  9-22-14 1-5 27-27-27-29 2014-08 10-20-14 1 19-5 19-8 19-10 19-12 2015-03  1-26-15 1 16-71-16-76 2015-12  9-21-15 1, 2 27-27, 27-28 3 27-28.1 4 27-29 2016-05  6-27-16 1 App. A, § 9-908       Added App. A, § 9-909       Rnbd App. A, § 9-909       as App. A, § 9-910 2       Rpld App. A, § 9-1700 2016-08  8-22-16 1 App. B, § 13.2(A) 2016-12  9-19-16 1 27-27 2017-02  2- 6-17 1 16-71-16-76 2017-12  9-18-17 1 27-16 2018-02  4-30-18 1 27-27 2018-11  9- 7-18 1 27-28 2 27-28.1 3 27-29  
