7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 1/505
Town of Highland Park
Code of Ordinances
Including Supplement No. 10
This code contains all ordinances deemed appropriate to be included in this Code of Ordinances as enacted
through Ordinance 2042 adopted 9/10/18.
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1.01 CODE OF ORDINANCES*
Sec. 1.01.001 Adoption
There is hereby adopted the Code of Ordinances of the Town of Highland Park, Texas, as compiled, edited and
published by Franklin Legal Publishing, Inc. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.002 Designation and citation of code
The ordinances embraced in this chapter and the following chapters, articles and sections shall constitute and be
designated the “Code of Ordinances, Town of Highland Park, Texas,” and may be so cited. (Ordinance adopting
Code)
Sec. 1.01.003 Catchlines of articles, divisions and sections
The catchlines of the several articles, divisions and sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to
indicate the contents of the article, division or section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such
articles, divisions and sections, nor as any part of the articles, divisions and sections, nor, unless expressly so
provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such articles, divisions and sections, including the catchlines, are
amended or reenacted. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Headings of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.024.
Sec. 1.01.004 Definitions and rules of construction
In the construction of this code and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the Town Council, the following
rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Town
Council:
Generally. Words shall be construed in their common and usual significance unless the contrary is clearly
indicated.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 2/505
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time
before any proceeding shall be had, the first day is excluded and the last day is included. If the last day of any
period is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the period is extended to include the next day that is not a
Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday.
State law reference–Computation of time, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.014.
Council. Whenever the term “Council” or “Town Council” or “the Council” is used, it shall mean the Town
Council of the Town of Highland Park, Texas.
State law reference–References to municipal governing body and to members of municipal governing body, V.T.C.A., Local
Government Code, sec. 21.002.
County. The term “County” or “this County” shall mean the County of Dallas, Texas.
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision of this Code of Ordinances requires or authorizes an officer or
employee of the Town to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize such officer or
employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the act or duty unless the terms of the
provision specifically designate otherwise.
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms,
partnerships, associations and corporations, as well as to males.
State law reference–“Gender” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(c).
Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three (3) or more officers or other persons shall be
construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared.
State law reference–Grants of authority, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.004.
May. The word “may” is permissive.
State law reference–Construction of word “may,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.016.
Month. The word “month” shall mean a calendar month.
State law reference–“Month” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Must and shall. Each is mandatory.
State law reference–Construction of words “must” and “shall,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.016.
Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural, and any word importing the plural
number shall include the singular.
State law reference–“Number,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(b).
Oath. The word “oath” shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the
words “affirm” and “affirmed.”
State law reference–“Oath,” “swear” and “sworn” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this code, they shall mean standard time or daylight
saving time, as may be in current use in the Town.
State law reference–Standard time, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.016.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 3/505
Or, and. The word “or” may be read “and,” and the word “and” may be read “or,” as the sense requires it.
Owner. The word “owner,” applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in
common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or
land.
Person. The word “person” shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships,
organizations, business trusts, estates, trusts, and bodies politic and corporate, as well as to individuals.
State law reference–“Person” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.005.
Preceding, following. The terms “preceding” and “following” mean next before and next after, respectively.
Property. The word “property” shall mean and include real and personal property.
State law reference–“Property” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.005.
Real property. The term “real property” shall mean and include lands, tenements and hereditaments.
Sidewalk. The word “sidewalk” shall mean that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
Signature or subscription. A signature or subscription shall include a mark when a person cannot write.
State law reference–“Signature” and “subscribe” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
State. The term “the State” or “this State” shall be construed to mean the State of Texas.
Street. The word “street” shall have its commonly accepted meaning and shall include highways, sidewalks,
alleys, avenues, recessed parking areas and other public rights-of-way, including the entire right-of-way.
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present.
State law reference–“Tense,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(a).
Town and city. Each means the Town of Highland Park, Texas.
Town Administrator, Town Secretary, Chief of Police or other Town officers. The term “Town Administrator,”
“Town Secretary,” “Chief of Police” or other Town officer or department shall be construed to mean the Town
Administrator, Town Secretary, Chief of Police or such other municipal officer or department, respectively, of
the Town of Highland Park, Texas.
V.T.C.S., V.T.P.C., V.T.C.C.P., V.T.C.A. Such abbreviations refer to the divisions of Vernon's Texas Statutes
Annotated.
Written or in writing. The term “written” or “in writing” shall be construed to include any representation of
words, letters, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
State law reference–“Written” or “in writing” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Year. The word “year” shall mean a calendar year.
State law reference–“Year” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.005 Severability of parts of code
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 4/505
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Town Council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and
phrases of this code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this code shall be
declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such
unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of
this code, since the same would have been enacted by the Town Council without the incorporation in the code of
any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Severability of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.013.
Sec. 1.01.006 Repeal of ordinances
The repeal of an ordinance or any portion thereof shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive
any ordinance which has been previously repealed. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Effect of repeal of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.030.
Sec. 1.01.007 Amendments or additions to code
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature, and amendments to such ordinances, hereafter enacted or
presented to the Town Council for enactment, shall be drafted, so far as possible, as specific amendments of, or
additions to, the Code of Ordinances. Amendments to this code shall be made by reference to the chapter and
section of the code which is to be amended, and additions shall bear an appropriate designation of chapter,
article and section; provided, however, the failure to do so shall in no way affect the validity or enforceability of
such ordinances. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.008 Supplementation of code
(a) By contract or by Town personnel, supplements to this code shall be prepared and printed whenever
authorized or directed by the Town Council. A supplement to the code shall include all substantive permanent
and general parts of ordinances passed by the Town Council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the
period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the code. The pages of a supplement shall be
so numbered that they will fit properly into the code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become
obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the
code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement.
(b) In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of the code which have been repealed shall be
excluded from the code by omission thereof from reprinted pages.
(c) When preparing a supplement to this code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization
authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of
ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code.
For example, the codifier may:
(1) Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
(2) Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for articles, sections and other subdivisions
of the code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles;
(3) Assign appropriate numbers to articles, sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the
code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing article or section or other
subdivision numbers;
(4) Change the words “this ordinance” or words of the same meaning to “this chapter,” “this
article,” “this section,” “this subsection,” etc., as the case may be; and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 5/505
(5) Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance
material inserted into the code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or
effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the code.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.009 General penalty for violations of code; continuing violations
(a) Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the Town an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be
unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor or whenever in this code or such ordinance the doing of any act is
required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the
violation of any such provision of this code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five
hundred dollars ($500.00).
(b) A fine or penalty for the violation of a rule, ordinance or police regulation that governs fire safety, zoning
or public health and sanitation, including the dumping of refuse, may not exceed two thousand dollars
($2,000.00).
(c) Unless otherwise specifically stated in this code, any violation of this code or of any ordinance that is
punishable by a fine that does not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) does not require a culpable mental
state, and a culpable mental state is hereby not required to prove any such offense. Unless otherwise specifically
stated in this code, any violation of this code or of any ordinance that is punishable by a fine that exceeds five
hundred dollars ($500.00) shall require a culpable mental state.
(d) No penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or a similar offense under the
laws of the State.
(e) Unless otherwise stated in this code or in any ordinance, each day any violation of this code or of any
ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
(f) In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the Town may pursue other remedies such as abatement of
nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
State law references–Penalties for violations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 54.001; penalty for class C misdemeanor,
V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 12.23; requirement of culpability, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 6.02.
ARTICLE 1.02 ADMINISTRATION
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 1.02.001 Fee for 9-1-1 emergency service
(a) Imposed. There is hereby imposed on each telecommunications user's local exchange access line, or its
equivalent, in the Town a 9-1-1 emergency service fee of up to eight (8) percent per month for each residential
or business line. Such fees shall be used only to provide for the purchase, installation, operation, and
maintenance expense of 9-1-1 emergency service to be furnished pursuant to separate agreements between the
Town and telecommunications carriers providing 9-1-1 emergency service in the Town's exchange service area
(the “service supplier”).
(b) Contract for collection. The Mayor is hereby authorized to execute a written contract on behalf of the
Town with service suppliers pursuant to the provisions of this section to provide for the collection of 9-1-1
emergency service fees for telecommunications users located within the municipal boundaries of the Town. Such
contract shall contain no provision or term inconsistent with chapter 771 or 772, Health and Safety Code,
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 6/505
Vernon's Texas Codes Annotated, as amended, and/or the rules and regulations promulgated, issued and/or
approved by the Public Utility Commission of the State.
(c) Restrictions and limitations; examination of records; use of funds. The 9-1-1 emergency service fee
imposed by this section shall be subject to the following restrictions and limitations:
(1) The 9-1-1 emergency service fee may only be imposed upon persons or businesses provided
local exchange access lines in the Town (the “service user”).
(2) The 9-1-1 emergency service fee may not be imposed upon more than one hundred (100) local
exchange access lines or their equivalent for a single entity at a single location.
(3) The 9-1-1 emergency service fee may not be imposed upon any coin-operated or coin/card
reader-operated telephone equipment.
(4) The 9-1-1 emergency service fee shall be separately stated on each service user's bill.
(5) The amount of the 9-1-1 emergency service fee may not exceed eight (8) percent of the service
supplier's base rate (recurring charge) exclusive of all taxes, fees, license costs or similar charges for
local exchange access lines or trunks or their equivalent.
(6) The 9-1-1 emergency service fee must have uniform application within the municipal
boundaries.
(7) The service supplier will be advised in writing at least ninety (90) days prior to the desired first
billing date of the amount of the 9-1-1 emergency service fee to be applied to each type of service.
(8) The 9-1-1 emergency service fee may not be imposed until the 9-1-1 emergency service is
operating.
(9) The service supplier will not be obligated to take any legal action to enforce the condition of
any billed 9-1-1 emergency service fee.
(10) The service supplier shall not disconnect any service user's access line for failure to pay the 9-
1-1 emergency service fees.
(11) The service supplier shall remit the collected 9-1-1 emergency service fees to the Town on a
periodic basis, not more frequently than monthly, on or before the sixth day after the close of the
month in which such fees were collected.
(12) The service supplier will retain, from its remittance to the Town, no more than two (2) percent
of the collected 9-1-1 emergency service fees as its compensation for performing its obligations
under the contract.
(13) Should the Town decide at some future date to change the amount of the 9-1-1 emergency
service fee to be billed to service users, the Town will provide the service supplier with at least ninety
(90) days' written notice prior to the desired implementation date of the change in the 9-1-1
emergency service fee.
(14) The service supplier shall agree to provide the Town with a list of any service users who have
specifically advised the service supplier of their refusal to pay the 9-1-1 emergency service fee. This
list shall be provided to the Town on an annual basis.
(15) The service supplier shall retain records of the amount of 9-1-1 emergency service fees
collected pursuant to this section for a period not to exceed two (2) years from the date of collection
or contract expiration, whichever is longer.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 7/505
(16) The service supplier agrees to permit the Town's auditor or the Town's independent auditor
once annually, at the Town's expense, within ninety (90) days of the anniversary of the service
establishment date, to examine at the service supplier's offices the report(s) the service supplier
generates regarding the billing of the Town's 9-1-1 emergency service fee. The service supplier shall
provide the Town's auditor or the Town's independent auditor with all nonproprietary backup
documentation and nonconfidential substantiation data that may reasonably be requested by the
Town's auditor or the Town's independent auditor with respect to any such reports. Proprietary
documentation or confidential data shall be made available for examination (but not copying) by the
Town only if the Town's auditor or the Town's independent auditor signs a protective agreement for
nondisclosure of such proprietary information and confidential data, and examines same in the
presence of a service supplier.
(17) The collected 9-1-1 emergency service fees shall be used only to provide for the purchase,
installation, operating and maintenance expenses of the 9-1-1 emergency service fee.
(18) One or more public hearings should be held prior to the adoption or amendment of any 9-1-1
emergency service fee imposed by this section.
(1971 Code, sec. 2-3)
State law reference–Local administration of emergency communications, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, ch. 772.
Sec. 1.02.002 Waiver of construction bonds for public works projects
The Town, pursuant to the authority granted to it under the provisions of chapter 149, title 1, section 252.044,
subsection (b), of the Local Government Code enacted by the 70th Texas Legislature, may elect to waive the
requirement of a construction bond for public works projects requiring an expenditure by the Town of less than
one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) when no payment is due by the Town until such time as the work is
completed and accepted by the Town. (1971 Code, sec. 2-5)
Sec. 1.02.003 Legal counsel and indemnification for Town officers and employees
(a) Beginning with the period commencing January 1, 1976, and thereafter, the Town Council shall in all
cases provide legal counsel of its choosing to defend any members of the Town Council, its Mayor, officers or
employees of the Town, or a member of any Town board or commission who is a party or is threatened to be
made a party to any threatened, pending or contemplated action, suit or proceeding, whether civil, criminal,
administrative or investigative, by reason of the fact that said person is or was a Town Councilman, Mayor,
officer, board member, commission member or employee of the Town, and shall pay and indemnify such
Councilman, Mayor, official, employee and board or commission member against all expenses, fees, judgments,
fines and amounts paid in settlement actually or reasonably incurred by such person in connection with such
action, suit or proceeding, subject to the exceptions set forth in subsection (b) of this section.
(b) Nothing herein shall be construed to require the Town to provide legal counsel or such indemnification for
any Town Councilman, Mayor, officer or employee, or the member of any Town board or commission, in the
following situations:
(1) In civil matters:
(A) Where the Councilman, Mayor, officer or employee, or board or commission member is
the plaintiff or moving party; or
(B) Where it shall be finally adjudicated in any action, suit or proceeding and said
Councilman, officer or employee, or board or commission member shall not have acted in good
faith and not in the reasonable belief that his or her action was in the best interest of the Town.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 8/505
(2) In criminal matters, where the Councilman, officer or employee, or board or commission
member:
(A) Is the complaining party; or
(B) Had reasonable cause to believe that such conduct was unlawful.
The termination of any action, suit or proceeding by judgment, order or conviction adverse to such person, or by
settlement, or by plea of nolo contendere or its equivalent, shall not of itself create a presumption that such
person did not act in good faith and in the reasonable belief that his action was in the best interests of the Town,
and, with respect to any criminal action or proceeding, had reasonable cause to believe that his conduct was
unlawful.
(c) Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit any such Councilman, Mayor, officer or employee
from seeking additional legal counsel other than provided by the Town. However, nothing herein shall be
construed as to require the Town to pay any fees or other expenses incurred as a result of employment of such
additional counsel.
(d) The rights provided for in this section shall not be deemed exclusive of any other rights to which those
indemnified may be entitled under any other statute, ordinance, agreement, insurance or policy of the Town.
(e) In circumstances involving litigation or other legal proceeding between two (2) persons qualifying for the
privileges granted herein, the Town Attorney will not be required to represent or otherwise participate on behalf
of either party.
(f) If for any reason any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, phrase, word, or provision of this section
shall be held invalid or unconstitutional by final judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction, it shall not affect
any other section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, phrase, word, or provision of this section, for it is the definite
intent of this Town Council that every section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, phrase, word, or provision hereof
be given full force and effect for its purpose.
(1971 Code, sec. 2-8)
Secs. 1.02.004–1.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Payments by Credit Card or Electronic Means
Sec. 1.02.031 Authorized
In accordance with Texas Local Government Code, chapter 132. Payment of fees and other costs by credit card
or electronic means in municipalities and counties (“chapter 132”), any municipal officer of the Town is
authorized to accept payment by credit card of such fees, fines, court costs, or other charges and to collect a fee
for processing the payment by credit card.
Sec. 1.02.032 Processing fee
In accordance with chapter 132, [Texas Local Government Code] any municipal officer of the Town is hereby
authorized and directed to assess a processing fee not to exceed five 5% of the amount of the fee, fine, court
cost, or other charge being paid by the use of a credit card, as an amount reasonably necessary and related to the
expense incurred by the Town, as authorized by section 132.003(b) of chapter 132[, Texas Local Government
Code].
Sec. 1.02.033 Service charge
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 9/505
In accordance with chapter 132, if for any reason a payment by credit card is not honored by the credit card
company on which the funds are drawn, the municipal officer shall collect a service charge from the person who
owes the fee, fine, court cost, or other charge to the Town. The service charge is in addition to the original fee,
fine, court cost, or other charge as is for the collection of that original amount. The amount of the service charge
shall be the same amount as the fee charged for the collection of a check drawn on an account with insufficient
funds, as authorized by section 132.004 of chapter 132[, Texas Local Government Code].
(Ordinance 1920 adopted 6/24/13)
ARTICLE 1.03 TOWN OFFICERS*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 1.03.001–1.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Town Administrator*
Sec. 1.03.031 Appointment; administrative head of government
The Town Council shall appoint a Town Administrator, who shall be the administrative head of the municipal
government, under the direction and supervision of the Town Council. (1971 Code, sec. 2-17)
Charter reference–Appointment of Town Administrator, sec. 4.02(A).
Sec. 1.03.032 Term of office; discharge
The Town Administrator shall be appointed for an indefinite period and shall be subject to discharge at the will
of the Town Council. (1971 Code, sec. 2-19)
Charter reference–Term and removal of Town Administrator, sec. 4.02(C).
Sec. 1.03.033 Compensation and bond
The Town Administrator shall receive such compensation as the Town Council shall fix from time to time and
shall furnish such bond as may be required by the Town Council, the premium to be paid by the Town. (1971
Code, sec. 2-20)
Charter references–Bond of Town Administrator, sec. 4.02(A); compensation of Town Administrator, sec. 4.02(B).
State law reference–Official bonds, V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 604.
Sec. 1.03.034 Acting Town Administrator
During the absence or disability of the Town Administrator, the Town Council shall designate some properly
qualified person to perform the duties of such office. (1971 Code, sec. 2-21)
Charter reference–Acting Town Administrator, sec. 4.02(E).
Sec. 1.03.035 General powers and duties
In addition to the powers and duties prescribed by other sections of this division, the powers and duties of the
Town Administrator shall be:
(1) To devote all of his working time and attention to the affairs of the Town, and be responsible to
the Town Council for the efficient administration of its affairs.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 10/505
(2) To see that all laws and ordinances are enforced.
(3) With the advice of the Town Council, to appoint and remove all heads of departments. He shall
have the power to appoint and remove all subordinate employees.
(4) To exercise supervision and control over all departments created by the Town Council.
(5) To attend all meetings of the Town Council, with the right to take part in the discussions, but
having no vote. He shall be notified of all special meetings of the Council.
(6) To recommend to the Town Council, in writing from time to time, for adoption, such measures
as he may deem necessary or expedient.
(7) To do and perform such other duties as may be prescribed by ordinance or resolution of the
Council.
(1971 Code, sec. 2-22)
Charter reference–Powers and duties of Town Administrator, sec. 4.02(D).
Sec. 1.03.036 Duties with respect to franchises
The Town Administrator shall see that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the Town and its inhabitants
in any public utility franchise are faithfully kept and performed and, upon knowledge of any violation thereof, he
shall call the same to the attention of the Town Council. (1971 Code, sec. 2-23)
Sec. 1.03.037 General duties as Budget Officer
The Town Administrator shall act as Budget Officer and, as such, shall prepare and submit to the Town Council,
prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, a budget of proposed expenditures for the ensuing year, showing, in as
much detail as practicable, the estimated amount required by months for the efficient operation of each
department of the Town and the reason for such estimated expenditures. In addition, he shall make and file a
budget as required by State law. (1971 Code, sec. 2-24)
Sec. 1.03.038 Monthly reports of expenditures; advising Council as to financial needs and conditions
The Town Administrator shall make a full written report to the Town Council, as soon after the closing of each
month's account as possible, showing the operation and expenditures of each department for the preceding
month and a comparison of such monthly expenditures, by department, with the then monthly allowances made
for such department in the annual budget. He shall keep the Town Council fully advised at all times as to the
financial needs and conditions of the Town. (1971 Code, sec. 2-25)
Charter reference–Financial reports, sec. 9.15.
Sec. 1.03.039 Recommendations as to salaries
The Town Administrator shall recommend to the Town Council the salary to be paid each appointive officer and
subordinate employee of the Town, and it shall be the duty of the Council to pass ordinances or resolutions, from
time to time, fixing rates of compensation. (1971 Code, sec. 2-26)
Sec. 1.03.040 Powers and duties as Purchasing Agent
(a) The Town Administrator shall act as Purchasing Agent for the Town and purchase all merchandise,
material and supplies needed by the Town, and may establish, if needed, a suitable storehouse where such
supplies shall be kept, and from which the same shall be issued as needed. He may adopt such rules and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 11/505
regulations governing requisitions and transaction of business between himself, as such Purchasing Agent, and
the heads of the departments, officers and employees of the Town, as the Council may approve.
(b) It shall be the duty of the Purchasing Agent to give approval for competition on purchases and sales,
except when the nature of the purchase or sale is such that competition is impossible and impracticable. All
purchases in excess of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), except of real estate or rights or easements therein,
shall be by contract to the lowest responsible bidder, and all sales, except of real estate or rights or easements
therein, shall be made to the highest bidder, after public notice and the receipt of sealed bids, unless the Town
Council deems that it is impracticable or impossible to purchase or sell in such manner.
(c) All sealed bids received shall be opened publicly and thereafter shall be subject to public inspection. The
Purchasing Agent may reject all bids and re-advertise for new bids. The Purchasing Agent may require
successful bidders to furnish security conditioned upon the faithful performance of their contract and
conditioned upon the payment of wages and compensation of all laborers employed or work for which a contract
is made by the contractor, subcontractor, agent, or any other person.
(d) The Purchasing Agent shall not let any contract for periods exceeding one (1) year for street lighting,
public improvements, labor or supplies.
(e) In case of accident or other circumstances creating an emergency, the Town Administrator may, with the
consent of the Council, award contracts and make purchases for the purpose of repairing damages created by
such accident or avoiding such public emergency, but, immediately afterwards, he shall file with the Mayor a
certificate showing such emergency and the necessity of such action, together with an itemized account of all
expenditures.
(1971 Code, sec. 2-27)
Charter reference–Purchasing, sec. 9.17.
State law reference–Purchasing and contracting authority of municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 252.001 et seq.
ARTICLE 1.04 DEPARTMENTS*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 1.04.001–1.04.030 Reserved
Division 2. Department of Public Safety
Sec. 1.04.031 Created
There is hereby created and established the Department of Public Safety for the Town, for the protection of life
and property from hazardous situations, for the giving of aid, and for the suppression and prevention of crime
and fire. (1971 Code, sec. 2-110)
Sec. 1.04.032 Duties of Director
It shall be the duty of the Director of the Department of Public Safety to:
(1) Plan, administer, and coordinate the municipal public safety program involving law
enforcement, police patrol, and fire prevention and control;
(2) Direct the activities of the Chiefs of the Police and Fire Departments; and
(3) Perform related work as required.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 12/505
(1971 Code, sec. 2-111)
Sec. 1.04.033 Officers to have same powers and duties as members of Police and Fire Departments
A Public Safety Officer shall have the same powers, duties and responsibilities as any member of the Town
Police and Fire Departments, and all powers conferred upon same as set forth in the charter, the Code of
Ordinances of the Town, and the statutes of the State. (1971 Code, sec. 2-112)
ARTICLE 1.05 CLAIMS FOR DAMAGES AGAINST TOWN*
Sec. 1.05.001 Notice in case of personal injury or death
The Town shall never be liable for any personal injury, whether resulting in death or not, unless the person
injured or someone in his behalf, or in the event the injury results in death, the person who may have a cause of
action under the law by reason of such fatal injury, shall file a notice in writing with the Town Administrator or
the Town Secretary, within thirty (30) days after the date of the injury, stating specifically in such notice when,
where and how the exact injury occurred and the full extent thereof, together with the amount of damages
claimed or asserted. (1971 Code, sec. 2-54)
Sec. 1.05.002 Notice in case of damage to personal property
The Town shall never be liable for any claim for damage or injury to personal property unless the person whose
personal property has been injured or damaged, or someone in his behalf, shall file a notice in writing with the
Town Administrator or the Town Secretary, within thirty (30) days after such damage or injury has occurred,
stating specifically when, where, and how the injury or damage occurred and the full extent thereof, and the
amount of damage sustained. (1971 Code, sec. 2-55)
Sec. 1.05.003 Notice in case of damage to real property
The Town shall never be liable for any claim for damage or injury to real property caused by the negligent act or
omission of its officers, servants, agents or employees, unless the person whose real property has been injured or
damaged, or someone in his behalf, shall file a notice in writing with the Town Administrator or Town Secretary,
within thirty (30) days after such damage or injury has occurred, stating specifically when, where and how the
injury or damage occurred and the amount of damage claimed. (1971 Code, sec. 2-56)
Sec. 1.05.004 Claims arising from defect in streets, sidewalks, etc.
The Town shall never be liable on account of any damage or injury to person or to personal property arising
from or occasioned by any defect in any public street, highway, alley, sidewalk, grounds or public work of the
Town, unless the specific defect causing the damage or injury shall have been actually known to the Town
Administrator or Town Secretary at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the occurrence of the injury or damage,
or unless the attention of the Town Administrator or Town Secretary shall have been called thereto by a notice
thereof in writing at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the occurrence of the injury or damage and proper
diligence has not been exercised to rectify the defect. The notice herein required to be given to the Town
Administrator or Town Secretary of the specific defect causing the damage or injury shall apply where the defect
arose from any omission of the Town itself, or through its agents, servants, or employees, or acts of third parties.
(1971 Code, sec. 2-57)
Sec. 1.05.005 Failure to notify Town
The failure to notify the Town Administrator or Town Secretary within the time and manner specified in this
article shall exonerate, excuse and exempt the Town from any liability whatsoever. (1971 Code, sec. 2-58)
Sec. 1.05.006 Waiver of requirements
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 13/505
No act of any officer or employee of the Town shall waive compliance, or stop the Town from requiring
compliance, with the provisions of this article as to notice, but such provisions may be waived by resolution of
the Town Council. (1971 Code, sec. 2-59)
Sec. 1.05.007 Exceptions in cases of actual notice
(a) The above written notice requirements shall be waived if the Town has actual knowledge of death, injury
or property damage likely to result in a claim against the Town. The Town shall not be deemed to have actual
knowledge unless that knowledge is attributable to an appropriate Town official whose job duties include the
authority to investigate and/or settle claims against the Town.
(b) Notice requirements shall likewise be waived in cases in which the plaintiff can demonstrate good cause or
civil rights violations.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 1.06 COUNCIL APPROVAL OF RATE INCREASES FOR UTILITIES AND OTHER
PUBLIC SERVICES*
Sec. 1.06.001 Required
It shall be unlawful for any person furnishing, distributing or supplying electric power, electric lights, gas,
sewage facilities, water, telephone, or any other public service, commodities or conveniences to any of the
inhabitants of the Town to raise or increase the rates charged therefor without first obtaining the consent or
approval of the Town Council to such raise or increase. (1971 Code, sec. 2-71)
Sec. 1.06.002 Application
Any person desiring or proposing to increase or raise any of the rates charged the citizens of the Town for any
public service of the character mentioned in section 1.06.001 shall file with the Council an application for
authority to make such increase, specifying therein the authority or right under which such service is performed
for the citizens of the Town, the rate or rates which are currently being charged therefor, and the rate or rates
which it is proposed to charge therefor. Such application shall also be accompanied by a complete statement,
under oath, showing the alleged necessity for any such proposed increase or raise in rates and the reasonableness
thereof. Such application shall also furnish to the Town Council such additional data or information as it may
from time to time request in connection with the proposal to increase such rates, in order that the Council may
pass intelligently upon the merits of such application. (1971 Code, sec. 2-72)
Sec. 1.06.003 Hearing required; notice of hearing
When any application for a rate increase is filed with the Town Council under this article, it shall be the duty of
the Council to grant and hold a public hearing thereon, which hearing shall be held in some suitable place in the
Town on a date not less than ten (10) nor more than thirty (30) days from the date such application is filed.
Public notice of the time, place and date of such proposed hearing shall be given by posting printed or written
notice thereof at each of three (3) public places in the Town, one of which shall be at the Town Hall, for a period
of at least ten (10) days prior to the date fixed for such hearing. (1971 Code, sec. 2-73)
Sec. 1.06.004 Conduct of hearing
At the hearing provided for in section 1.06.003, the Town Council shall hear and consider any and all protests
and objections to the proposed rates and shall also hear and consider all material and proper evidence which may
be presented by the applicant, or by any other interested party, relating to the reasonableness and fairness of such
proposed rates under the law and the facts. Such hearing may be adjourned from time to time if deemed proper
or necessary by the Council, until the entire matter of the proposed increase in rates has been fully investigated
and considered by the Council. (1971 Code, sec. 2-74)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 14/505
Sec. 1.06.005 Ordinance authorizing increase
If, as the result of a hearing and investigation under this article, the Town Council considers and determines that
the applicant is duly authorized and empowered to furnish the service for which he proposes to increase the
rates, and that the rates under consideration should be raised or increased, the Council shall pass an ordinance
authorizing such increase as it may deem proper, not to exceed, however, the amount specified in the application
filed with the Council asking its permission and consent to make such increase. (1971 Code, sec. 2-75)
Sec. 1.06.006 Cutting off customer's service for refusal to pay excessive rate
Any agent, employee or representative of any person who attempts, in any manner whatever, to disconnect or cut
off any inhabitant of the Town from a proper supply of electric power, electric light, gas, sewage, water or
telephone facilities on account of the failure or refusal of such inhabitant to pay any rate in excess of the rate
approved by the Council shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (1971 Code, sec. 2-76)
Sec. 1.06.007 Violations
Any person seeking and undertaking to increase or raise rates in violation of any of the terms of this article, or
seeking to collect from any of the inhabitants of the Town compensation for its services at a greater rate than has
been approved by the Council, shall, at the option of the Town Council, forfeit his right and franchise to use any
of the public streets or alleys of the Town in connection with his business, and may be required by the Council,
at its option, to remove from such streets and alleys all of his material and equipment used in connection with
the services rendered the citizens of the Town, but such right to forfeit such rights, privileges and franchises shall
not be deemed an exclusive remedy for the violation of this article, and the Council may, at its option, pursue
any other remedy provided by law or in equity. (1971 Code, sec. 2-77)
ARTICLE 1.07 CODE OF ETHICS*
Sec. 1.07.001 Declaration of policy
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Town that the proper operation of democratic government requires
that public officials and employees be independent, impartial and responsible only to the people of the Town;
that the governmental decisions and policy be made in the proper channels of the governmental structure; that no
officer, employee or member of any standing committee or board should have any interest, financial or
otherwise, direct or indirect, or engage in any business transaction or professional activity, or incur any
obligation of any nature, which is in conflict with the proper discharge of his duties in the public interest; that
public office not be used for personal gain; and that the Town Council at all times shall be maintained as a
nonpartisan body. To implement such a policy, the Town Council deems it advisable to enact a code of ethics for
all officials and employees, whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid, to serve not only as a guide for official
conduct of the Town's public servants, but also as a basis for discipline for those who refuse to abide by its
terms. (1971 Code, sec. 2-81)
Sec. 1.07.002 Definitions
In this article, unless the context otherwise requires:
Employee. Any person employed by the Town, including those individuals on a part-time basis, but shall not be
extended to apply to any independent contractor.
Officer. Any member of the Town Council and any appointive member of a board, commission or committee set
up by ordinance or State law on a permanent basis; but does not include members of a board, commission or
committee that functions only in an advisory or study capacity and which does not have the power to make
findings as to the rights of specific parties.
(1971 Code, sec. 2-82)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 15/505
Sec. 1.07.003 Standards of conduct
No officer or employee of the Town shall:
(1) Accept any gift or favor from any person, firm or corporation that might reasonably tend to
influence him in the discharge of his official duties, or grant in the discharge of his official duties any
improper favor, service or thing of value.
(2) Use his official position to secure special privileges or exemptions for himself or others.
(3) Grant any special consideration, treatment or advantage to any citizen, individual, business
organization or group beyond that which is available to every other citizen, individual, business
organization or group. This shall not prohibit the granting of fringe benefits to Town employees as a
part of their contract of employment or as an added incentive to the securing or retaining of
employees.
(4) Disclose information that could adversely affect the property, government or affairs of the
Town, nor directly or indirectly use any information gained by reason of his official position or
employment for his own personal gain or benefit or for the private interest of others.
(5) Transact any business on behalf of the Town in his official capacity with any business entity
with which he is an officer, agent or member, or in which he owns a substantial interest. In the event
that such a circumstance should arise, then he shall make known his interest, and in the case of an
officer, abstain from voting on the matter, or in the case of an employee, turn the matter over to his
superior for reassignment, state the reasons for doing so, and have nothing further to do with the
matter involved.
(6) Engage in any outside activities which will conflict with, or will be incompatible with, the
duties assigned to him in the employment of the Town, or reflect discredit upon the Town, or in
which his employment in the Town will give him an advantage over others engaged in a similar
business, vocation or activity.
(7) Accept other employment or engage in outside activities incompatible with the full and proper
discharge of his duties and responsibilities with the Town, or which might impair his independent
judgment in the performance of his public duty.
(8) Receive any fee or compensation for his services as an officer or employee of the Town from
any source other than the Town, except as may be otherwise provided by law. This shall not prohibit
his performing the same or other services for a private organization that he performs for the Town if
there is no conflict with his Town duties and responsibilities.
(9) (A) No Town Councilman or employee shall represent, directly or indirectly, or appear
in behalf of private interests of others before any agency of the Town or any Town board,
commission or committee, nor shall he represent any private interest of others in any action or
proceeding involving the Town, nor participate on behalf of others in any litigation to which the
Town might be a party, nor shall he ever accept any retainer or compensation that is contingent
upon a specific action taken by the Town or any of its agencies.
(B) No other officer shall represent, directly or indirectly, or appear in behalf of the private
interests of others before a board, commission or committee of which he is a member, or before
the Council or board which has appellate jurisdiction over the board, commission or committee
of which he is a member, with regard to matters that may be the subject of specific action by
any such body.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 16/505
(10) Use the prestige of his position in behalf of any political party, but he shall at all times
maintain the nonpartisan policy of the Town, provided that all officials and employees are
encouraged to register and vote as they may choose in all local, state and national elections.
(11) Knowingly perform or refuse to perform any act to deliberately thwart the execution of the
Town ordinances, rules or regulations, or the achievement of official Town programs.
(12) Use Town supplies, equipment or facilities for any purpose other than the conduct of official
Town business.
(13) Engage in any dishonest or criminal act or any other conduct prejudicial to the government of
the Town or that reflects discredit upon the government of the Town.
(1971 Code, sec. 2-83)
Sec. 1.07.004 Disclosure of interest
Any officer, whether elected or appointed, who has either a personal or private interest in any matter pending
before his committee or board, shall disclose such interest to the other members of the committee or board and
shall refrain from discussing the same with any other member of the committee or board and shall not vote
thereon. (1971 Code, sec. 2-84)
Sec. 1.07.005 Three-year prohibition of transactions with Town after officer's termination of service
Any officer, whether elected or appointed, shall be disqualified, for a period of three (3) years after termination
of service with the Town, from entering into any transactions or contracts with the Town where he shall have a
financial interest either directly or indirectly. (1971 Code, sec. 2-85)
Sec. 1.07.006 Reports by Town's auditor
Each year, at the time of the annual audit of the financial affairs of the Town, the Town's auditor shall comment
in a special report to the Town Council on any and all financial transactions between the Town and its officers
and employees. (1971 Code, sec. 2-86)
Sec. 1.07.007 Violations; decisions
The failure of any officer or employee to comply with or who violates one or more of the foregoing standards of
conduct which apply to him shall constitute grounds for expulsion, reprimand, removal from office or discharge,
whichever is applicable. In the case of a Town Councilman, the matter shall be decided by a majority of the
remainder of the Councilmen. In the case of members of boards or commissions, the matters shall be decided by
the Town Council. The decision of these bodies shall be final in the absence of bias, prejudice or fraud. (1971
Code, sec. 2-87)
ARTICLE 1.08 RECORDS MANAGEMENT*
Sec. 1.08.001 Definition of Town records
(a) All papers, correspondence, memoranda, accounts, reports, maps, plans, photographs, sound and video
recordings, files, microform, magnetic or paper tape, punched cards, or other documents, regardless of physical
form or characteristic, which have been or shall be created, received, filed or recorded by any Town office or
department or its lawful successor, or officials thereof, in pursuance of law or ordinance or in the conduct,
transaction or performance of any business, duty or function of public business, whether or not confidential or
restricted in use, are hereby declared to be records of the Town and shall be, without limitation, created,
maintained and disposed of in accordance with all provisions of this article or procedures authorized by it and in
no other manner.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 17/505
(b) Library and museum materials, including but not limited to materials acquired solely for reference, exhibit
and/or display, and stocks of publications shall not constitute records for purposes of this article.
(1971 Code, sec. 2-141)
Sec. 1.08.002 Town records declared public property
All Town records as defined in section 1.08.001 are hereby declared to be property of the Town. No Town
official and/or employee or his or her successors has, by virtue of his or her position, any personal or property
right to such records, even though he or she may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized
destruction, removal from files, and/or use of such records is prohibited. (1971 Code, sec. 2-142)
Sec. 1.08.003 Policy
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Town to provide for efficient, economical and effective controls over
the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use and disposition of all records through a comprehensive
system of integrated procedures for the management of records from their creation to their ultimate disposition.
(1971 Code, sec. 2-143)
Sec. 1.08.004 Records Management Officer designated
The Town Administrator is hereby designated as Records Management Officer for the Town. The Records
Management Officer shall cause his or her name to be filed with the Director and Librarian of the State Library
within thirty (30) days of the effective date of this article (ordinance adopted December 17, 1990). Any of the
duties imposed upon the Records Management Officer by this article may be delegated to any official or
employee of the Town under the administrative control of the Town Administrator. (1971 Code, sec. 2-144)
Sec. 1.08.005 Duties of Records Management Officer
The Records Management Officer shall have the following duties; however, duties assigned shall be limited to
records management activities:
(1) Plan, formulate and prescribe basic files management and records disposition policies, systems,
standards and procedures;
(2) Prepare records retention and disposition schedules in cooperation with department heads for
all offices and departments, define and identify all vital and permanent records, and establish
retention periods for all records. Retention periods shall be no shorter than desired by the originating
office or department but shall be as long as deemed necessary by either the Records Management
Officer or Records Management Committee;
(3) Review schedules annually and update or amend schedules if needed;
(4) Provide records management advice and assistance to department heads for all offices and
departments by preparation of manuals outlining procedures and policies and by on-site consultation;
(5) Develop, disseminate and coordinate files maintenance and records disposition procedures,
without limitation to those prescribed by this article, to meet the current and long-term information
needs of the Town;
(6) Train departmental Records Officers and other personnel in the fundamentals of records
management and their duties in the records management program;
(7) Carry out at the proper time actions such as microphotography, destruction and transfers that
are required by records schedules;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 18/505
(8) Establish, monitor and require compliance with standards for filing and storage equipment and
supplies in all offices and departments;
(9) Develop Town-wide forms design and control system;
(10) Establish, in cooperation with other responsible officials or employees, a disaster plan for
each Town office or department to ensure maximum availability of records for reestablishing
operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense;
(11) Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records
of the Town;
(12) Protect privacy and assure availability of public information from records, and bring to the
attention of the Town Administrator any office or department not in compliance with laws or
regulations regarding public access to information or protection of privacy.
(1971 Code, sec. 2-145)
Sec. 1.08.006 Responsibilities of department heads
All Town department heads are responsible for the implementation and operation of effective files operations,
records transfers and dispositions and other activities in accordance with the provisions of this article within
their areas of responsibility. They are designated Records Officers and will provide the Records Management
Officer the names of such designees of all file stations and file custodians under their supervision. (1971 Code,
sec. 2-146)
Sec. 1.08.007 Responsibilities of Records Officers
The Records Officer in each office or department is responsible for providing coordination between the Records
Management Officer and personnel in his or her office or department to ensure that all provisions of this article
are complied with. This responsibility shall include overseeing the application of records schedules within his or
her office and/or department. (1971 Code, sec. 2-147)
Sec. 1.08.008 Use of records control schedules required
All Town offices and departments shall adopt records retention and disposition schedules and destroy, transfer or
otherwise dispose of records only according to such schedules. (1971 Code, sec. 2-148)
Sec. 1.08.009 Records Management Committee; approval of records control schedules
(a) A Records Management Committee consisting of the Town department heads and Town Attorney is
hereby established. This Committee shall:
(1) Assist the Records Management Officer in the development of policies and procedures
governing the records management program;
(2) Review the performance of the program on a regular basis and propose changes and
improvements as needed;
(3) Review and approve records control schedules;
(4) Give final approval to the destruction of records in accordance with approved records control
schedules; and
(5) Actively support and promote the records management program throughout the Town.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 19/505
(b) The records retention and disposition schedule shall be submitted to the Town Council for approval and,
upon approval, shall constitute full authority to destroy, transfer, microphotograph or take other actions. The
Records Management Officer shall notify the State Librarian of intended destruction as required by law, but no
further notice to the State or Town shall be required.
(c) Revision of retention periods shall be submitted for review and adopted in the same manner as the original
retention periods.
(1971 Code, sec. 2-149)
Sec. 1.08.010 One-time destruction of obsolete records
Prior to adoption of records schedules for an office or department, a one-time destruction of accumulated
obsolete records of that office or department may be made as approved by the Town Council under the
supervision of the Records Management Officer. Prior to such destruction, the Records Management Officer
shall submit lists of any records to be destroyed to the Records Management Committee. The Committee shall
give written notice within ten (10) working days of any records the Committee deems should not be destroyed,
and such records shall be retained for a period suggested by the Committee. The Records Management Officer
shall also submit notice as required by law to the State Librarian. Obsolete records shall include without
limitation records no longer created by the office or department and no longer needed for administrative, legal,
fiscal or other research purposes. (1971 Code, sec. 2-150)
Sec. 1.08.011 Preservation of permanent records
The Records Management Officer shall develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the
historically valuable records of the Town. The Records Management Officer shall provide housing under
archival conditions for such records in a municipal facility and in such manner that the records, unless their use
is restricted by law or regulation, are open to the public for research purposes. If Town-owned facilities are not
available, the Records Management Officer shall arrange for the transfer of the records to the State Library for
perpetual care and preservation in one of its nearby regional historical resource depositories, or shall make other
arrangements for their permanent preservation not contrary to law or regulation. In no circumstances shall any
permanent records of the Town be transferred to private individuals, to private historical societies or museums,
or to private colleges or universities. (1971 Code, sec. 2-151)
Sec. 1.08.012 Micrographics program
A centralized micrographics program shall be designed and implemented by the Records Management Officer to
serve all Town offices and departments. Unless a micrographics program in an office or department is
specifically exempted by order of the Town Council, all microfilming of records will be centralized and under
direct supervision of the Records Management Officer. The records management plan will establish policies and
procedures for the microfilming of Town records, including without limitation policies to ensure that all
microfilming is done in accordance with standards and procedures for microfilming of local government records
established in rules of the State Library and Archives Commission. The plan will also establish criteria for
determining eligibility of records for microfilming. Procedures will be established for ensuring that microfilm
programs exempt from the centralized operations are reviewed periodically for their cost effectiveness,
administrative efficiency and conformance with State Library rules. (1971 Code, sec. 2-152)
Sec. 1.08.013 Texas public information requests; limitations
(a) Upon written request, and subject to Texas Government Code section 552.221, the personnel of the Town
shall produce the Town's nonexempted, public information for inspection or duplication. Except as limited by
subsection (b) below, the Town shall not recover from the requestor the Town's costs attributable to said
personnel time. The personnel of the Town may also provide copies of nonexempted, public information to a
requestor without recovering from the requestor the Town's costs attributable to said personnel time and in
accordance with State law.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 20/505
(b) In accordance with Texas Government Code section 552.275(a) and (b), as amended, the Town may
charge a requestor the hourly rate for that Town personnel involved in (1) producing the Town's nonexempted,
public information for inspection or duplication to the requestor; and/or (2) providing copies of nonexempted,
public information to the requestor, if and when the Town previously spent thirty-six (36) hours performing
subsections (1) or (2) during the 12-month period that corresponds to the Town's fiscal year.
(c) In accordance with Texas Government Code section 552.275(d) and (e), as amended, prior to charging a
requestor under subsection (b) above, the Town must have provided the requestor with separate written
statements of the personnel time spent complying with those request(s), as well as the cumulative amount of
time spent complying with those request(s), that comprise the thirty-six (36) hours during said 12-month period.
(Ordinance 1792 adopted 5/10/09)
ARTICLE 1.09 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT*
Sec. 1.09.001 Organization
(a) There exists the office of Emergency Management Director of the Town, which shall be held by the Mayor
in accordance with State law, as defined by the Texas Disaster Act of 1975, V.T.C.A., Government Code, chapter
418, and Executive Order WPC-87-6a by the Governor of the State.
(b) An Emergency Management Coordinator may be appointed by the Mayor and serve at the pleasure of the
Director.
(c) The Director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management within the
Town and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this article. He/she may delegate authority
for execution of these duties to the Emergency Management Coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for such
execution shall remain with the Director.
(d) The operational emergency management organization of the Town shall consist of the officers and
employees of the Town so designated by the Director in the emergency management plan, as well as organized
volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such officers and
employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan.
(1971 Code, sec. 2-161)
Sec. 1.09.002 Powers and duties of Director
The duties and responsibilities of the Emergency Management Director shall include the following:
(1) Conducting from time to time an ongoing survey of actual or potential hazards which threaten
life and property within the Town and an ongoing program of identifying and requiring or
recommending the implementation of measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence or
reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster should occur.
(2) Supervising the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the Town
and recommending for adoption by the Town Council all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary
for the implementation of such plans.
(3) Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The declaration may not be continued or renewed
for a period in excess of seven (7) days except by or with the consent of the Town Council. Any order
or proclamation declaring, continuing or terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt
and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the Town Secretary.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 21/505
(4) Issuing necessary proclamations, regulations or directives which are necessary for carrying out
the purposes of this article. Such proclamations, regulations or directives shall be disseminated
promptly by means calculated to bring their contents to the attention of the general public and, unless
circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or impede, promptly filed with the Town Secretary.
(5) Directing and controlling the operations of the Town's emergency management organization as
well as the training of emergency management personnel.
(6) Determining all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency
management organization of the Town.
(7) Maintaining liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional or federal emergency
management organizations.
(8) Marshaling all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any department of the Town to
aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan.
(9) Supervising the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the
representatives of the State and of other local political subdivisions of the State, and the drafting and
execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the County in which the Town is located and
with other municipalities within the County for the Countywide coordination of emergency
management efforts.
(10) Supervising and finally authorizing the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment,
including acceptance of private contributions which may be offered, for the purpose of improving
emergency management within the Town.
(11) Authorizing agreements, after approval by the Town Attorney, for use of private property for
public shelter and other purposes.
(12) Surveying the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies and services which could
be used during a disaster as provided for herein.
(13) Other requirements as specified in the Texas Disaster Act of 1975 (V.T.C.A., Government
Code, chapter 418).
(1971 Code, sec. 2-162)
Sec. 1.09.003 Emergency management plan
A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be developed and maintained in a current state. The plan
shall set forth the form of the organization, establish and designate divisions and functions, assign
responsibilities, tasks, duties and powers, and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of
this article. As provided by State law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the State
Division of Emergency Management. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall
conform to the recommendations of the State Division of Emergency Management. When approved by the State
Division of Emergency Management, it shall be the duty of all departments and agencies to perform the
functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times.
The emergency management plan shall be considered supplementary to this article and have the effect of law
during the time of a disaster. (1971 Code, sec. 2-163)
Sec. 1.09.004 Interjurisdictional program
The Mayor is hereby authorized to join with the County Judge and the mayors of the other towns or cities in the
County in the formation of an Emergency Management Council for the County and shall have the authority to
cooperate in the preparation of a joint emergency management plan and in the appointment of a joint Emergency
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 22/505
Management Coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a Countywide program of emergency
management insofar as said program may affect the Town. (1971 Code, sec. 2-164)
Sec. 1.09.005 Override of existing regulations by emergency regulations
At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this article shall be in
effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations, insofar as the
latter may be inconsistent therewith. (1971 Code, sec. 2-165)
Sec. 1.09.006 Liability
This article is an exercise by the Town of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace,
health and safety, and neither the Town, the agents and representatives of said Town, nor any individual,
receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith
carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to
the provisions of this article, shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of said activity.
Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants
to the Town a license or privilege or otherwise permits the Town to inspect, designate and use the whole or any
part or parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or
practice enemy attack or natural or manmade disaster shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be
civilly liable for the death of or injury to any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license,
privilege or other permission or for loss of or damage to the property of such person. (1971 Code, sec. 2-166)
Sec. 1.09.007 Commitment of funds
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the Town in carrying out any emergency
management activity authorized by this article without prior approval by the Town Council, nor shall any person
have any right to bind the Town by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the
Town Council unless during a declared disaster. During a declared disaster, the Mayor may expend and/or
commit public funds of the Town when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of health, life or
property. (1971 Code, sec. 2-167)
Sec. 1.09.008 Offenses; penalties
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency
management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article or to do any
act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this article. Note: In this
section, the word “person” shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships and
bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals.
(b) It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or other means
of identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the Town, unless authority to do so
has been granted to such person by the proper officials.
(c) Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a warning signal or the
termination of a warning shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this article and shall be subject to the penalties
imposed by this article.
(d) Any person or entity violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof may be fined as provided in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(1971 Code, sec. 2-168)
ARTICLE 1.10 LIBRARY
Sec. 1.10.001 Established
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 23/505
In accordance with sections 1.04 and 1.14 of the Town charter, there is hereby formally created a public library
within the framework of the governmental organization of the Town, which shall be known as the Highland Park
Library, hereinafter referred to as the “library,” and it shall function according to the laws of the State, the
charter of the Town, and the provisions of this enactment. (1971 Code, sec. 13 1/2-1)
Sec. 1.10.002 Books and equipment
The Town hereby accepts all gifts and donations of books and equipment heretofore made for the library, with
grateful thanks to the donors both of books and time, and it is ordained that such books and equipment, together
with such additions as may be made from time to time, shall constitute and form the books and equipment of the
Town library. (1971 Code, sec. 13 1/2-2)
Sec. 1.10.003 Operating funds
The Town Council shall appropriate for the operation and maintenance of the library such funds as it deems
proper in consideration with the Town charter and the laws of the State. (1971 Code, sec. 13 1/2-3)
Sec. 1.10.004 Free use of library
Use of the library shall be free to all residents of the Town. (1971 Code, sec. 13 1/2-4)
Sec. 1.10.005 Appointment of Librarian
The head of the library shall be a person who by education, training and experience shall be qualified to
discharge the duties and responsibilities of Librarian. It is desirable for such person to hold a Master of Library
Science degree from a school accredited by the American Library Association. Such Librarian, who shall be in
charge of the library, shall be appointed by the Town Administrator and shall receive such compensation as may
be prescribed by the Town Council. (1971 Code, sec. 13 1/2-5)
Sec. 1.10.006 Duties of Librarian
The Librarian shall:
(1) Be the chief administrative officer of the Library Department of the Town, subject to the
direction of the Town Administrator, and as such shall be in immediate charge of the care,
maintenance and operation of the library facilities contained therein of the Town.
(2) Attend meetings of the Library Advisory Committee and shall advise the Library Advisory
Committee pertaining to the planning, development and operation of the library facilities of the
Town.
(3) Recommend for employment required personnel according to the standard procedures as set
forth by the Town and, upon employment, shall supervise them in the performance of their various
duties.
(4) Inform the general public of the services and facilities being provided by the Library
Department.
(5) Conduct studies of local conditions and needs for library services and assist with recruitment
and training of library personnel.
(6) Prepare an annual budget for submission to the Town Administrator.
(1971 Code, sec. 13 1/2-6)
Sec. 1.10.007 Library Advisory Committee
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 24/505
The Mayor shall appoint a Library Advisory Committee, hereinafter referred to as the “Committee,” which shall
be an advisory body to the Librarian. The Committee shall be composed of the Librarian and three (3) members
of the Town Council appointed for a two-year term, and until their successors are appointed and qualified. A
majority of the Committee shall constitute a quorum. The Councilmembers shall serve without compensation. It
shall be the function of this Committee to make recommendations to the Town Council, the Town Administrator
and the Librarian concerning the operating policies of the library. (1971 Code, sec. 13 1/2-7)
Sec. 1.10.008 Hours
The library shall be kept open for the use of the residents of the Town during such hours as may be fixed by the
Town Council upon the recommendation of the Town Administrator following consultation with the Library
Committee and the Librarian. (1971 Code, sec. 13 1/2-8)
Sec. 1.10.009 Library cards
A library card shall be required of each user of the library who desires to be loaned books and other library
material and equipment. The fee to be collected for the library card shall be determined by the Town Council
upon recommendation of the Town Administrator following consultation with the Library Committee and the
Librarian. (1971 Code, sec. 13 1/2-9)
Sec. 1.10.010 Fee for overdue materials
Fines shall be collected for failure to return, at the date due, any books or other library materials and equipment
which have been loaned to holders of library cards. The schedule for fines shall be established by the Town
Council upon the recommendation of the Town Administrator following consultation with the Library Board and
the Librarian. (1971 Code, sec. 13 1/2-10)
Sec. 1.10.011 Destruction of library property
Any person who shall willfully or wantonly cut, mutilate, mark, tear, write upon, deface or otherwise destroy or
injure, in whole or in part, any book, pamphlet, periodical, map or document, picture or written or engraved or
printed paper belonging to the public library, or shall suffer any such injury to be inflicted while such property is
in his or her custody, or shall willfully or wantonly injure any of the furniture or property in the building of the
public library, or shall willfully or wantonly mark or deface or in any way injure the public library or any part
thereof or any fixture therein or appurtenance thereto, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine as provided in section 1.01.009 of this code for each offense.
(1971 Code, sec. 13 1/2-11)
Sec. 1.10.012 Taking or failing to return library property
(a) Any person who shall take from the public library any book, pamphlet, periodical, paper, or other property,
except in accordance with the rules of such library, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction thereof may be fined as provided in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(b) Any person who shall take or borrow from the public library any book, pamphlet, periodical, paper, or
other property and neglect, refuse or fail to return the same within two (2) weeks of the date of mailing a notice
by registered mail, with return receipt requested, to his address shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and
upon conviction thereof may be fined as provided in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(1971 Code, sec. 13 1/2-12)
ARTICLE 1.11 PARKS AND RECREATION*
Division 1. Generally
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 25/505
Secs. 1.11.001–1.11.030 Reserved
Division 2. Park Rules
Sec. 1.11.031 Definitions
The following words and phrases, when used in this division, shall, for the purpose of this division, have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
Park. A park, reservation or any other area in the Town, owned or used by the Town, and devoted to active or
passive recreation.
Police Officer. Every official of the Town Police Department.
(1971 Code, sec. 12-16)
Sec. 1.11.032 Authority to regulate activities
Police Officers shall have the authority to regulate activities in parks when necessary to prevent congestion and
to secure the maximum use for the comfort and convenience of all. (1971 Code, sec. 12-17)
Sec. 1.11.033 Injuring, defacing or removing property
No person in a park shall wilfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or remove any
building, benches, bridges, railings, paving or paving material, water lines or other public utilities or parts or
appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards, whether temporary or permanent, tables, monuments, stakes,
posts, or other boundary markers, or other structures or equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances
whatsoever, either real or personal. (1971 Code, sec. 12-18)
Sec. 1.11.034 Damaging or removing trees, plants or grass
No person shall damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant, or injure the bark, or pick the flowers
or seeds, of any tree or plant growing in a park, nor shall any person attach any rope, wire or other contrivance to
any such tree or plant. No person shall dig in or otherwise disturb grass areas in a park or in any other way injure
or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any park area. (1971 Code, sec. 12-19)
Sec. 1.11.035 Climbing trees; walking, standing or sitting on fountains, railings, etc.
No person shall climb any tree in a park, or walk, stand or sit upon any fountains or railings or upon any other
property in a park, which property is not designated or customarily used for such purposes. (1971 Code, sec. 12-
20)
Sec. 1.11.036 Littering
No person shall deposit or leave in any park any glass, bottles, broken glass, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish,
waste, garbage, refuse or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any park waters or left anywhere
on the grounds thereof, but it shall be placed in the proper receptacles, where provided. Where receptacles are
not so provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its
presence, and properly disposed of elsewhere. (1971 Code, sec. 12-21)
State law reference–Litter, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, ch. 365.
Sec. 1.11.037 Hunting or molesting animals or birds; using or carrying weapons or traps
No person shall hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot or throw missiles at any animal,
reptile or bird in a park. No person shall use, carry or possess firearms of any description, or air rifles, spring
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 26/505
guns, bow-and-arrows, slings, or any other form of weapons potentially inimical to wildlife and dangerous to
human safety, or any instrument that can be loaded with and fire blank cartridges, or any kind of trapping device,
in a park. Shooting into park areas from beyond park boundaries is forbidden. (1971 Code, sec. 12-22)
Sec. 1.11.038 Fishing permit
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to fish in, or take fish from, the lakes and streams in the public parks of
the Town, without first applying for and receiving a fishing permit issued by the Chief of Police.
(b) A permit to fish in the lakes and streams in the public parks of the Town shall be issued free of charge by
the Chief of Police to any bona fide resident citizen of the Town who shall apply therefor.
(c) A permit to fish in the lakes and streams in the public parks of the Town may be issued by the Chief of
Police to a nonresident of the Town, upon the payment of a fee of five dollars ($5.00) for such permit. Each
permit so issued to a nonresident of the Town shall be valid for one (1) year from its date.
(d) The permit to fish in the lakes and streams in the parks of the Town shall be carried by the person to whom
issued at all times while fishing and shall be exhibited by the permittee upon request of any Police Officer.
(1971 Code, sec. 12-23)
Sec. 1.11.039 Fishing with trotlines prohibited; limitation on number of poles
No person shall fish at any time with a trotline or with more than two (2) fishing poles in any of the lakes or
streams in the parks within the Town. (1971 Code, sec. 12-24)
Sec. 1.11.040 Boats and other watercraft
No person shall bring into or operate any boat, raft or other watercraft, whether motor-powered or not, upon any
waters in a park. (1971 Code, sec. 12-25)
State law reference–Authority to make certain rules and regulations regarding public water within municipality's jurisdiction,
V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code, sec. 31.092.
Sec. 1.11.041 Swimming, bathing or wading
No person shall swim, bathe or wade in any lake or pool in a park, except in the Highland Park Swimming Pool
in Davis Park, located between Drexel Drive and St. Johns Drive, as regulated by division 3 of this article. (1971
Code, sec. 12-26)
State law reference–Authority to make certain rules and regulations regarding public water within municipality's jurisdiction,
V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code, sec. 31.092.
Sec. 1.11.042 Picnicking prohibited in Lakeside Park
No person shall picnic or lunch in the park area known as Lakeside Park, from Beverly Drive to Wycliff Avenue,
on Lakeside Drive and St. Johns Drive. (1971 Code, sec. 12-27)
Sec. 1.11.043 Camping
No person shall set up tents, shacks, or any other temporary shelter in any park, for the purpose of camping.
(1971 Code, sec. 12-28)
Sec. 1.11.044 Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages
No person shall bring any alcoholic beverages into any park, nor shall any person drink alcoholic beverages at
any time in any park. (1971 Code, sec. 12-29)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 27/505
Sec. 1.11.045 Remaining in park between midnight and 5:00 a.m.
No person shall remain, stay or loiter in a park between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. on any day.
(1971 Code, sec. 12-30.1)
Sec. 1.11.046 Fires; dropping burning cigarettes or other inflammable material
No person shall build or attempt to build a fire in any park, nor shall any person drop, throw or otherwise scatter
lighted matches, burning cigarettes or cigars, tobacco paper or other inflammable material within any park area.
(1971 Code, sec. 12-31)
Sec. 1.11.047 Advertising
No person shall announce, advertise or call the public attention in any way to any article or service for sale or
hire in any park. (1971 Code, sec. 12-33)
Sec. 1.11.048 Organized sports activities - permit/permission required
(a) No person shall manage or participate in any organized sports activity in a park without first obtaining a
permit/permission for such activity.
(b) A person seeking the issuance of a permit under this section shall file an application with the Director of
Town Services, or his or her designee. The application shall state:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the person and organization applying for the
permit;
(2) If the use or activity is to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by any person other than the
applicant, the name, address and telephone number of that person;
(3) The exact nature of the use or activity for which the permit is being sought;
(4) The date(s) and hours for which the permit is desired;
(5) The park and the portion of the park desired to be used to conduct the proposed use or activity;
(6) An estimate of the anticipated attendance; and
(7) Any other information that the Director of Town Services finds to be reasonably necessary in
order to determine whether to issue a permit.
(c) The person seeking a permit under this section must be resident of the Town.
(d) The Director of Town Services, or his or her designee shall issue a permit under this section, unless:
(1) There is a reasonable risk that the proposed activity will be detrimental to the safety and
conditions of the park;
(2) The proposed activity or use of the park will unreasonably interfere with or detract from the
general public's use and enjoyment of the park;
(3) The proposed activity or use of the park will unreasonably interfere with or detract from the
public health, safety or welfare;
(4) The conduct of the proposed activity or use is reasonably likely to result in or create a clear and
present danger of violence by the applicant to persons or property resulting in potential harm to the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 28/505
public;
(5) The park grounds requested by the applicant have been reserved for another activity or for use
at the day and hour requested in the application;
(6) False or misleading information is contained in the application or required information is
omitted;
(7) The event would violate any federal, State or municipal law; or
(8) The nature of the event could cause unreasonable or undue environmental damage to the site.
(e) For the purposes of this section, an “organized sports activity” means a group of five (5) or more persons
engaging in various athletic activities, including but not limited to gaming events that involve the use of a
baseball, softball, kickball, volleyball, football, soccer, rugby, lacrosse, or Frisbee.
Sec. 1.11.049 Penalty
Any person or entity violating any of the provisions of this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction thereof may be fined as provided in section 1.01.009(a) of this Code of Ordinances.
(Ordinance 2013 adopted 1/9/17)
Secs. 1.11.050–1.11.080 Reserved
Division 3. Davis Park Swimming Pool
Part I. In General
Sec. 1.11.081 Definition
For the purpose of this division, the term “swimming pool” shall mean the municipal swimming pool located in
Davis Park within the Town. (1971 Code, sec. 12-44)
Sec. 1.11.082 Penalties
Any person or entity violating any of the provisions of this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction thereof may be fined as provided in section 1.01.009 of this code. In addition, such person may have
his season permit for the use of the swimming pool forfeited. (1971 Code, sec. 12-54)
Sec. 1.11.083 Use restricted to Town residents and guests
Only bona fide residents of the Town shall be allowed to enter and use the swimming pool; provided that a bona
fide guest of a bona fide resident of the Town may be invited and permitted to use the swimming pool when
accompanied by such resident. (1971 Code, sec. 12-45)
Sec. 1.11.084 Use of pool and wading pool by children under eight years of age
(a) No child under eight (8) years of age shall be permitted in the swimming pool unless accompanied by his
parent or parents, except when such child is taking swimming lessons from a competent person or is a competent
swimmer.
(b) A child under the age of eight (8) years who is the child of a bona fide resident of the Town shall be
permitted to use the wading pool in Davis Park, free of charge, when accompanied by his parent or a competent
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 29/505
person authorized by the parent to accompany the child and who shall be responsible for the safety and conduct
of the child entrusted to his care. No child under eight (8) years of age shall be permitted to enter the wading
pool enclosure unless accompanied by his parent or a person over sixteen (16) years of age who has been
entrusted with the care of such child.
(1971 Code, sec. 12-46)
Sec. 1.11.085 Shower and foot bath required before entering pool
Every person shall, before entering the swimming pool, take a shower bath and a foot bath in the facilities
provided at the pool. (1971 Code, sec. 12-51)
Sec. 1.11.086 Prohibited conduct
(a) In the interest of the public health, safety and welfare, each of the following enumerated acts is forbidden
and unlawful in the swimming pool and fenced-in area surrounding the pool:
(1) Diving off the shoulders of another person.
(2) Running along the banks of the pool.
(3) Splashing water on other persons in such a manner as to interfere with others, or using the pool
in such a manner as to create disorder or disturbances.
(4) Acting with indecent familiarity toward other persons.
(5) Taking floaters, inner tubes, or any other objects or devices in the deep end of the pool.
(6) Cursing, swearing or using indecent language.
(7) Throwing rocks or any other object in the pool or in the vicinity of the pool.
(8) Entering the pool while under the influence of intoxicating liquor.
(9) Eating food, smoking or chewing tobacco while in the pool.
(10) Using the spring board with other persons.
(11) Diving in shallow water.
(12) Entering the deep end of the pool unless such person can swim two (2) widths of the pool.
(13) Taking or permitting dogs or pets in the fenced-in area surrounding the pool.
(b) It shall be the duty of all persons using the swimming pool to act in an orderly manner so as to permit the
largest use and enjoyment of the pool by all persons, and no person shall willfully interfere with or willfully
annoy or disturb others in the proper use of the pool. Whenever the Pool Attendant or any Police Officer calls
attention to any acts prohibited by this section being committed, or about to be committed, such person so
committing, or about to commit, such acts shall immediately desist therefrom, and upon failing to do so, such
person shall be ejected from the pool. Such ejection shall not bar the prosecution of such person for violating
this section.
(1971 Code, sec. 12-52)
Sec. 1.11.087 Use by persons with contagious disease, skin disorder or open sores
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 30/505
No person who has an infectious, contagious or communicable disease, a skin disorder or open sores shall use
the swimming pool. The Pool Attendant and the Police are authorized to immediately eject from the pool any
person who has an infectious, contagious or communicable disease, a skin disorder or open sores, and such
person shall be denied further use of the pool unless a certificate of a licensed physician is furnished certifying
that such person is free of all contagious, infectious, or communicable diseases. (1971 Code, sec. 12-53)
Secs. 1.11.088–1.11.110 Reserved
Part II. Use Permits
Sec. 1.11.111 Fees
The Town Council shall, by resolution duly enacted at a regular meeting held not less than thirty (30) days prior
to the date set for the opening of the swimming pool each year, establish the charge to be made for each annual
permit to use the swimming pool for the ensuing season and the charge to be made for each single-admission
permit for such season. Such charges may be determined each year by resolution enacted by the Town Council
in the manner herein provided, without the necessity of amending this division, and any charge so established
shall continue from year to year until changed by subsequent resolution enacted by the Town Council. (1971
Code, sec. 12-47)
Sec. 1.11.112 Issuance and effect
A season permit for use of the swimming pool shall be issued by the Town Secretary upon application made by a
bona fide resident of the Town and payment of the established charge for such permit. Such season permit shall
entitle the owner thereof to use the swimming pool at all times it shall be opened for use during the year for
which the permit is issued. A single-admission permit, good for one swim on the day upon which it is issued,
may be purchased at the pool by a bona fide resident of the Town for use by such resident or a bona fide guest of
such resident when accompanied by such resident. (1971 Code, sec. 12-48)
Sec. 1.11.113 Register of season permits; numbering; transfer
A season permit issued pursuant to section 1.11.112 shall be registered in a book provided for such purpose in
the office of the Town Secretary and shall be numbered and nontransferable. The season permit register shall
provide space for the name, address and telephone number of the permittee. (1971 Code, sec. 12-49)
Sec. 1.11.114 Season permit tags
(a) Each bona fide resident who is issued a season permit under this division shall be furnished a metal tag
bearing the same number shown on the permit register, which must be securely fastened to the bathing suit and
worn at all times while such resident is using the swimming pool, and no person, although the owner of a
registered season permit, shall be allowed in the pool unless at all times wearing and displaying such tag.
(b) Should the legal holder of a duly issued and registered metal tag, as provided for in subsection (a), lose
such tag, the Town Secretary shall issue to such person a new tag, upon payment of a fee of one dollar ($1.00),
which fee shall be refunded upon surrender of such new tag accompanied by a display of the original tag.
(c) Should a registered permit tag issued under this section be found in use by any person other than the
registered owner, the Pool Attendant shall take up such tag and eject the person unlawfully using it. The permit
tag taken from an unlawful user shall be returned to the rightful owner upon satisfactory showing that the use by
such person was without the owner's consent. If such use was with the owner's permission, the tag shall be
forfeited.
(1971 Code, sec. 12-50)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 31/505
Secs. 1.11.115–1.11.140 Reserved
Division 4. Municipal Tennis Courts
Part I. In General
Sec. 1.11.141 Definitions
Within the meaning of this division, the following terms are defined as follows:
Bona fide guest. Any person invited to use the municipal tennis courts of the Town when such person is
accompanied by a bona fide permit holder of the Town as defined in this section.
Bona fide permit holder. Such person as may be a resident of and who holds a valid municipal tennis court
permit (hereinafter referred to as “MTC”) from the Town.
(1971 Code, sec. 12-65)
Sec. 1.11.142 Use limited to permit holders and guests
The use of the tennis courts within the corporate limits of the Town is limited to the exclusive use and enjoyment
of bona fide permit holders of the Town and their bona fide guests. (1971 Code, sec. 12-66)
Sec. 1.11.143 Use regulations; prohibited conduct; reservations
(a) Tennis courts are to be used only for tennis play. It shall be a violation of this division for any person to
enter upon tennis courts located in the Town and use same for any purpose other than tennis play. Prohibited
activities on the tennis courts include, but are not limited to, riding bicycles, the use of skates or skateboards, the
use of scooters or motorized vehicles, the playing of any game other than tennis, or for any other purpose.
(b) In the interest of the public health, safety and welfare, each of the following enumerated acts is forbidden
in and around municipal tennis courts located in the Town:
(1) Cursing, swearing or using indecent language.
(2) Creating a disturbance or unnecessary noise.
(3) Acting with indecent familiarity toward other persons.
(4) Entering upon tennis courts while under the influence of intoxicating liquor.
(5) Discarding food, beverages, bottles, cans or other refuse within the fenced-in areas surrounding
the tennis courts.
(6) Throwing rocks, dirt, debris, or any other objects in, on or around the tennis courts.
(7) Throwing tennis racquets, metal objects, or other items manufactured of hard material in, on or
around the tennis courts.
(8) Taking or permitting dogs or other pets within the fenced in areas surrounding the tennis courts.
(9) Climbing fences.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 32/505
(c) All persons entering upon tennis courts within the Town must wear tennis shoes, and it shall be a violation
of this division for any person to enter upon any tennis court in leather shoes or any other footwear likely to
damage the surface of the courts. The term “tennis shoes” shall mean soft shoes with rubber soles, which soles
have no heels or treads.
(d) No person shall enter upon a tennis court in the Town without first making a reservation either in person,
or by telephone, with the Reservation Clerk at the Town Fire Station, and it shall be a violation of this division
for anyone to enter upon the tennis courts without a reservation. A valid permit number must be furnished when
making a reservation.
(e) Reservations for tennis courts shall be taken in accordance with regulations as may be prescribed from
time to time by the Town Administrator.
(f) At least one member of each group using a tennis court shall have in his or her possession his or her valid
permit, and to enter upon the tennis court without such permit is a violation of this division.
(g) The Chief of Police or his designated representative shall, from time to time, check the use of municipal
tennis courts to enforce compliance with this division, and in particular to enforce compliance with the
requirement of a permit and reservation.
(1971 Code, sec. 12-69)
Sec. 1.11.144 Damaging courts or equipment
Any person who shall willfully damage in any way the playing surfaces of tennis courts, tennis nets, fences
surrounding tennis courts, tennis lighting fixtures, tennis backboards, or any other equipment involved in the use
of tennis courts or attached thereto shall be guilty of a violation of this division. (1971 Code, sec. 12-70)
Secs. 1.11.145–1.11.170 Reserved
Part II. Use Permits
Sec. 1.11.171 Application
Any person who is a resident of the Town may make an application on an application form prescribed by the
Town at the Town Hall, 4700 Drexel Drive, on January 1st of each year or any time during that same calendar
year, for an annual MTC permit. (1971 Code, sec. 12-67)
Sec. 1.11.172 Issuance; fees; expiration; transfer
Upon timely and proper application being made, an annual MTC permit shall be issued to a resident applicant,
subject to the following conditions:
(1) The Town Council shall, by resolution enacted at a regular meeting, establish the charge made
for each annual permit to use the municipal tennis courts for the ensuing season. Such charges may
be determined each year by resolution enacted by the Town Council in the manner herein provided
without the necessity of amending this division, and any permit charge so established shall continue
from year to year until changed by subsequent resolution enacted by the Town Council.
(2) MTC permits shall be numbered and dated to indicate validity.
(3) All MTC permits shall expire on January 1 of each year. Permits are nontransferable. If a
permit should be found in use by any person other than the registered owner, said permit shall be
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 33/505
taken up and such person will be ejected from the tennis court by the Chief of Police or his
designated representative. The permit taken from the unlawful user shall be returned to the rightful
owner upon satisfactory showing that the use by such person was without the owner's consent. If
such use was with the owner's permission, the permit shall be forfeited.
(1971 Code, sec. 12-68)
Secs. 1.11.173–1.11.200 Reserved
Division 5. Park Weddings
Sec. 1.11.201 Restrictions
The use of Town parks for weddings shall be restricted to residents of the Town and is further subject to the
following restrictions:
(1) No more than twenty-five (25) persons;
(2) Restricted to daylight hours only and a maximum time of thirty (30) minutes;
(3) No food and drink;
(4) No music, amplifiers or recording equipment;
(5) No artificial lighting;
(6) No chairs, floral arrangements, candelabra or other props or hardware.
(1971 Code, sec. 12-82)
Sec. 1.11.202 Liability
Any resident who uses a Town park for a wedding shall be liable to the Town for any damage to the Town
shrubbery, grass and any other Town property by reason of such wedding. (1971 Code, sec. 12-83)
ARTICLE 1.12 SPECIAL EVENTS
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 1.12.001 Definitions
Applicant. A person who has filed a written application for a special event permit.
Director of Public Safety. The Director of Public Safety of the Town, or his designated agent.
Person. An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association or other legal entity.
Progressive special event. An activity which is not confined to a single location, such as a foot race, marathon or
parade.
Special event. A temporary event or gathering (other than a private social event which does not exceed twelve
(12) hours in duration), not longer than ten (10) consecutive calendar days in duration, using private and/or
public property, in which the estimated number of participants exceeds twenty-five (25) during any day of the
event and/or which involves one (1) or more of the following activities:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 34/505
(1) Closing or modifying the traffic flow on a public street;
(2) Blocking or restricting the use of public and/or private property;
(3) Sale of merchandise, food or beverages on public property or on private property where
otherwise prohibited by ordinance;
(4) Requiring the placement of temporary no-parking or traffic-control signs in a public right-ofway;
(5) Use of any voice amplification equipment;
(6) Placement of equipment or cables across public streets, public sidewalks or public rights-ofway;
(7) Use of vehicles requiring auxiliary motors for self-contained power units or generators;
(8) Use of artificial lighting or floodlights;
(9) Signs not in conformance with the Town's zoning ordinance.
Special event permit. Written approval from the Director of Public Safety to hold a special event.
(1971 Code, sec. 13 3/4-1)
Sec. 1.12.002 Penalty
Any person or entity violating any of the provisions of this article or any requirement of a special event permit
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof may be fined as provided in section
1.01.009 of this code. (1971 Code, sec. 13 3/4-42)
Sec. 1.12.003 Offenses
A person commits an offense if he:
(1) Commences or conducts a special event without a special event permit required by this article;
or
(2) Fails to comply with any provision of this article.
(1971 Code, sec. 13 3/4-41)
Sec. 1.12.004 Authority of Director of Public Safety; limitation on activities for profit
(a) The provisions of this article shall be administered and enforced by the Director of Public Safety.
(b) The Director of Public Safety has authority to issue a special event permit that authorizes one (1) or more
of the activities described as “special events” when requirements of this article have been met.
(c) Nothing in this article is intended to authorize business (for profit) activities in those districts of the Town
not zoned commercial.
(1971 Code, sec. 13 3/4-2)
Sec. 1.12.005 Provisions cumulative; other permits
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 35/505
The provisions of this article are cumulative of all Town ordinances. Building permits, electrical permits, food
establishment permits, alcoholic beverage licenses and all other permits required by a Town ordinance and/or
other State or federal law required for specific activities to be conducted in conjunction with or as part of the
special event shall be applied for separately in accordance with such applicable Town ordinance and/or State or
federal law. (1971 Code, sec. 13 3/4-3)
Sec. 1.12.006 Exemptions
(a) The provisions of this article shall not apply to:
(1) A special event conducted entirely on:
(A) Property in business zoning districts;
(B) Property in country club zoning districts;
(C) Events conducted on public school property under the sponsorship of the Highland Park
Independent School District or its affiliate organizations (Dad's Club, PTA, etc.);
(D) Town-owned property; or
(2) Private parties, receptions and other social events of limited duration conducted on private
property (not to exceed twelve (12) hours).
(1971 Code, sec. 13 3/4-4)
(3) Upon the approval by the Town Council, food trucks located on private property for a total
duration of not more than 120 days. An application for same must be filed with Town staff, and such
application shall include, at a minimum, the proposed location(s), hours of operation, and length of
time. (Ordinance 1967 adopted 3/23/15)
(b) In the event that a part of a special event is exempt under provisions of subsection (a) above, and an
additional part of the special event is proposed to be conducted on nonexempt property, the Director of Public
Safety shall review that segment of the event proposed to be conducted on nonexempt property and issue a
determination based on the requirements of this article. (1971 Code, sec. 13 3/4-4)
Secs. 1.12.007–1.12.030 Reserved
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 1.12.031 Application; notification of residents; issuance; duration
(a) A person desiring to hold a special event shall apply in advance for a special event permit by filing with
the Director of Public Safety a written application upon a form provided by the Town for that purpose. The
Director of Public Safety shall inform the applicant of any applicable license or permit requirements,
restrictions, regulations and fees for Town services. An application shall be filed not less than forty-five (45)
days before the special event is to begin. The Director of Public Safety may waive the 45-day filing requirement
if he determines that the application can be processed in less than forty-five (45) days, taking into consideration
the number and types of permits required to be issued in conjunction with the special event permit. The
completed application shall be returned to the Director of Public Safety at least twenty (20) days before the
event unless, in the opinion of the Director of Public Safety, the application can be processed in less time.
(b) A completed application shall contain the following information:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 36/505
(1) The full name and principal office of the individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association
or other legal entity applying for the special event permit;
(2) The name, address and telephone number of the person or persons responsible for the conduct
of the special event;
(3) A description of the special event and requested dates and hours of operation for the event;
(4) The estimated number of persons to participate in the special event;
(5) A sketch showing the areas to be used during the special event along with proposed structures,
tents, fences, barricades and signs. It shall be the applicant's responsibility to make private
arrangements for the execution and dismantling of all signs and barricades used in the event unless,
in the opinion of the Director of Public Safety, legitimate circumstances indicate a public necessity
for the Town to supply, erect and dismantle the signs and/or barricades, in which case he may
authorize use of Town equipment and/or personnel to provide such traffic-control devices;
(6) Provisions for parking with a designation of where, if applicable, no-parking signs will be used;
(7) Full details of how the applicant proposes to provide security and traffic control;
(8) The time and location of public street closings, if any are requested;
(9) Full explanation of the sale of merchandise or the sale or serving of food or alcoholic beverages
at the special event, if any;
(10) Description of animals to be used in the special event, if any;
(11) Details of how the applicant will clean up the area used after the special event, if on public
property; and
(12) Proof that the applicant possesses or will obtain all licenses and permits required by Town
ordinance and/or by State or federal law for the conduct of the special event.
(13) Applicants for block parties which include barricading streets shall present written
documentation that all residents residing in the affected block have been notified of the proposed
dates and times of the street blockage. Applicants for block parties shall only be required to provide
items (1), (2), (3), (4), (8), and (11) above and the written documentation described herein.
(14) Applicants for special event permits involving location filming or videotaping shall present
written documentation that each property owner in the affected block and the immediately adjacent
blocks has been contacted and is aware of the proposed dates, times and scope of the filming and type
of vehicles and equipment to be used. Such written notice shall further direct residents who object to
the filming to contact the Director of Public Safety and advise him of their areas of concern.
(c) Upon receipt of the properly competed application, the Director of Public Safety shall forward a copy of
the application to the Public Works, Parks and Sanitation Departments if any part of the proposed event affects
an area of Town operations for which the respective departments have responsibility. Each department shall
review the application and return it with any written comments to the Director of Public Safety within five (5)
working days of receipt thereof.
(d) After reviewing the application, which meets all of the applicable requirements of this article and with
favorable departmental comments, the Director of Public Safety shall issue the special event permit unless denial
is required by section 1.12.032. A special event permit will be issued, subject to the provisions of this article, for
a period not to exceed ten (10) consecutive days.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 37/505
(1971 Code, sec. 13 3/4-21)
Sec. 1.12.032 Denial or revocation
(a) The Director of Public Safety shall deny a special event permit for any of the following reasons:
(1) The applicant fails to comply with any provision of this article;
(2) A special event permit has been granted for another special event at the same place and time or
in the same area of the Town on successive days;
(3) The applicant fails to publish any public notice required under this article;
(4) The proposed special event will unreasonably disrupt the orderly flow of traffic and no
reasonable means of rerouting traffic or otherwise meeting traffic needs is available. Special events
should avoid using Mockingbird Lane and Preston Road. The Director may deny a permit for any
event requiring traffic stoppage on any thoroughfare;
(5) The applicant fails to adequately provide for any of the following:
(A) The protection of private property adjacent to the special event location.
(B) Protection of public and private property.
(C) Crowd security, taking into consideration the size and character of the event; in any
progressive event such as a race or bike-a-thon, the Director of Public Safety shall deny a
permit if the number of participants will exceed four thousand (4,000) and/or the proposed
starting time is after 8:00 a.m., and all participants will not exit the prescribed course within the
Town prior to 9:30 a.m.
(D) Emergency vehicle access.
(E) General well-being and safety of the participants as detailed by the proposed activities
contained in the application.
(6) The applicant fails to provide written documentation of neighborhood awareness as provided in
section 1.12.031 of this division.
(7) The applicant fails to comply with, or the proposed special event will violate, any Town
ordinance or State or federal law.
(8) The applicant makes a false statement of any material fact on the application for a special event
permit.
(9) The applicant fails to provide proof that he possesses or is able to obtain a license or permit
required by Town ordinance or other applicable law for the conduct of all activities included as part
of the special event.
(10) The applicant fails to provide proof in those instances where the proposed special event also
involves adjacent jurisdictions.
(b) The Director of Public Safety shall revoke by written notice a special event permit if:
(1) The applicant fails to comply with, or the special event is in violation of, a condition or
provision of the special event permit, an ordinance of the Town or any State or federal applicable
law;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 38/505
(2) The permit holder made a false statement of material fact on an application for a special event
permit.
(1971 Code, sec. 13 3/4-22)
Sec. 1.12.033 Conditions
(a) The Director of Public Safety may issue a permit for a special event and shall impose such conditions upon
the permit as may be necessary to protect the public. These conditions may include, but may not be limited to,
the following:
(1) No commercial filming, videotaping or still photography shall occur on public property, or
affecting public property, before 7:30 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m. The Director of Public Safety may
extend, with approval of the residents, these hours upon a demonstration of necessity and/or upon a
showing the exception shall not disturb the public. All other special events shall not be scheduled
before 7:30 a.m. nor after 10:00 p.m. unless otherwise provided by the Town Council;
(2) No gunfire, explosives, pyrotechnics or other noise-creating devices shall be permitted unless
special authorization is granted by the Town Council;
(3) No permits shall be issued for any public or private property upon which there are violations of
the fire code, nor will a permit be issued for any activity, scene or representation of an event which
the Town Fire Marshal deems hazardous to the environment or public health; and
(4) No permit shall be required for filming, videotaping or still photography by an individual when
such activities are for that individual's personal entertainment, nor shall any permit be required for
such activities related to news gathering or for investigative purposes.
(b) Upon approval of a progressive special event, the applicant shall be required to publish notices of at least
four (4) column inches each in size, in the Park Cities News and the Park Cities People, for two (2) consecutive
issues immediately prior to the date of the scheduled event, of the proposed route, date, time and approximate
number of participants in said event.
(1971 Code, sec. 13 3/4-23)
Sec. 1.12.034 Appeals
In the event the Director of Public Safety denies issuance of a special event permit or revokes such a permit, he
shall send the applicant or permit holder, at the applicant's address on file with the Town, written notice of the
denial or revocation and of the right to an appeal, by certified mail with return receipt requested. The applicant
or permit holder may appeal the decision of the Director of Public Safety to the Town Administrator within ten
(10) working days of the denial or revocation. Should the applicant or permit holder elect to appeal the decision
of the Town Administrator, the appeal of the denial or revocation may be heard by the Town Council. (1971
Code, sec. 13 3/4-24)
CHAPTER 2
ANIMAL CONTROL
ARTICLE 2.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 39/505
Sec. 2.01.001 Definitions
The definition of terms as used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates, is as follows:
Animal. Any live, vertebrate creature, domestic or wild.
At large. Off of the premises of the owner and not under the control of the owner or a member of the owner's
immediate family, or a servant of the owner, either by leash, cord, chain or other article attached to the dog or cat
and held by such person having control.
Cat. Each and every domestic mammal of the feline species, regardless of age or sex.
Dog. Each and every domestic mammal of the canine species, regardless of age or sex.
Owner. Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation owning, keeping, in control of, or harboring one
or more dogs and/or cats. A dog or cat shall be deemed to be harbored if it is fed or sheltered for three (3)
consecutive days or more.
Poundmaster. The person having charge of or control over the animal boarding facility as designated from time
to time by the Director of Public Safety of the Town.
Vicious dog. A dog which is unruly, refractory or has displayed an inclination to approach or growl at a person or
persons in an angry, threatening or ill-tempered manner when such person or persons was or were not doing acts
ordinarily calculated to cause well-tamed dogs or cats to respond in such manner, or to bite, bite at, attack or
snap at a person or persons, or has displayed habits indicating a lack of docility or a lack of complete taming.
(1971 Code, sec. 3-1)
Sec. 2.01.002 Animals prohibited in restaurants, food stores and other food establishments
No owner of any dog or cat or other animal, and no manager, clerk, owner or operator of any place where food is
exposed or offered for sale, served or sold for human consumption, shall permit any dog or cat or other animal to
enter, be, or remain within any store, restaurant, cafe, shop, building, structure or place where food is offered or
exposed for sale, displayed or handled for human consumption within the corporate limits of the Town. (1971
Code, sec. 3-2)
State law reference–Discrimination against persons with disabilities using assistance animals in public facilities, V.T.C.A., Human
Resources Code, sec. 121.003.
Sec. 2.01.003 Keeping wild animals, fowl or livestock prohibited
(a) The following terms shall mean:
Animal. Any live creature, domestic or wild, vertebrate or invertebrate, not of the human species.
Fowl. Any of various birds, including chickens, turkeys, geese, ducks, doves, guineas, swans, peafowl or any
other free, uncaged bird or fowl, except parakeets, canaries, pigeons or other birds of similar size that are
customarily kept within cages.
Livestock. Cattle, swine, sheep, horses, donkeys, burros and goats.
Person. Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation owning, keeping, maintaining control of, or
harboring any animals prohibited by this section.
Wild. Not domesticated.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 40/505
Wild animal. Any live monkey (nonhuman primate), ape, opossum, raccoon, rabbit, skunk, bear, fox, weasel,
coatimundi, snake, mink, ferret, lizard, alligator, jaguar, jackal, wolf, crocodile, leopard, panther, tiger, bobcat,
cheetah, lion, lynx, ocelot, bee, or any other animal which retains its wild nature.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor or permit to be kept on his premises any wild animal,
fowl or livestock.
(c) Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and
upon conviction shall be fined as provided in section 1.01.009 of this code, and each and every day such
violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
(1971 Code, sec. 3-3)
State law reference–Dangerous wild animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 822.101 et seq.
Sec. 2.01.004 Noisy animals; limitation on number of animals; complaints
(a) Noisy animals prohibited. No person shall keep upon any property under the control of such person any
dog or cat or animal of the canine kind which habitually barks, howls, or yelps, or any cat which habitually cries
or howls to the great discomfort of the people and quiet of the neighborhood, or in such manner as to materially
disturb or annoy persons in the neighborhood who are of ordinary sensitivities. Such animals are hereby declared
to be a public nuisance.
(b) Number of dogs and cats limited. The keeping of an unlimited number of dogs and cats in the Town for a
considerable period of time detracts from and, in many instances, is detrimental to the healthful and comfortable
life for which such areas were created. The keeping of an unlimited number of dogs and cats is, therefore,
declared to be a public nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to keep more than a total of three
(3) dogs and cats within the Town, with the exception that a litter of pups or a litter of kittens, or a portion of a
litter, may be kept for a period of time not exceeding three (3) months from birth.
(c) Duty of owner to control noise. Each and every person shall prevent each, any and every dog or cat upon
any premises in the Town controlled or used by such person from barking and/or howling for any period of more
than three (3) consecutive minutes, and from making any such noises as could reasonably be expected to disturb
the peace, rest, quietude or comfort of any person of normal nervous sensibilities.
(d) Violations. Each, any and every person who violates any of the foregoing provisions of this section and
any person who shall harbor or keep on his premises, or in or about his premises, or on premises under his
control, any dog, cat, or animal of dog kind which by loud or unusual barking or howling disturbs the peace and
quiet of any person of normal nervous sensibilities beyond the boundaries of other property shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined as hereinafter provided for a violation of this chapter, and each
and every twenty-four (24) hours that such dog, cat, or other animal shall remain or be kept on any premises
shall constitute a separate offense.
(e) Complaints. Whenever any person shall complain to the Department of Public Safety that a dog which
habitually barks, howls or yelps or a cat which habitually cries or howls is being kept by any person in the Town,
the Department of Public Safety shall notify the owner of said dog or cat that a complaint has been received and
that the person should take whatever steps necessary to alleviate the howling, yelping or crying. If the warning
given to the person alleged to be keeping a dog or cat as set forth herein is ineffective, then a verified complaint
of at least two (2) citizens not from the same family may be presented to the Department of Public Safety,
alleging that a vicious dog or a dog which habitually barks, howls or yelps, or a cat which habitually cries or
howls, is being kept by any person within the Town. The Department of Public Safety shall inform the owner of
such dog or cat that said petition has been received and shall cite the owner of the dog or cat for the violation
alleged in said petition.
(1971 Code, sec. 3-4)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 41/505
Sec. 2.01.005 Removal of excreta deposited by dogs
The owner of every animal shall be responsible for the removal of excreta deposited by his canine on public
walks, parks, recreation areas, or private property. (1971 Code, sec. 3-5)
Sec. 2.01.006 Abandonment
No owner of an animal shall abandon such animal. (1971 Code, sec. 3-6)
State law reference–Cruelty by abandoning animal, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 42.09(3).
Sec. 2.01.007 Restraint; running at large; pens or other enclosures
(a) All dogs shall be kept under restraint, either by a leash or by being kept in an enclosure of adequate height
sufficient to restrain a dog from leaving its owner's premises. It shall be unlawful for any dog or cat to be at large
on the public streets, parks, alleys, public premises and/or private premises other than the premises of the owner
of said dog or cat in the corporate limits of the Town unless the dog or cat is on a leash and is under the control
of a person physically able to control it.
(b) The owner of any dog or cat found running at large shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by a fine as provided by this chapter.
(c) No owner shall fail to exercise proper care and control of his animals to prevent them from becoming a
public nuisance.
(d) All pens, yards or runs or other structures wherein any animal is kept shall be of such construction so as to
be easily cleaned and kept in good repair. Fences which are intended as enclosures for any animal shall be
securely constructed, and shall be adequate for the purpose, kept in good repair, and not be allowed to become
unsightly.
(e) It shall hereafter be the duty of the Town Health Officer or the Town Director of the Department of Public
Safety to cause all dogs and cats, whether vaccinated and licensed or not, to be caught and placed in the Town
pound when found running at large upon the public streets, sidewalks, parkways, parks, alleys, public premises,
and/or private premises, other than the private premises of the owner of such dog or cat, unless the dog or cat is
on a leash and accompanied by the owner, or a member of the owner's immediate family, or a servant of the
owner. It shall be a violation of this chapter to interfere with an officer in the performance of his duties.
(1971 Code, sec. 3-7)
State law reference–Restraint, impoundment and disposition of dogs and cats, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 386.033.
Sec. 2.01.008 Impoundment of dangerous or vicious animals; confinement of animals that have attacked
person
(a) Any dog or cat or other animal found running at large that appears to be fierce or dangerous, or has vicious
propensities, may be taken up and impounded and shall not be released except upon approval of the Director of
the Town Department of Public Safety, but not before the payment of any penalties prescribed in this chapter;
provided, however, that if any dangerous, fierce, or vicious dog or cat or other animal so found at large cannot
be safely taken up and impounded, such dog or cat or other animal may be slain by any officer of the Town.
(b) Whenever any domesticated animal has bitten, scratched, or otherwise attacked any person or persons
within the corporate limits of the Town, it shall be confined in such place or places as the Town Department of
Public Safety may direct and for such period of observation as may be necessary, unless such animal is too
vicious and dangerous to be impounded safely, in which case it may be killed and the head shipped to the
department of state health services for rabies examination.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 42/505
(c) Whenever any dog or cat or other animal bites, scratches, or otherwise attacks any person or persons
within the corporate limits of the Town, the owner of said animal shall immediately notify the Town Police
Department. The Director of the Department of Public Safety shall order the animal confined and held, at the
owner's expense, for a period of ten (10) days in isolation approved by the Town Health Officer, or Department
of Public Safety, if practical; provided, however, that if such dog or cat or other animal cannot be safely captured
or impounded, it may be slain by any Policeman of the Town.
(d) Anyone having the knowledge or reason to believe that any dog, cat or other animal has bitten, scratched
or otherwise attacked any person or persons within the corporate limits of the Town shall report within twentyfour
(24) hours, so far as it is known, the name and address of the owner, the location of the incident, and other
circumstances of the animal. Such report concerning bites shall be made to the Town Department of Public
Safety.
(1971 Code, sec. 3-8)
Sec. 2.01.009 Dangerous dogs
Dangerous dogs, as defined in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, section 822.041, shall be regulated in
accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, chapter 822, subchapter D, section 822.041
et seq. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 2.01.010 Impoundment procedures
(a) Records; notification of owner. The Town Department of Public Safety, upon receiving any dog or cat,
shall make a complete registry, entering the breed, color, and sex of such dog or cat and whether licensed. If
licensed, the Director of the Department of Public Safety shall obtain the name and address of the owner and the
number of the license tag, and every reasonable effort shall be made to notify the owner thereof.
(b) Redemption of animal; fees. The owner of any animal so impounded may retain and repossess such animal
if, but only if, such owner pays a pound fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) in cash to the Town, and presents to the
Poundmaster a receipt for same. In the event that an animal is redeemed from the Poundmaster after seventy-two
(72) hours, the owner shall pay to the Town an additional ten dollars ($10.00) a day, or part of a day, for each
day thereafter.
(c) Disposal of unredeemed animals. After the expiration of seventy-two (72) hours from the time of
impoundment of such animal, whether licensed or unlicensed, the Director of the Department of Public Safety
shall have the option of either disposing of the animal by sale to a new owner upon payment of existing pound
fees or to cause said dog or cat to be killed and its body disposed of.
(1971 Code, sec. 3-10)
State law reference–Restraint, impoundment and disposition of dogs and cats, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 386.033.
Sec. 2.01.011 Confinement of animals suspected of having rabies
Any person owning or having in his possession or control any dog or cat or other animal with rabies or
suspected of having rabies shall report such fact to the Town Health Officer or the Department of Public Safety,
together with all known facts regarding possible exposure of persons or other animals to the disease. The
Department of Public Safety shall require the person owning or having in his possession any dog or cat or other
animal with rabies or suspected of having rabies to immediately confine in isolation, approved by the
Department of Public Safety or the Town Health Officer, at the owner's expense, such dog or cat or other animal
for ten (10) days unless death intervenes. Where approved isolation and confinement are not practical, animals
shall be slain under direction of the Town Health Officer or the Director of the Department of Public Safety.
Animals suspected of having rabies shall be examined postmortem for rabies in an approved laboratory. (1971
Code, sec. 3-11)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 43/505
State law reference–Rabies reports and quarantine, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.041 et seq.
Sec. 2.01.012 Bite incidents
(a) Filing of complaint. The Town Director of the Department of Public Safety may receive a complaint
concerning a dog which has bitten a human being. A complaint must be filed with the Director of the
Department of Public Safety with a written, sworn complaint which contains the following information:
(1) Name, address, and telephone number of the complainant and any other witnesses to the
incident;
(2) Date, time, and location of the incident;
(3) Description of the dog;
(4) Name, address, and telephone number of the dog owner;
(5) A statement that the dog, while straying, bit the complainant;
(6) A statement that the dog has exhibited vicious propensities; and
(7) Other facts or circumstances of the incident.
(b) Notice of hearing; impoundment of animal. After a sworn complaint is filed with the Department of Public
Safety, the Director shall set a time and place for a hearing. The Director shall give notice of the hearing to the
dog's owner by personal service or certified mail, return receipt requested, at least ten (10) days prior to the
hearing date. After the owner of the dog receives notice, the Department of Public Safety shall impound the dog
specified in the complaint.
(c) Determination; order to destroy animal. The court shall determine at the hearing if the dog specified in the
complaint should be destroyed for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare of the community. The
court shall receive testimony at the hearing concerning the incident under investigation. To order destruction of
the dog for the public health, safety and welfare, the court must find all the following facts to be true:
(1) The dog, while straying, bit the complainant;
(2) The dog has exhibited vicious propensities in past conduct;
(3) The impounded dog is the same dog which committed the acts under subsections (c)(1) and (2)
of this section;
(4) Destruction of the dog is necessary to preserve the public health, safety, and welfare of the
community.
If the court orders destruction of the dog and the owner is not present at the hearing, he shall notify the owner of
the decision by personal service or certified mail, return receipt requested. If the court does not order destruction
of the dog, the Director of the Department of Public Safety shall return the dog to the owner upon payment of a
pound fee if the owner shows proof of current registration.
(d) Appeal. An owner of a dog may appeal a destruction order to a court of competent jurisdiction within five
(5) days of the decision. If the Director of the Town Department of Public Safety receives written notice of the
appeal within five (5) days of the decision, he shall suspend the destruction order pending final determination of
the court.
(1971 Code, sec. 3-12)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 44/505
(e) Failure to release animal to Director of Public Safety. A person commits an offense if he knowingly
possesses and fails to release to the Town's Director of Public Safety a dog that has been charged by sworn
complaint as provided in this section. (1971 Code, sec. 3-12; Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Rabies reports and quarantine, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.041 et seq.
Sec. 2.01.013 Licensing and rabies vaccination
(a) License required; fee; term. It shall hereafter be unlawful for the owner of any dog or cat within the
corporate limits of the Town to keep or maintain said dog or cat unless said dog or cat is immunized against
rabies, and unless an annual license fee for each dog and cat has been paid to the Town. The annual license fees
are as follows:
(1) For each unneutered male dog: $20.00.
(2) For each unneutered male cat: $20.00.
(3) For each unspayed female dog: $20.00.
(4) For each unspayed female cat: $20.00.
(5) For each neutered male dog: $10.00.
(6) For each neutered male cat: $10.00.
(7) For each spayed female dog: $10.00.
(8) For each spayed female cat: $10.00.
The fee herein prescribed shall be due and payable on or before January 1 of each year beginning January 1,
1981.
(1971 Code, sec. 3-13)
(b) License application; certificate of vaccination. Written application for a license shall be made to the Town
Department of Public Safety, where shall be given the name and address of the applicant and a description of the
animal after obtaining a dog or cat over four (4) months old. At the time of the payment of the above-prescribed
annual license tax for each dog and cat, the owner of said dog or cat shall file with the Department of Public
Safety a written certificate of anti-rabies vaccination by a veterinarian duly licensed to practice such profession
by the State Board of Veterinary Medical Examiners, showing the name and address of the owner of said dog or
cat, containing a description of the color, breed, sex and weight of said dog or cat, together with the kind and
amount of vaccine used and the date of administration, and certifying that said dog or cat was so vaccinated and
immunized against rabies by such veterinarian for the current year. (1971 Code, sec. 3-13; Ordinance adopting
Code)
(c) License tag. Upon the filing of the certificate, as required, and the payment of the tax fixed, the
Department of Public Safety shall deliver to the owner of said dog or cat a metal tag stamped with the words
“Tax Paid,” and with the year for which same is paid, and such tag shall at all times be securely attached to a
collar around the neck of the dog or cat for which such license tax is paid. The Town Department of Public
Safety and its employees are hereby expressly prohibited from accepting payment of the above-prescribed
annual license tax and issuing a license tax receipt and tag unless the applicant has filed with the Department of
Public Safety the above-prescribed certificate of vaccination.
(d) Duration of license; license nontransferable. The annual license for dogs and cats required by this chapter
shall be valid, if not revoked, for the calendar year in which issued, and shall be nontransferable.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 45/505
(e) Exemptions. License fees shall not be required for Seeing Eye dogs, governmental police dogs, or a
nonresident keeping a dog or cat within the Town for no longer than sixty (60) days.
(1971 Code, sec. 3-13)
State law references–Authority of municipalities to establish rabies control programs, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.015;
registration of dogs and cats, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.031 et seq.; rabies vaccinations, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety
Code, sec. 826.051 et seq.
CHAPTER 3
BUILDING REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 3.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 3.01.001 Building Inspector
There is hereby created the office of Building Inspector of the Town. (1971 Code, sec. 5-1; Ordinance adopting
Code)
Sec. 3.01.002 Artificial turf
(a) Definitions. Words in this subsection shall have the same definition and/or meaning as that set forth in
chapter 14, zoning, section 22, general definitions, of this code, and for the purposes of this section only.
Artificial turf. A surface of synthetic fibers made to look like natural grass.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or to install artificial turf in or on the front yard of a lot
within the Town.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or to install artificial turf in a yard such that any portion of
said turf is visible from the Town's streets, sidewalks, parkways, and/or alleys.
(d) It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or to install artificial turf in any easement within the Town.
(e) Any person, or persons, desiring to construct or install artificial turf within the Town, shall first procure
from the Building Inspector a building permit. The application for such permit shall be in writing on a blank
form to be furnished for that purpose and shall be accompanied by a lot plan drawn to scale showing the outline
of the dwelling, and other structures on the lot, the location of the proposed artificial turf, and a description of
any specifications or installation instruction for such artificial turf.
(Ordinance 1893 adopted 8/13/12)
ARTICLE 3.02 BUILDING CODE*
Sec. 3.02.001 Title
This article shall be known as the Town building code and may be cited as such, and will be referred to in this
article as “the building code.”
Sec. 3.02.002 Adopted
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 46/505
The International Building Code, 2015 edition, and all amendments thereto, shall be, and the same are hereby
made, a part of this article by reference, the same as if copied herein and made a part hereof, and copies of said
International Building Code, 2015 edition, and all amendments thereto, shall be kept on file in the office of the
Building Official.
Sec. 3.02.003 Requirements varying from or not covered by code
Any requirement considered necessary for the safety, strength or stability of an existing or proposed building or
structure, or for the safety or health of the occupants thereof, which varies from provisions of the International
Building Code, 2015 edition, and all amendments thereto, or which is not specifically covered by the
International Building Code, 2015 edition, and all amendments thereto, shall be determined by the Building
Official subject to appeal to the Town Council.
Sec. 3.02.004 References in code
The International Building Code, 2015 edition, and all amendments thereto, is hereby amended as follows:
(1) Throughout the International Building Code, 2015 edition, and all amendments thereto,
wherever the term “Building Official” is used, there may be substituted therefor the term “Building
Inspector.”
(2) Throughout the International Building Code, 2015 edition, and all amendments thereto,
wherever the term “Board of Appeals” is used, there shall be substituted therefor the term “Town
Council.”
Sec. 3.02.005 Amendments
The following deletions, additions, and amendments to the International Building Code contained herein are
hereby approved and adopted:
Section 101.4; change to read as follows:
101.4 Referenced codes. The other codes listed in sections 101.4.1 through 101.4.6 and referenced
elsewhere in this code, when specifically adopted, shall be considered part of the requirements of this
code to the prescribed extend of each such reference. Whenever amendments have been adopted to
the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to
reference the amendments as well. Any reference to NFPA 70 or the Electrical Code shall mean the
Electrical Code as adopted.
Section 101.4.8; add the following:
101.4.8 Electrical. The provisions of the Electrical Code shall apply to the installation of electrical
systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and
appurtenances thereto.
Section 103 amend to replace “Building Safety” with “Building Inspection.”
Section 103.1 amend to read as follows:
“Creation of enforcement agency. The Building Inspection Department is hereby created and the
official in charge thereof shall be known as the Building Official.”
Section 104.8.1 is deleted.
Section 105.1.1 shall be deleted in its entirety.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 47/505
Section 105.1.2 shall be deleted in its entirety.
Section 105.2 shall be deleted in its entirety.
Section 109; add section 109.7 to read as follows:
109.7 Reinspection fee. A fee as established by City Council resolution may be charged when:
1. The inspection called for is not ready when the inspector arrives;
2. No building address or permit card is clearly posted;
3. City approved plans are not on the jobsite available to the inspector;
4. The building is locked or work otherwise not available for inspection when called;
5. The jobsite is red-tagged twice for the same item;
6. The original red tag has been removed from the jobsite.
7. Failure to maintain erosion control, trash control or tree protection.
Any reinspection fees assessed shall be paid before any more inspections are made on that jobsite.
Section 109; add section 109.8, 109.8.1, 109.8.2 and 109.9 to read as follows:
109.8 Work without a permit.
109.8.1 Investigation. Whenever work for which a permit is required by this code has been
commenced without first obtaining a permit, a special investigation shall be made before a
permit may be issued for such work.
109.8.2 Fee. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not
a permit is subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit
fee required by this code or the city fee schedule as applicable. The payment of such
investigation fee shall not exempt the applicant from compliance with all other provisions of
either this code or the technical codes nor from penalty prescribed by law.
109.9 Unauthorized cover up fee. Any work concealed without first obtaining the required
inspection in violation of section 110 shall be assessed a fee as established by the city fee
schedule.
Section 110.3.5; Lath, gypsum board and gypsum panel product inspection. Delete exception.
Section 113.3 shall be deleted in its entirety.
Section 114.2 shall be deleted in its entirety.
Section 114.3 shall be deleted in its entirety.
Section 114.4 shall be deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:
“The penalty for violation of this Code is as set out in the Highland Park Code of Ordinances section
1.01.009.”
Section 202; amend definition of Ambulatory Care Facility as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 48/505
AMBULATORY CARE FACILITY. Buildings or portions thereof used to provide medical, surgical,
psychiatric, nursing or similar care on a less than 24-hour basis to individuals who are rendered
incapable of self-preservation. This group may include but not be limited to the following:
- Dialysis centers
- Sedation dentistry
- Surgery centers
- Colonic centers
- Psychiatric centers
Section 202; add definition of Assisting Living Facilities to read as follows.
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES. A building or part thereof housing persons, on a 24-hour basis,
who because of age, disability or other reasons, live in a supervised residential environment which
provides personal care services and in which the occupants are capable of responding to an
emergency situation without physical assistance..
Section 202; change definition of “Atrium” by adding the following:
ATRIUM. An opening connecting three or more stories... {Balance remains unchanged}
Section 202; amend definition High-Rise Building to read as follows:
HIGH-RISE BUILDING. A building with an occupied floor located more than 55 feet (16 764 mm)
above the lowest level of Fire Department vehicle access.
Section 202; add definition of “Repair Garage” as follows:
REPAIR GARAGE. A building, structure or portion thereof used for servicing or repairing motor
vehicles. This occupancy shall also include garages involved in minor repair, modification and
servicing of motor vehicles for items such as lube changes, inspections, windshield repair or
replacement, shocks, minor part replacement and other such minor repairs.
Section 202; amend definition of special inspector to read as follows:
SPECIAL INSPECTOR. A qualified person employed or retained by an approved agency who shall
prove to the satisfaction of the registered design professional in responsible charge and the Building
Official as having the competence necessary to inspect a particular type of construction requiring
special inspection.
Section 303.1.3; add a sentence to read as follows:
303.1.3 Associated with Group E occupancies. A room or space used for assembly purposes that is
associated with a Group E occupancy is not considered a separate occupancy except when applying
the assembly requirements of Chapter 10 and 11.
Section 304.1; add the following to the list of occupancies:
Fire stations
Police stations with detention facilities for 5 or less
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 49/505
Section 307.1.1; add the following sentence to Exception 4:
4. Cleaning establishments... {Text unchanged} ...with section 707 or 1-hour horizontal assemblies
constructed in accordance with section 711 or both. See also IFC Chapter 21, Dry Cleaning Plant
provisions.
Section 403.1, exception #3; change by adding the following to read as follows:
3. The open air portion of a building [remainder unchanged]
Section 403.3, exception; delete item 2.
Section 403.3.2; change to read as follows:
[F] 403.3.2 Water supply to required fire pumps. In buildings that are more than 120 feet (36.5 m) in
building height, required fire pumps shall be supplied by connections to no fewer than two water
mains located in different streets. Separate supply piping shall be provided between each connection
to the water main and the pumps. Each connection and the supply piping between the connection and
the pumps shall be sized to supply the flow and pressure required for the pumps to operate.
Exception: {No change to exception.}
Section 404.5; delete exception.
Section 406.3.5.1 Carport separation; add sentence to read as follows:
A fire separation is not required between a Group R-2 and U carport provided that the carport is
entirely open on all sides and that the distance between the two is at least 10 feet (3048 mm).
(Ordinance 1996 adopted 6/27/16)
Section 423.1; change to read as follows:
423.1.1 Scope. This section applies to the construction of storm shelters constructed as separate
detached buildings or constructed as rooms or spaces within buildings for the purpose of providing
protection from storms that produce high winds, such as tornados and hurricanes. Such structures
shall be designated to be hurricane shelters, tornado shelters, or combined hurricane and tornado
shelters.
Section 423.4; change to read as follows:
423.3 Group E occupancies. In areas where the shelter design wind speed for tornados is 250 MPH in
accordance with Figure 304.2(1) of ICC 500, all Group E occupancies with an aggregate occupant
load of 50 or more shall have a storm shelter constructed in accordance with ICC 500.
Exceptions:
1. Group E day care facilities.
2. Group E occupancies accessory to places of religious worship.
3. Buildings meeting the requirements for shelter design in ICC 500.
Section 423.4.1 is added and shall read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 50/505
423.4.1 Required occupant capacity. The required occupant capacity of the storm shelter shall
include all the buildings on the site, and shall be the greater of the following:
1. The total occupant load of the classrooms, vocational rooms and offices in the Group E
occupancy.
2. The occupant load of any indoor assembly space that is associated with the Group E
occupancy.
Exceptions:
1. Where a new building is being added on an existing Group E site, and where the new
building is not of sufficient size to accommodate the required occupant capacity of the storm
shelter for all the buildings on the site, the storm shelter shall at a minimum accommodate the
required capacity for the new building.
2. Where approved by the code official, the required occupant capacity of the shelter shall be
permitted to be reduced by the occupant capacity of any existing storm shelters on the site.
Section 423.4.2 is added and shall read as follows:
423.4.2 Location. Storm shelters shall be located within the buildings they serve, or shall be located
where the maximum distance of travel from at least one exterior door of each building to a door of
the shelter serving that building does not exceed 1,000 ft. (304.8 m).
(Ordinance 2017 adopted 4/24/17)
Section 506.2.2; add a sentence to read as follows:
506.2.2 Open space limits. Such open space shall be either on the same lot or dedicated for public use
and shall be accessed from a street or approved fire lane. In order to be considered as accessible, if
not in direct contact with a street or fire lane, a minimum 10-foot wide pathway meeting Fire
Department access from the street or approved fire lane shall be provided.
Section 712.1.9, change item 4 to read as follows:
4. Is not open to a corridor in Group I and H occupancies.
Section 901.6.1; add section 901.6.1.1 to read as follows:
901.6.1.1 Standpipe Testing. Building owners/managers must maintain and test standpipe systems as
per NFPA 25 requirements. The following additional requirements shall be applied to the testing that
is required every 5 years:
1. The piping between the Fire Department Connection (FDC) and the standpipe shall be
back flushed when foreign material is present, and also hydrostatically tested for all FDC's on
any type of standpipe system. Hydrostatic testing shall also be conducted in accordance with
NFPA 25 requirements for the different types of standpipe systems.
2. For any manual (dry or wet) standpipe system not having an automatic water supply
capable of flowing water through the standpipe, the tester shall connect hose from a fire hydrant
or portable pumping system (as approved by the Fire Code Official) to each FDC, and flow
water through the standpipe system to the roof outlet to verify that each inlet connection
functions properly. Confirm that there are no open hose valves prior to introducing water into a
dry standpipe. There is no required pressure criteria at the outlet. Verify that check valves
function properly and that there are no closed control valves on the system.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 51/505
3. Any pressure relief, reducing, or control valves shall be tested in accordance with the
requirements of NFPA 25. All hose valves shall be exercised.
4. If the FDC is not already provided with approved caps, the contractor shall install such
caps for all FDC's as required by the Fire Code Official.
5. Upon successful completion of standpipe test, place a blue tag (as per Texas
Administrative Code, Fire Sprinkler Rules for Inspection, Test and Maintenance Service (ITM)
Tag) at the bottom of each standpipe riser in the building. The tag shall be check-marked as
“Fifth Year” for Type of ITM, and the note on the back of the tag shall read “5 Year Standpipe
Test” at a minimum.
6. The procedures required by Texas Administrative Code Fire Sprinkler Rules with regard to
Yellow Tags and Red Tags or any deficiencies noted during the testing, including the required
notification of the local Authority Having Jurisdiction (Fire Code Official) shall be followed.
7. Additionally, records of the testing shall be maintained by the owner and contractor, if
applicable, as required by the State Rules mentioned above and NFPA 25.
8. Standpipe system tests where water will be flowed external to the building shall not be
conducted during freezing conditions or during the day prior to expected nighttime freezing
conditions.
9. Contact the Fire Code Official for requests to remove existing fire hose from Class II and
III standpipe systems where employees are not trained in the utilization of this firefighting
equipment. All standpipe hose valves must remain in place and be provided with an approved
cap and chain when approval is given to remove hose by the Fire Code Official.
Section 903.1.1; change to read as follows:
[F] 903.1.1 Alternative protection. Alternative automatic fire-extinguishing systems complying with
section 904 shall be permitted in addition to automatic sprinkler protection where recognized by the
applicable standard, or as approved by the Fire Code Official.
Section 903.2; change to read as follows:
[F] 903.2 Where required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new buildings and structures
shall be provided in the locations described in sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.12. Automatic
Sprinklers shall not be installed in elevator machine rooms, elevator machine spaces, and elevator
hoistways, other than pits where such sprinklers would not necessitate shunt trip requirements under
any circumstances. Storage shall not be allowed within the elevator machine room. Signage shall be
provided at the entry doors to the elevator machine room indicating “ELEVATOR MACHINERY -
NO STORAGE ALLOWED.”
Section 903.2; delete the exception.
Section 903.2.9; add section 903.2.9.3 to read as follows:
[F] 903.2.9.3 Self-service storage facility. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed
throughout all self-service storage facilities.
Section 903.2.11; change 903.2.11.3 and add 903.2.11.7, 903.2.11.8, and 903.2.11.9 as follows:
903.2.11.3 Buildings 35 feet or more in height. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed
throughout buildings that have one or more stories, other than penthouses in compliance with section
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 52/505
1510 of the International Building Code, located 35 feet (10 668 mm) or more above the lowest level
of Fire Department vehicle access, measured to the finished floor.
Exception: Open parking structures in compliance with section 406.5 of the International
Building Code, having no other occupancies above the subject garage.
903.2.11.7 High-Piled Combustible Storage. For any building with a clear height exceeding 12 feet
(4572 mm), see Chapter 32 of the IFC to determine if those provisions apply.
903.2.11.8 Spray Booths and Rooms. New and existing spray booths and spraying rooms shall be
protected by an approved automatic fire-extinguishing system.
903.2.11.9 Buildings Over 6,000 sq. ft. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout
all buildings with a building area 6,000 sq. ft. or greater and in all existing buildings that are enlarged
to be 6,000 sq. ft. or greater. For the purpose of this provision, fire walls shall not define separate
buildings.
Exception: Open parking garages in compliance with section 406.5 of the International
Building Code.
Section 903.3.1.1.1; change to read as follows:
[F] 903.3.1.1.1 Exempt locations. When approved by the Fire Code Official, automatic sprinklers
shall not be required in the following rooms or areas where such rooms or areas are protected with an
approved automatic fire detection system in accordance with section 907.2 that will respond to
visible or invisible particles of combustion. Sprinklers shall not be omitted from a room merely
because it is damp, of fire-resistance-rated construction or contains electrical equipment.
1. Any room where the application of water, or flame and water, constitutes a serious life or
fire hazard.
2. Any room or space where sprinklers are considered undesirable because of the nature of
the contents, when approved by the code official.
3. Generator and transformer rooms, under the direct control of a public utility, separated
from the remainder of the building by walls and floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assemblies having
a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours.
4. Elevator machine rooms, machinery spaces, and hoistways, other than pits where such
sprinklers would not necessitate shunt trip requirements under any circumstances.
Section 903.3.1.2.3; add section to read as follows:
[F] Section 903.3.1.2.3 Attics and Attached Garages. Sprinkler protection is required in attic spaces
of such buildings two or more stories in height, in accordance with NFPA 13 and/or NFPA 13R
requirements, and attached garages.
Section 903.3.1.3; change to read as follows:
[F] 903.3.1.3 NFPA 13D sprinkler systems. Automatic sprinkler systems installed in one- and twofamily
dwellings; Group R-3; Group R-4 Condition 1 and townhouses shall be permitted to be
installed throughout in accordance with NFPA 13D or in accordance with State law.
Section 903.3.1.4; add to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 53/505
[F] 903.3.1.4 Freeze protection. Freeze protection systems for automatic fire sprinkler systems shall
be in accordance with the requirements of the applicable referenced NFPA standard and this section.
903.3.1.4.1 Attics. Only dry-pipe, pre-action, or listed antifreeze automatic fire sprinkler
systems shall be allowed to protect attic spaces.
Exception: Wet-pipe fire sprinkler systems shall be allowed to protect non-ventilated attic
spaces where:
1. The attic sprinklers are supplied by a separate floor control valve assembly to allow
ease of draining the attic system without impairing sprinklers throughout the rest of the
building, and
2. Adequate heat shall be provided for freeze protection as per the applicable referenced
NFPA standard, and
3. The attic space is a part of the building's thermal, or heat, envelope, such that
insulation is provided at the roof deck, rather than at the ceiling level.
903.3.1.4.2 Heat trace/insulation. Heat trace/insulation shall only be allowed where approved
by the Fire Code Official for small sections of large diameter water-filled pipe.
Section 903.3.5; add a second paragraph to read as follows:
[F] Water supply as required for such systems shall be provided in conformance with the supply
requirements of the respective standards; however, every water-based fire protection system shall be
designed with a 10 psi safety factor. Reference section 507.4 for additional design requirements.
Section 903.4; add a second paragraph after the exceptions to read as follows:
[F] Sprinkler and standpipe system water-flow detectors shall be provided for each floor tap to the
sprinkler system and shall cause an alarm upon detection of water flow for more than 45 seconds. All
control valves in the sprinkler and standpipe systems except for Fire Department hose connection
valves shall be electrically supervised to initiate a supervisory signal at the central station upon
tampering.
Section 903.4.2; add second paragraph to read as follows:
[F] The alarm device required on the exterior of the building shall be a weatherproof horn/strobe
notification appliance with a minimum 75 candela strobe rating, installed as close as practicable to
the Fire Department connection.
Section 905.2; change to read as follows:
[F] 905.2 Installation standard. Standpipe systems shall be installed in accordance with this section
and NFPA 14. Manual dry standpipe systems shall be supervised with a minimum of 10 psig and a
maximum of 40 psig air pressure with a high/low alarm.
Section 905.3; add section 905.3.9 and exception to read as follows:
[F] 905.3.9 Buildings exceeding 10,000 sq. ft. In buildings exceeding 10,000 square feet in area per
story and where any portion of the building's interior area is more than 200 feet (60960 mm) of
travel, vertically and horizontally, from the nearest point of Fire Department vehicle access, Class I
automatic wet or manual wet standpipes shall be provided.
Exceptions:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 54/505
1. Automatic dry and semi-automatic dry standpipes are allowed as provided for in NFPA 14.
2. R-2 occupancies of four stories or less in height having no interior corridors.
Section 905.4; change items 1., 3., and 5. and add Item 7. to read as follows:
[F] 1. In every required exit stairway, a hose connection shall be provided for each story above and
below grade plane. Hose connections shall be located at an intermediate landing between stories,
unless otherwise approved by the Fire Code Official.
2. {No change.}
3. In every exit passageway, at the entrance from the exit passageway to other areas of a building.
Exception: Where floor areas adjacent to an exit passageway are reachable from an exit
stairway hose connection by a... {No change to rest.}
4. {No change.}
5. Where the roof has a slope less than four units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33.3-percent
slope), each standpipe shall be provided with a two-way hose connection located to serve the roof or
at the highest landing of an exit stairway with stair access to the roof provided in accordance with
section 1011.12.
6. {No change.}
7. When required by this Chapter, standpipe connections shall be placed adjacent to all required
exits to the structure and at two hundred feet (200') intervals along major corridors thereafter, or as
otherwise approved by the Fire Code Official.
Section 905.9; add a second paragraph after the exceptions to read as follows:
[F] Sprinkler and standpipe system water-flow detectors shall be provided for each floor tap to the
sprinkler system and shall cause an alarm upon detection of water flow for more than 45 seconds. All
control valves in the sprinkler and standpipe systems except for Fire Department hose connection
valves shall be electrically supervised to initiate a supervisory signal at the central station upon
tampering.
Section 905.9; add a second paragraph after the exceptions to read as follows:
[F] Sprinkler and standpipe system water-flow detectors shall be provided for each floor tap to the
sprinkler system and shall cause an alarm upon detection of water flow for more than 45 seconds. All
control valves in the sprinkler and standpipe systems except for Fire Department hose connection
valves shall be electrically supervised to initiate a supervisory signal at the central station upon
tampering.
Section 907.2.1; change to read as follows:
[F] 907.2.1 Group A. A manual fire alarm system that activates the occupant notification system in
accordance with section 907.5 shall be installed in Group A occupancies having an occupant load of
300 or more persons or more than 100 persons above or below the lowest level of exit discharge.
Group A occupancies not separated from one another in accordance with section 707.3.10 of the
International Building Code shall be considered as a single occupancy for the purposes of applying
this section. Portions of Group E occupancies occupied for assembly purposes shall be provided with
a fire alarm system as required for the Group E occupancy.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 55/505
Exception: {No change.}
Activation of fire alarm notification appliances shall:
1. Cause illumination of the means of egress with light of not less than 1 footcandle (11 lux)
at the walking surface level, and
2. Stop any conflicting or confusing sounds and visual distractions.
Section 907.2.3; change to read as follows:
[F] 907.2.3 Group E. A manual fire alarm system that initiates the occupant notification signal
utilizing an emergency voice/alarm communication system meeting the requirements of section
907.5.2.2 and installed in accordance with section 907.6 shall be installed in Group E educational
occupancies. When automatic sprinkler systems or smoke detectors are installed, such systems or
detectors shall be connected to the building fire alarm system. An approved smoke detection system
shall be installed in Group E day care occupancies. Unless separated by a minimum of 100' open
space, all buildings, whether portable buildings or the main building, will be considered one building
for alarm occupant load consideration and interconnection of alarm systems.
Exceptions:
1. {No change.}
1.1. Residential In-Home day care with not more than 12 children may use
interconnected single station detectors in all habitable rooms. (For care of more than five
children 2 1/2 or less years of age, see section 907.2.6.)
{No change to remainder of exceptions.}
Section 907.2.13, exception 3; change to read as follows:
[F] 3. Open air portions of buildings with an occupancy in Group A-5 in accordance with section
303.1 of the International Building Code; however, this exception does not apply to accessory uses
including but not limited to sky boxes, restaurants and similarly enclosed areas.
Section 907.4.2; add section 907.4.2.7 to read as follows:
[F] 907.4.2.7 Type. Manual alarm initiating devices shall be an approved double action type.
Section 907.6.1; add section 907.6.1.1 to read as follows:
[F] 907.6.1.1 Wiring Installation. All fire alarm systems shall be installed in such a manner that a
failure of any single initiating device or single open in an initiating circuit conductor will not
interfere with the normal operation of other such devices. All signaling line circuits (SLC) shall be
installed in such a way that a single open will not interfere with the operation of any addressable
devices (Class A). Outgoing and return SLC conductors shall be installed in accordance with NFPA
72 requirements for Class A circuits and shall have a minimum of four feet separation horizontal and
one foot vertical between supply and return circuit conductors. The initiating device circuit (IDC)
from a signaling line circuit interface device may be wired Class B, provided the distance from the
interface device to the initiating device is ten feet or less.
Section 907.6.3; delete all four Exceptions.
Section 907.6.6; add sentence at end of paragraph to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 56/505
[F] See 907.6.3 for the required information transmitted to the supervising station.
Table 910.3; change the title of the first row of the table from “Group F-1 and S-1” to include “Group H” and to
read as follows:
Group H, F-1 and S-1
Section 910.3.2.2; add second paragraph to read as follows:
The automatic operating mechanism of the smoke and heat vents shall operate at a temperature rating
at least 100 degrees F (approximately 38 degrees Celsius) greater than the temperature rating of the
sprinklers installed.
Section 912.2; add section 912.2.3 to read as follows:
[F] 912.2.3 Hydrant distance. An approved fire hydrant shall be located within 100 feet of the Fire
Department connection as the fire hose lays.
Section 909.22; add to read as follows:
[F] 909.22 Stairway or ramp pressurization alternative. Where the building is equipped throughout
with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with section 903.3.1.1 and the stair pressurization
alternative is chosen for compliance with Building Code requirements for a smoke proof enclosure,
interior exit stairways or ramps shall be pressurized to a minimum of 0.10 inches of water (25 Pa)
and a maximum of 0.35 inches of water (87 Pa) in the shaft relative to the building measured with all
interior exit stairway and ramp doors closed under maximum anticipated conditions of stack effect
and wind effect. Such systems shall comply with section 909, including the installation of a separate
firefighter's smoke control panel as per section 909.16, and a Smoke Control Permit shall be required
from the Fire Department as per section 105.7.
[F] 909.22.1 Ventilating equipment. The activation of ventilating equipment for the stair or
ramp pressurization system shall be by smoke detectors installed at each floor level at an
approved location at the entrance to the smoke proof enclosure. When the closing device for the
stairway or ramp shaft and vestibule doors is activated by smoke detection or power failure,
mechanical equipment shall activate and operate at the required performance levels. Smoke
detectors shall be installed in accordance with section 907.3.
[F] 909.22.1.1 Ventilation systems. Smoke proof enclosure ventilation systems shall be
independent of other building ventilation systems. The equipment, control wiring, power
wiring and ductwork shall comply with one of the following:
1. Equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall be located exterior
to the building and directly connected to the smoke proof enclosure or connected to
the smoke proof enclosure by ductwork enclosed by not less than 2-hour fire barriers
constructed in accordance with section 707 of the Building Code or horizontal
assemblies constructed in accordance with section 711 of the Building Code, or
both.
2. Equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall be located within
the smoke proof enclosure with intake or exhaust directly from and to the outside or
through ductwork enclosed by not less than 2-hour barriers constructed in
accordance with section 707 of the Building Code or horizontal assemblies
constructed in accordance with section 711 of the Building Code, or both.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 57/505
3. Equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall be located within
the building if separated from the remainder of the building, including other
mechanical equipment, by not less than 2-hour fire barriers constructed in
accordance with section 707 of the Building Code or horizontal assemblies
constructed in accordance with section 711 of the Building Code, or both.
Exceptions:
1. Control wiring and power wiring utilizing a 2-hour rated cable or cable
system.
2. Where encased with not less than 2 inches (51 mm) of concrete.
3. Control wiring and power wiring protected by a listed electrical circuit
protective systems with a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours.
[F] 909.22.1.2 Standby power. Mechanical vestibule and stairway and ramp shaft
ventilation systems and automatic fire detection systems shall be provided with standby
power in accordance with section 2702 of the Building Code.
[F] 909.22.1.3 Acceptance and testing. Before the mechanical equipment is approved, the
system shall be tested in the presence of the Fire Code Official to confirm that the system
is operating in compliance with these requirements.
Section 910.2; change exception 2. and 3. to read as follows:
[F] 2. Only manual smoke and heat removal shall be required in areas of buildings equipped with
early suppression fast-response (ESFR) sprinklers. Automatic smoke and heat removal is prohibited.
3. Only manual smoke and heat removal shall be required in areas of buildings equipped with
control mode special application sprinklers with a response time index of 50(m*S)1/2 or less that are
listed to control a fire in stored commodities with 12 or fewer sprinklers. Automatic smoke and heat
removal is prohibited.
Section 910.2; add subsections 910.2.3 with exceptions to read as follows:
[F] 910.2.3 Group H. Buildings and portions thereof used as a Group H occupancy as follows:
1. In occupancies classified as Group H-2 or H-3, any of which are more than 15,000 square
feet (1394 m2) in single floor area.
Exception: Buildings of noncombustible construction containing only noncombustible
materials.
2. In areas of buildings in Group H used for storing Class 2, 3, and 4 liquid and solid
oxidizers, Class 1 and unclassified detonable organic peroxides, Class 3 and 4 unstable
(reactive) materials, or Class 2 or 3 water-reactive materials as required for a high-hazard
commodity classification.
Exception: Buildings of noncombustible construction containing only noncombustible
materials.
Section 910.3; add section 910.3.4 to read as follows:
[F] 910.3.4 Vent operation. Smoke and heat vents shall be capable of being operated by approved
automatic and manual means. Automatic operation of smoke and heat vents shall conform to the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 58/505
provisions of sections 910.3.2.1 through 910.3.2.3.
[F] 910.3.4.1 Sprinklered buildings. Where installed in buildings equipped with an approved
automatic sprinkler system, smoke and heat vents shall be designed to operate automatically.
The automatic operating mechanism of the smoke and heat vents shall operate at a temperature
rating at least 100 degrees F (approximately 38 degrees Celsius) greater than the temperature
rating of the sprinklers installed.
Exception: Manual only system per 910.2
[F] 910.3.4.2 Nonsprinklered buildings. Where installed in buildings not equipped with an
approved automatic sprinkler system, smoke and heat vents shall operate automatically by
actuation of a heat-responsive device rated at between 100°F (56°C) and 220°F (122°C) above
ambient.
Exception: Listed gravity-operated drop out vents.
Section 910.4.3.1; change to read as follows:
[F] 910.4.3.1 Makeup air. Makeup air openings shall be provided within 6 feet (1829 mm) of the
floor level. Operation of makeup air openings shall be automatic. The minimum gross area of
makeup air inlets shall be 8 square feet per 1,000 cubic feet per minute (0.74 m2 per 0.4719 m3/s) of
smoke exhaust.
Section 910.4.4; change to read as follows:
[F] 910.4.4 Activation. The mechanical smoke removal system shall be activated automatically by
the automatic sprinkler system or by an approved fire detection system. Individual manual controls
shall also be provided.
Exception: Manual only systems per section 910.2.
Section 912.2; add section 912.2.3 to read as follows:
[F] 912.2.3 Hydrant distance. An approved fire hydrant shall be located within 100 feet of the Fire
Department connection as the fire hose lays along an unobstructed path.
Section 913.2.1; add second paragraph and exception to read as follows:
[F] When located on the ground level at an exterior wall, the fire pump room shall be provided with
an exterior Fire Department access door that is not less than 3 ft. in width and 6 ft.-8 in. in height,
regardless of any interior doors that are provided. A key box shall be provided at this door, as
required by section 506.1.
Exception: When it is necessary to locate the fire pump room on other levels or not at an
exterior wall, the corridor leading to the fire pump room access from the exterior of the building
shall be provided with equivalent fire resistance as that required for the pump room, or as
approved by the Fire Code Official. Access keys shall be provided in the key box as required by
section 506.1.
Section 1006.2.2.6 add a new section 1006.2.2.6 as follows:
1006.2.2.6 Electrical Rooms. For electrical rooms, special exiting requirements may apply. Reference
the electrical code as adopted.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 59/505
Section 1009.1; add the following exception 4:
Exceptions:
{previous exceptions unchanged}
4. Buildings regulated under State law and built in accordance with State registered plans,
including any variances or waivers granted by the State, shall be deemed to be in compliance
with the requirements of section 1009.
Section 1010.1.9.4 Bolt Locks; amend exceptions 3 and 4 as follows:
Exceptions:
3. Where a pair of doors serves an occupant load of less than 50 persons in a Group B, F, M
or S occupancy. {Remainder unchanged}
4. Where a pair of doors serves a Group A, B, F, M or S occupancy {Remainder unchanged}
Section 1015.8 Window openings. Amend text to read as follows:
1. Operable windows where the top of the sill of the opening is located more than 55 feet (16 764
mm) above the finished grade or other surface below and that are provided with window fall
prevention devices that comply with ASTM F 2006.
Section 1020.1 Construction; add exception 6 to read as follows:
6. In group B occupancies, corridor walls and ceilings need not be of fire-resistive construction
within a single tenant space when the space is equipped with approved automatic smoke-detection
within the corridor. The actuation of any detector shall activate self-annunciating alarms audible in all
areas within the corridor. Smoke detectors shall be connected to an approved automatic fire alarm
system where such system is provided.
Section 1029.1.1.1 Delete this section. Spaces under grandstands and bleachers;[.]
Section 1101.1 Scope. Add exception to section 1101.1 as follows:
Exception: Components of projects regulated by and registered with Architectural Barriers Division
of Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation shall be deemed to be in compliance with the
requirements of this chapter.
Section 1203.1; amend to read as follows:
1203.1 General. Buildings shall be provided with natural ventilation in accordance with section
1203.4, or mechanical ventilation in accordance with the International Mechanical Code.
Where air infiltration rate in a dwelling unit is 5 air changes or less per hour when tested with a
blower door at a pressure 0.2 inch w.c. (50 Pa) in accordance with section 402.4.1.2 of the
International Energy Conservation Code, the dwelling unit shall be ventilated by mechanical means
in accordance with section 403 of the International Mechanical Code.
Table 1505.1; delete footnote c and replace footnote b with the following:
b. Non-classified roof coverings shall be permitted on buildings of U occupancies having not more
than 120 sq. ft. of protected roof area. When exceeding 120 sq. ft. of protected roof area, buildings of
U occupancies may use non-rated non-combustible roof coverings.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 60/505
Section 1505.7; delete the section.
Section 1510.1; add a sentence to read as follows:
1510.1 General. Materials and methods of applications used for recovering or replacing an existing
roof covering shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 15. All individual replacement shingles
or shakes shall be in compliance with the rating required by Table 1505.1.
Section 1704.2, Special inspections and tests is amended to read as follows:
1704.2 Special inspections and tests. Where application is made to the Building Official for
construction as specified in section 105, the owner or the owner's authorized agent, or the registered
design professional in responsible charge, other than the contractor, shall employ one or more
approved agencies to provide special inspections and tests during construction on the types of work
listed under section 1705 and identify the approved agencies to the Building Official. The special
inspector shall not be employed by the contractor. These special inspections and tests are in addition
to the inspections identified by the Building Official that are identified in section 110.
Section 1704.2.1, Special inspector qualifications, is amended by adding the following sentence to the beginning
of the section to read as follows:
1704.2.1 Special inspector qualifications. Prior to the start of construction and/or upon request, the
approved agencies shall provide written documentation to the registered design professional in
responsible charge and the Building Official demonstrating the competence and relevant experience
or training of the special inspectors who will perform the special inspections and tests during
construction. [Remainder unchanged]
Section 1704.2.4, Report requirement, is amended by adding the following sentence to the beginning of the
section to read as follows:
1704.2.4 Report requirement. Approved agencies shall keep records of special inspections and tests.
The approved agency shall submit reports of special inspections and tests to the Building Official
upon request, and to the registered design professional in responsible charge. Individual inspection
reports shall indicate that work inspected or tested was or was not completed in conformance to
approved construction documents. [Remainder unchanged]
Section 1704.2.5.2, Fabricator approval, is amended to read as follows:
1704.2.5.1 Fabricator approval. Special inspections during fabrications required by Section 1704 are
not required where the work is done on the premises of a fabricator registered and approved to
perform such work without special inspection. Approval shall be based upon review of the
fabricator's written procedural and quality control manuals and periodic auditing of fabrication
practices by an approved agency, or a fabricator that is enrolled in a nationally accepted inspections
program. At completion of fabrication, the acceptable or approved fabricator shall submit a certificate
of compliance to the owner or the owner's authorized agent or the registered design professional in
responsible charge, stating that the work was performed in accordance with the approved
construction documents. The certificate of compliance shall also be made available to the Building
Official upon request.
Section 2901.1; add a sentence at the end of the section to read as follows:
[P] 2901.1 Scope. {existing text to remain} The provisions of this Chapter are meant to work in
coordination with the provisions of Chapter 4 of the International Plumbing Code. Should any
conflicts arise between the two chapters, the Building Official shall determine which provision
applies.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 61/505
Section 2902.1; add a second paragraph to read as follows:
In other than E Occupancies, the minimum number of fixtures in Table 2902.1 may be lowered, if
requested in writing, by the applicant stating reasons for a reduced number and approved by the
Building Official.
Table 2902.1; add footnote f to read as follows:
f. Drinking fountains are not required in M Occupancies with an occupant load of 100 or less, B
Occupancies with an occupant load of 25 or less, and for dining and/or drinking establishments.
Section 2902.1.3; add new section 2902.1.3 to read as follows:
2902.1.3 Additional fixtures for food preparation facilities. In addition to the fixtures required in this
Chapter, all food service facilities shall be provided with additional fixtures set out in this section.
2902.1.3.1 Handwashing lavatory. At least one handwashing lavatory shall be provided for use
by employees that is accessible from food preparation, food dispensing and ware washing areas.
Additional hand washing lavatories may be required based on convenience of use by
employees.
2902.1.3.2 Service sink. In new or remodeled food service establishments, at least one service
sink or one floor sink shall be provided so that it is conveniently located for the cleaning of
mops or similar wet floor cleaning tool and for the disposal of mop water and similar liquid
waste. The location of the service sink(s) and/or mop sink(s) shall be approved by the Dallas
County Health Department.
Section 3002.1 Hoistway enclosure protection. Add exceptions to read as follows:
Exceptions:
1. Elevators wholly located within atriums complying with section 404 shall not require
hoistway enclosure protection.
2. Elevators in open or enclosed parking garages that serve only the parking garage, and
complying with sections 406.5 and 406.6, respectively, shall not require hoistway enclosure
protection.
Section 3005.4 Delete first sentence and replace with the following:
3005.4 Machine rooms, control rooms, machinery spaces and control spaces. Elevator machine
rooms, control rooms, control spaces and machinery spaces shall be enclosed with fire barriers
constructed in accordance with section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with
section 711, or both. [Remainder unchanged]
Section 3005.7 add a section 3005.7 as follows:
3005.7 Fire Protection in Machine rooms, control rooms, machinery spaces and control spaces.
3005.7.1 Automatic sprinkler system. The building shall be equipped throughout with an
automatic sprinkler system in accordance with section 903.3.1.1, except as otherwise permitted
by section 903.3.1.1.1 and as prohibited by section 3005.7.2.1.
[3005.7.2]
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 62/505
3005.7.2.1 Prohibited locations. Automatic sprinklers shall not be installed in machine
rooms, elevator machinery spaces, control rooms, control spaces and elevator hoist-ways.
3005.7.2.2 Sprinkler system monitoring. The sprinkler system shall have a sprinkler
control valve supervisory switch and water-flow initiating device provided for each floor
that is monitored by the building's fire alarm system.
3005.7.3 Water protection. An approved method to prevent water from infiltrating into the
hoistway enclosure from the operation of the automatic sprinkler system outside the elevator
lobby shall be provided.
3005.7.4 Shunt trip. Means for elevator shutdown in accordance with section 3005.5 shall not
be installed.
Section 3005.8 add section 3005.8 as follows:
3005.8 Storage. Storage shall not be allowed within the elevator machine room, control room,
machinery spaces and/or control spaces. Provide approved signage at each entry to the above listed
locations stating: “No Storage Allowed.”
Section 3006.2, Hoistway opening protection required. Revise text as follows:
5. The building is a high rise and the elevator hoistway is more than 55 feet (16 764 mm) in height.
The height of the hoistway shall be measured from the lowest floor at or above grade to the highest
floors served by the hoistway.
Section 3109.1; change to read as follows:
3109.1 General. Swimming pools shall comply with the requirements of sections 3109.2 through
3109.5 and other applicable sections of this code and complying with applicable State laws.
Sec. 3.02.006 Appendices adopted
The following appendices in the International Building Code, 2015 edition, and all amendments thereto, are
hereby adopted as follows:
(1) Appendix “D,” Fire Districts, as amended in previous section.
(2) Appendix “E,” Supplementary Accessibility Requirements.
(3) Appendix “F,” Rodent Proofing.
(4) Appendix “G,” Flood Resistant Construction.
(5) Appendix “H,” Signs, except subsection H101.2, signs exempt from permits, which shall be
deleted in its entirety.
(6) Appendix “I,” Patio Covers.
(7) Appendix “J,” Grading.
(8) Appendix “K,” Administrative Provisions.
Sec. 3.02.007 Appendices not adopted
The following appendices in the International Building Code, 2015 edition, are hereby deleted as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 63/505
(1) Appendix “A,” Employee Qualifications.
(2) Appendix “B,” Board Of Appeals.
(3) Appendix “C,” Group U - Agriculture Buildings.
Sec. 3.02.008 Drainage from property with subsurface improvements or pumped discharges
(a) Prior to the Town issuing a building permit for construction of a structure with subsurface improvements:
(1) A subsurface soil and discharge system report prepared by a registered professional engineer in
the State shall be submitted to the Town, along with a plan and a letter of recommendation to remove
water from around the foundation and specifying the method of discharging to the Town's subsurface
storm sewer system.
(2) Pumped discharges from properties with subsurface improvements or other substantial
discharges shall be connected to the Town's subsurface storm sewer system.
(b) Substantial discharges are defined as pumped discharges that are recurring at intervals resulting in constant
drainage to the street or alley, or which cause the street or alley to remain wet, therefore promoting the growth of
algae or breeding of mosquitoes. Pumped discharges are not permitted into easements.
Sec. 3.02.009 Compliance
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, remove,
demolish, convert, equip, use, occupy, or maintain any building or structure in the Town contrary to or in
violation of any provisions of the building code, or to cause, permit, or suffer the same to be done.
Sec. 3.02.010 Building permit required
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, remove, demolish, convert, or
equip any building or structure or any portion of any building or structure in the Town without first obtaining a
building permit in accordance with the fee schedule as established by Town Council resolution.
Sec. 3.02.011 Building permit fees; razing or moving buildings
(a) The building permit fees for the Town shall be established by Town Council resolution.
(b) A five hundred dollar ($500.00) deposit is required prior to issuing a permit to raze or move a main
building. All debris, including all concrete structural members below grade, shall be removed from the lot and
the lot shall be completely cleaned and graded to prevent any retention of water. All utilities shall be
disconnected and the sewer line shall be effectively plugged with concrete or as may be required by the Building
Inspector, at or near the property line, prior to the issuance of the raze permit. Public sidewalks shall not be
removed; however, all public sidewalks damaged during demolition or in need of replacement and/or
abandonment shall be repaired and/or replaced in conformance with all applicable Town ordinances. Driveway
approaches will be removed and curb and gutter installed within ninety (90) days from issuance of permit, unless
an extension is approved by the Building Inspector. When the lot is cleared, all utilities disconnected and/or
capped, all repairs made and approaches removed, the deposit will be refunded. Costs incurred by the Town as a
result of razing the building or performing any work deemed necessary by the Building Inspector shall be
deducted from the deposit and costs exceeding the amount of the deposit will be billed to the owner.
(c) The raze contractor shall have a total of ten (10) working days from the date that work begins to complete
the job and request a final inspection, unless an extension has been granted by the Building Inspector. If all
requirements of the raze permit are not completed within the allotted time, then the five hundred dollar
($500.00) deposit may be forfeited to the Town.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 64/505
(d) All but $50.00 of the permit fee may be refunded if work has not commenced and request for refund is
made in writing no more than thirty (30) days from issuance of permit.
Sec. 3.02.012 Registration of general contractors
(a) The term general contractor, as used in this section, is hereby defined and construed to mean any person,
firm, or corporation engaged in the business of general contracting, construction management, or coordination of
subcontractor services related to the construction, alteration, addition, and/or renovation to either residential or
commercial structures and building sites within the Town.
(b) No general contractor shall engage in any contracting work in the Town, without having first registered
with the Town as a general contractor. To register, an application shall be made in writing on forms furnished for
that purpose by the Building Inspection Department along with a registration fee, as established by Town
Council resolution, and filed with the Building Inspection Department. Such registration shall be accompanied
by a valid State-issued identification card or a valid State-issued driver's license of the responsible individual
with the general contracting business, and proof of general liability insurance. General contractor registrations
are valid only for one calendar year from the date on which they are issued.
Exception: A homeowner is not required to be registered as a general contractor to perform work in
his/her own home on which a homestead exemption is filed.
(c) The general contractor shall acknowledge on the registration form, receipt of the Town's constructionrelated
ordinances pertaining to:
(1) The construction site conditions;
(2) The Town's defined holidays and work hours for construction sites;
(3) The Town's construction parking policy; and
(4) The Town's permit requirement and submittal process.
(d) The Town's issuance of a general contractor registration under the provisions of this section shall expire
one calendar year from the date on which they are issued. The general contractor registration of any person,
firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article may be revoked by the Town.
(Ordinance 1996 adopted 6/27/16)
ARTICLE 3.03 ELECTRICITY
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 3.03.001–3.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Electrical Code*
Sec. 3.03.031 Title
This division shall be known as the Town electrical code and may be cited as such, and shall be hereinafter
referred to as “the electrical code.” The electrical code is hereby adopted as the safe and practical standards for
the installation, alteration, and use of electrical equipment in the Town.
Sec. 3.03.032 Adopted
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 65/505
The National Electrical Code, 2014 edition, together with all amendments thereto, shall be and the same are
hereby made a part of this division by reference, the same as if copied at length herein, and made a part hereof
for all purposes, and copies of said National Electrical Code, 2014 edition, together with all amendments thereto,
shall be kept on file in the office of the Town Electrical Inspector.
Sec. 3.03.033 Requirements varying from or not covered by Code
Any requirement considered necessary for the safety of existing or proposed electric wiring, electric apparatus or
electric equipment, or for the safety of occupants of any building or structure in which wiring, electric apparatus
or electric equipment is installed, altered or repaired, which varies from provisions of the National Electrical
Code, 2014 edition, or any amendments thereto, or which is not specifically covered by the National Electrical
Code, 2014 edition, or any amendments thereto, shall be determined by the Town Electrical Inspector subject to
appeal to the Town Council.
Sec. 3.03.034 Amendments
The National Electrical Code, 2014 edition, is hereby amended as follows:
Article 100; amend the following definition by adding the sentence below:
Authority having jurisdiction (AHJ). Add the following sentence to the end of the definition “The
AHJ shall be the Town of Highland Park and its employees or agents as assigned.”
Article 100; add the following to definitions:
Engineering Supervision. Supervision by a Qualified State of Texas Licensed Professional Engineer
engaged primarily in the design or maintenance of electrical installations.
Article 100; amend the following definition:
Intersystem Bonding Termination. A device that provides a means for connecting intersystem
bonding conductors for communication systems and other systems to the grounding electrode system.
Bonding conductors for other systems shall not be larger than 6 AWG.
Article 110.2; change the following to read as follows:
110.2 Approval. The conductors and equipment required or permitted by this Code shall be
acceptable only if approved. Approval of equipment may be evident by listing and labeling of
equipment by a Nationally Recognized Testing Lab (NRTL) with a certification mark of that
laboratory or a qualified third party inspection agency approved by the AHJ.
Exception: Unlisted equipment that is relocated to another location within a jurisdiction or is
field modified is subject to the approval by the AHJ. This approval may be by a field evaluation
by a NRTL or qualified third party inspection agency approved by the AHJ.
Informational Note No. 1: See 90.7, Examination of Equipment for Safety, and 110.3,
Examination, Identification, Installation, and Use of Equipment. See definitions of Approved,
Identified, Labeled, and Listed.
Informational Note No. 2: Manufacturer's self-certification of equipment may not necessarily
comply with US product safety standards as certified by a Nationally Recognized Testing Lab.
Informational Note No. 3: NFPA 790 and 791 provide an example of an approved method for
qualifying a third party inspection agency.
Article 210.52(G)(1) Garages: delete the following requirement:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 66/505
(1) Garages. In each attached garage and in each detached garage with electric power. At least one
receptacle outlet shall be installed for each car space.
Article 230.71(A); add the following exception:
Exception: Multi-occupant buildings. Individual service disconnecting means is limited to six for
each occupant. The number of individual disconnects at one location may exceed six.
Article 240.24(D); add the following exception:
“Exception: Overcurrent devices shall be permitted in clothes closets provided the working
clearances in section 110-26 of the National Electrical Code are maintained.”
Article 240.91; delete the article.
Article 300; shall be amended by adding thereto a new subsection 300.1(D) to read as follows:
(D) Metal Raceways/Conduit Required. All wiring, except installations operating at 50 volts or
less, including but not exclusive of security systems, communication systems, room thermostats, and
low voltage lighting control systems, installed in or on any building or structure shall be placed in
metallic conduit, metallic tubing, or metallic raceways. Where possible, rigid metallic conduit or
electrical metallic tubing shall be used, however, flexible metal conduit will be permitted in existing
floors, in existing walls, existing ceilings, and for the connection of motors or portable and stationary
equipment and fixtures where flexibility of connection is required. A ground wire must be installed in
all flexible metal conduit. Prewired flexible metal raceways/conduits where installations operate in
excess of 50 volts are prohibited.
Article 300.11; add the following exception:
Exception: Ceiling grid support wires may be used for structural supports when the associated wiring
is located in that area, not more than two raceways or cables supported per wire, with a maximum
nominal metric designation 16 (trade size 1/2").
Article 310.15(B)(7); change to read as follows:
(7) This article shall not be used in conjunction with 220.82.
Article 334 Nonmetallic-sheathed cable; Types NM, NMC, and NMS DELETE in its entirety.
Article 500.8(A)(3); change to read as follows:
500.8 Equipment. Articles 500 through 504 require equipment construction and installation standards
that ensure safe performance under conditions of proper use and maintenance.
Informational Note No. 1: It is important that inspection authorities and users exercise more
than ordinary care with regard to installation and maintenance.
Informational Note No. 2: Since there is no consistent relationship between explosion
properties and ignition temperature, the two are independent requirements.
Informational Note No. 3: Low ambient conditions require special consideration. Explosion
proof or dust-ignition proof equipment may not be suitable for use at temperatures lower than
-25°C (-13°F) unless they are identified for low-temperature service. However, at low ambient
temperatures, flammable concentrations of vapors may not exist in a location classified as Class
I, Division 1 at normal ambient temperature.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 67/505
(A) Suitability. Suitability of identified equipment shall be determined by one of the following:
(1) Equipment listing or labeling
(2) Evidence of equipment evaluation from a qualified testing laboratory or inspection
agency concerned with product evaluation
(3) Evidence acceptable to the authority having jurisdiction such as a manufacturer's selfevaluation
or an engineering judgment signed and sealed by a qualified Licensed Professional
Engineer.
Informational Note: Additional documentation for equipment may include certificates
demonstrating compliance with applicable equipment standards, indicating special
conditions of use, and other pertinent information.
Article 505.7(A); changed to read as follows:
505.7 Special Precaution. Article 505 requires equipment construction and installation that ensures
safe performance under conditions of proper use and maintenance.
Informational Note No. 1: It is important that inspection authorities and users exercise more
than ordinary care with regard to the installation and maintenance of electrical equipment in
hazardous (classified) locations.
Informational Note No. 2: Low ambient conditions require special consideration. Electrical
equipment depending on the protection techniques described by 505.8(A) may not be suitable
for use at temperatures lower than -20°C (-4°F) unless they are identified for use at lower
temperatures. However, at low ambient temperatures, flammable concentrations of vapors may
not exist in a location classified Class I, Zones 0, 1, or 2 at normal ambient temperature.
(A) Implementation of Zone Classification System. Classification of areas, engineering and design,
selection of equipment and wiring methods, installation, and inspection shall be performed by a
qualified Licensed Professional Engineer.
Article 517.30 Essential Electrical Systems for Hospitals; create a new (H) and add the following language:
(G) Coordination. Overcurrent protective devices serving the equipment branch of the essential
electrical system shall be coordinated for the period of time that a fault's duration extends beyond 0.1
second.
Exception No. 1: Between transformer primary and secondary overcurrent protective devices,
where only one overcurrent protective device or set of overcurrent protective devices exists on
the transformer secondary.
Exception No. 2: Between overcurrent protective devices of the same size (ampere rating) in
series.
Informational Note: The terms coordination and coordinated as used in this section do not cover
the full range of overcurrent conditions.
(H) Selective Coordination. Overcurrent protective devices serving the life safety, and critical
branches of the essential electrical system shall be selectively coordinated with all supply-side
overcurrent protective devices.
Exception No. 1: Between transformer primary and secondary overcurrent protective devices,
where only one overcurrent protective device or set of overcurrent protective devices exists on
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 68/505
the transformer secondary.
Exception No. 2: Between overcurrent protective devices of the same size (ampere rating) in
series.
Informational Note: The terms coordination and coordinated as used in this section do not cover
the full range of overcurrent conditions.
Article 680 of “The Electrical Code” entitled Swimming Pools, Fountains, and Similar Installations shall be
amended by amending 680.8(A) Power to read as follows:
(A) Power. With respect to service drop conductors and open overhead wiring, swimming pool and
similar installations shall comply with the minimum horizontal clearance of ten feet (10') measured to
the inside wall of the pool.
Table 680.8(A) Overhead conductor clearances; shall be deleted in its entirety.
Figure 680.8(A) Clearances from pool structures; shall be deleted in its entirety.
Article 680.25(A); changed to read as follows:
680.25 Feeders. These provisions shall apply to any feeder on the supply side of panelboards
supplying branch circuits for pool equipment covered in Part II of this article and on the load side of
the service equipment or the source of a separately derived system.
(A) Wiring Methods.
(1) Feeders. Feeders shall be installed in rigid metal conduit or intermediate metal
conduit. The following wiring methods shall be permitted if not subject to physical
damage:
1. Liquidtight flexible nonmetallic conduit;
2. Electrical metallic tubing where installed on or within a building;
3. Electrical nonmetallic tubing where installed below ground;
Exception: An existing feeder between an existing remote panelboard and service
equipment shall be permitted to run in flexible metal conduit or an approved cable
assembly that includes an equipment grounding conductor within its outer sheath. The
equipment grounding conductor shall comply with 250.24(A)(5).
Annex H 80.23 shall be changed by deleting the words “Notice of violations” in the first paragraph and by
deleting (A) and changing (B) Penalties (2) to read as follows:
“Failure to comply with the requirements of this code shall result in each day the offense continues
being a separate violation.”
By changing (B)(3) to read as follows:
“(3) The penalty for violation of the Town Electric Code is as set out in the Highland Park
Code of Ordinances section 1.01.009.”
Sec. 3.03.035 Registration of electrical contractors
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 69/505
(a) The term “electrical contractor” as used in this division is hereby defined and construed to mean any
person, firm, or corporation engaged in the business of installing or altering electrical equipment and appliances,
for the utilization of electricity supplied by light, heat or power. The term “electrical contractor” does include
employees employed by such contractor to do or supervise such work.
(b) No person, firm or corporation shall engage in any electrical contracting work in the Town without having
first being registered with the Town as an electrical contractor with a valid master electrician's license issued by
the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation. All applications for registration shall be made to the Town
Building Inspection Department on forms furnished by the Department. The Town shall charge an annual
registration fee as established by Town Council resolution. Such registrations are valid only for the calendar year
in which they are issued.
(c) The electrical contractor registration issued by the Town under the provisions of this division shall expire
365 days from the date of issuance. The electrical registration of any person, firm, or corporation violating any
of the provisions of this division may be revoked by the Town.
(d) Any registration issued under the terms of the electrical code may be revoked if the Town determines that
the licensee is no longer qualified.
Sec. 3.03.036 Permit required
It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation licensed under the provisions of this division to install any
electrical appliances, wiring, or fixtures within the Town not in compliance with the Town's ordinances, and it
shall be unlawful for such person, firm, or corporation to do any such work without first having obtained a
permit by a registered electrical contractor as defined in section 3.03.035(a) or as otherwise required by the
Town. Plans and specifications to cover proposed work must be submitted to and approved by the Town
Electrical Inspection Department prior to the issuance of a permit. A permit issued by the Town shall be
construed to be a license to proceed with the work and shall not be construed as authority to violate, alter, cancel,
or set aside any provisions of the electrical code, nor shall such issuance of a permit prevent the Town Electrical
Inspector from thereafter requiring correction of errors in plans or in work performed which may be deemed by
the Town in violation of the electrical code.
Sec. 3.03.037 Electrical building permit fee
(a) Fees covering the installation, alteration and repair of electric wiring, electric apparatus, and electric
equipment shall be established by Town Council resolution.
(Ordinance 2002 adopted 6/27/16)
(b) All but $50.00 of the electrical building permit fee can be refunded if work has not commenced and
request for refund is made in writing no more than thirty (30) days from issuance of permit. (Ordinance 2029
adopted 9/25/17)
Sec. 3.03.038 Concealing wiring prior to inspection
No electrical wiring or conduit shall be concealed in any manner prior to inspection and approval by the Town
Electrical Inspector.
Sec. 3.03.039 Enforcement
The Town Electrical Inspector shall enforce the provisions of the electrical code, and he, or his duly authorized
representative, may enter any building, structure, or premises to perform any duty imposed upon him by the
electrical code. Upon notice from the Town Electrical Inspector that work is being performed in violation of the
electrical code, such work shall be stopped immediately.
(Ordinance 2002 adopted 6/27/16)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 70/505
Secs. 3.03.040–3.03.060 Reserved
Division 3. Residential Outdoor Lighting
Sec. 3.03.061 Definitions
For purposes of this division, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning set forth below:
Abate. When used as part of the phrase “abate the emission of light of a prohibited intensity,” means to
physically and permanently preclude the emission of light of a prohibited intensity from the source of such light.
The abatement may be effected by:
(1) Using a source of lesser intensity;
(2) Removing the fixture which is the source of the light;
(3) Redirecting the light;
(4) Shielding the light; and/or
(5) Taking other steps that physically and permanently preclude the emission of light of a
prohibited intensity.
Merely moving an electrical light switch to an “off” position or temporarily removing a light bulb shall not
constitute an abatement.
Decorative holiday light. Any light emitted on or from a source-of-light residential property for the apparent
purpose of observing, celebrating, honoring, enjoying, or recognizing a holiday, holiday season, historic
occasion, annual event, special event, anniversary, birth, or death.
Light. Artificial light; that is, any light that originates from a source other than the sun.
Recipient-of-light residential property. Any parcel of real property which is located within the corporate limits of
the Town, that is zoned “one-family residence (detached),” “one-family residence (attached) townhouse,” or
“two-family residence duplex.”
Source-of-light residential property. Any parcel of real property which is located within the corporate limits of
the Town, that is zoned “one-family residence (detached),” “one-family residence (attached) townhouse,” or
“two-family residence duplex,” and from which light is emitted directly or by reflection.
Sec. 3.03.062 Intent
The intent of this division is to protect recipient-of-light residential properties and their occupants from
unreasonable and/or annoying light emitting from source-of-light residential properties.
Sec. 3.03.063 Regulation
(a) For purposes of this division, the intensity of any light which is emitted from a source-of-light residential
property shall be measured at any point on or along an imaginary vertical plane above any property line of any
recipient-of-light residential property.
(b) The emission of light from a source-of-light residential property which, at any point of measurement
described immediately above, exceeds one footcandle (ten lux) of intensity, is hereby prohibited.
Sec. 3.03.064 Exceptions
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 71/505
(a) Section 3.03.063 above does not apply to light emitted from decorative holiday lights used:
(1) During the period beginning with July 2nd and ending with July 6th of a given year; and
(2) During the period beginning on the Saturday preceding Thanksgiving day of a given year and
ending the first Sunday following New Year's Day of the succeeding year.
(b) Section 3.03.063 above applies to decorative holiday lights used at any other time during the year.
Sec. 3.03.065 Enforcement
(a) The Town Building Inspector shall enforce the provisions of this division, and may:
(1) Issue a citation for a violation of the provisions of this division; and/or
(2) Consistent with State laws and/or regulations, enter upon any property and take such action as
is reasonably necessary to effect compliance with this division;
provided however, prior to issuing a citation or entering upon a property: (A) the inspector shall give written
notice of a violation to the owner(s) or the occupant(s) of the source-of-light residential property from which the
prohibited emission of light originated; and (B) such owner(s) or occupant(s) shall have a period of three (3)
business days to abate the prohibited emission of light; provided further however, if during a period of two (2)
years following the date on which any such written notice is given, one or more violations of this division
occurs, the building inspector may issue a citation or enter upon a property without giving the owner(s) or the
occupant(s) any additional notice or opportunity to abate.
(b) After the lapse of a period of three (3) business days following the giving of any required notice, a separate
offense shall occur on each calendar day during which the prohibited emission of light occurs.
(Ordinance 1913 adopted 3/11/13)
ARTICLE 3.04 PLUMBING*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 3.04.001–3.04.030 Reserved
Division 2. Plumbing Code†
Sec. 3.04.031 Title
This division shall be known as the Town plumbing code and may be cited as such, and will be referred to in this
division as “the plumbing code.”
Sec. 3.04.032 Adopted
The International Plumbing Code, 2015 edition, shall be, and same is hereby made, a part of this division by
reference, the same as if copied at length herein, and made a part hereof for all purposes, and copies of said
International Plumbing Code, 2015 edition, shall be kept on file in the office of the Building Inspector.
Sec. 3.04.033 Requirements varying from or not covered by Code
Any requirement considered necessary for the safety, strength or stability of an existing or proposed plumbing
installation, or for the safety of the occupants of a building or structure, which varies from provisions of the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 72/505
International Plumbing Code, 2015 edition, or which is not specifically covered by the International Plumbing
Code, 2009 edition, shall be determined by the Plumbing Inspector subject to appeal to the Town Council.
Sec. 3.04.034 References in Code
The International Plumbing Code, 2015 edition, is hereby amended as follows:
(1) Throughout the International Plumbing Code, 2015 edition, and any amendments thereto,
wherever the term “Plumbing Official” is used, there may be substituted therefor the term “Plumbing
Inspector.”
(2) Throughout the International Plumbing Code, 2015 edition, and any amendments thereto,
wherever the term “Board of Adjustment and Appeals” is used, there shall be substituted therefor the
term “Town Council.”
Sec. 3.04.035 Amendments
The following deletions, additions, and amendments to the International Plumbing Code contained herein are
hereby approved and adopted:
Table of Contents, Chapter 7, section 714; change to read as follows:
714 Engineered Drainage Design ……………………………………69
Section 102.8; change to read as follows:
102.8 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those
that are listed in Chapter 15 and such codes, when specifically adopted, and standards shall be
considered as part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference.
Where the differences occur between provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the
provisions of this code shall be the minimum requirements. Whenever amendments have been
adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be
considered to reference the adopted amendments. Any reference to NFPA 70 or the National
Electrical Code (NEC) shall mean the Electrical Code as adopted.
Add Section 106.4.1 - licensing of plumbers, which shall read as follows:
106.4.1 LICENSING OF PLUMBERS.
1. GENERAL. Before any person, firm or corporation shall engage in the plumbing business,
he shall be qualified as set forth herein, and a license shall be obtained from the State of Texas
as required by the Plumbing License Law of 1947, article 6243-101 Vernon's Annotated Civil
Statutes, and any subsequent amendments thereto. Where any plumbing work is being done, a
licensed Master or Journeyman Plumber shall at all times be present on the job, and in actual
control, and in charge of the work being done, unless otherwise allowed by the State Plumbing
License Law.
2. ILLEGAL WORK - REVOCATION OF LICENSE. Any person, firm or corporation
engaged in the plumbing business whose work does not conform to the rules and regulations
hereinafter set out, or whose workmanship or materials are of inferior quality, shall on notice
from the Plumbing Inspector make necessary changes or corrections at once so as to conform to
this code, if work has not been so changed after ten (10) days' notice from the Plumbing
Inspector, the Plumbing Inspector shall then refuse to issue any more permits until such work
has fully complied with the rules and regulations of this code. The Plumbing Inspector may
appear before the Governing Authority and request that all licenses be revoked because of
continuous violations pursuant to the State of Texas Plumbing Licensing Law.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 73/505
3. ALLOWING ONES NAME OR LICENSE TO BE USED TO OBTAIN PERMIT
FRAUDULENTLY. No person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of plumbing shall
allow his, its, or their names to be used by any other person, firm, or corporation, directly or
indirectly, to obtain a permit, or for the construction of any work under his, its, or their names
or license.
Section 106.5.3 shall be amended in part as follows:
Every permit issued shall become invalid unless work authorized by such permit is commenced
within ninety (90) days after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or
abandoned for a period of ninety (90) days after the time the work has commended.
Section 106.6.2; change to read as follows:
106.6.2 Fee schedule. The fees for all plumbing work shall be as adopted by resolution of the
governing body of the jurisdiction.
Section 106.6.3 Fee Refunds. The code official shall establish a policy for authorizing the refunding of fees.
Section 106.7 shall be added, which shall read as follows:
Section 106.7 Registration of Contractors.
(a) Any person who engages in the design, installation, construction, maintenance, service
repair, alteration or modification of a product, plumbing system or irrigation system requiring a
permit as set forth in this ordinance shall be licensed by the State of Texas to perform such
work as a plumbing contractor or irrigation contractor, respectively.
(b) Plumbing contractors and irrigation contractors are required to register annually with the
Town. Registration for plumbing contractors shall be maintained annually, corresponding with
their State-issued responsible master plumber's license. Registration for irrigation contractors
will expire one calendar year from the date on which they are issued. Registration shall be made
in writing on Department of Building Inspection furnished forms for that purpose. A
registration fee shall be required as established by Town Council resolution. This registration
shall be accompanied by a copy of the person's State-issued responsible master plumber's
license or State-issued irrigator's license, and a copy of their driver's license.
Exception: A homeowner is not required to be licensed as a registered contractor to perform
work in his own home.
Section 108.2 shall be deleted in its entirety.
Section 108.3 shall be deleted in its entirety.
Section 108.4 shall be deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:
“The penalty for violation of this Code is as set out in the Highland Park Code of Ordinances section
1.01.009.”
Section 109; Means of Appeal, shall be deleted in its entirety.
Section 305.4.1; change to read as follows:
305.4.1 Sewer depth. Building sewers shall be a minimum of 12 inches (304 mm) below grade.
Section 305.7; change to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 74/505
305.7 Protection of components of plumbing system. Components of a plumbing system installed
within 3 feet along alleyways, driveways, parking garages or other locations in a manner in which
they could be exposed to damage shall be recessed into the wall or otherwise protected in an
approved manner.
Section 314.2.1; amended by adding the following which shall read as follows:
{text unchanged} Condensate shall not discharge into a street, alley, sidewalk, rooftop, or other areas
so as to cause a nuisance.
Section 409.2; amended by adding the following which shall read as follows:
409.2 Water connection. The water supply to a commercial dishwashing machine shall be protected
against backflow by an air gap or backflow preventer in accordance with section 608. {Remainder of
text unchanged}
Section 412.4; change to read as follows:
412.4 Required location for floor drains. Floor drains shall be installed in the following areas.
1. In public coin-operated laundries and in the central washing facilities of multiple family
dwellings, the rooms containing automatic clothes washers shall be provided with floor drains
located to readily drain the entire floor area. Such drains shall have a minimum outlet of not
less than 3 inches (76 mm) in diameter.
2. Commercial kitchens. In lieu of floor drains in commercial kitchens, the code official may
accept floor sinks.
3. Public restrooms.
Section 419.3; change to read as follows:
419.3 Surrounding material. Wall and floor space to a point 2 feet (610 mm) in front of a urinal lip
and 4 feet (1219 mm) above the floor and at least 2 feet (610 mm) to each side of the urinal shall be
waterproofed with a smooth, readily cleanable, hard, nonabsorbent material.
Section 502.3; change to read as follows:
502.3 Appliances in attics. Attics containing a water heater shall be provided with an opening and
unobstructed passageway large enough to allow removal of the water heater. The passageway shall be
not less than 30 inches (762 mm) in height and 22 inches (559 mm) in width and not more than 20
feet (6096 mm) in length measured along the centerline of the passageway from the opening to the
water heater. The passageway shall have continuous solid flooring not less than 24 inches (610 mm)
in width. A level service space not less than 30 inches (762 mm) in length and 30 inches (508 mm) in
width shall be present at the front or service side of the water heater. The clear access opening
dimensions shall be a minimum of 20 inches by 30 inches (508 mm by 762 mm), or larger where
such dimensions be not less than 20 inches by 30 inches(508mm by 762mm) where such dimensions
are large enough to allow removal of the water heater. A walkway to an appliance shall be rated as a
floor as approved by the Building Official. As a minimum, for access to the attic space, provide one
of the following:
1. A permanent stair.
2. A pull down stair with a minimum 300 lb. (136 kg) capacity.
3. An access door from an upper floor level.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 75/505
4. Access Panel may be used in lieu of items 1, 2, and 3 with prior approval of the code
official due to building conditions.
Exceptions:
1. The passageway and level service space are not required where the appliance is
capable of being serviced and removed... {remainder of section unchanged}
Add Section 502.6, which shall read as follows:
502.6 Water heaters above ground or floor. When the attic, roof, mezzanine or platform in which a
water heater is installed is more than eight (8) feet (2438 mm) above the ground or floor level, it shall
be made accessible by a stairway or permanent ladder fastened to the building.
Exception: A max 10 gallon water heater (or larger with approval) is capable of being accessed
through a lay-in ceiling and a water heater is installed is not more than ten (10) feet (3048 mm)
above the ground or floor level and may be reached with a portable ladder.
Section 504.6; change to read as follows:
504.6 Requirements for discharge piping. The discharge piping serving a pressure relief valve,
temperature relief valve or combination thereof shall:
1. Not be directly connected to the drainage system.
2. Discharge through an air gap.
3. Not be smaller than the diameter of the outlet of the valve served and shall discharge full
size to the air gap.
4. Serve a single relief device and shall not connect to piping serving any other relief device
or equipment.
Exception: Multiple relief devices may be installed to a single T & P discharge piping
system when approved by the administrative authority and permitted by the manufactures
installation instructions and installed with those instructions.
5. Discharge, to an indirect waste receptor or to the outdoors.
6. Discharge in a manner that does not cause personal injury or structural damage.
7. Discharge to a termination point that is readily observable by the building occupants.
8. Not be trapped.
9. Be installed so as to flow by gravity.
10. Terminate not more than 6 inches above and not less than two times the discharge pipe
diameter above the floor or flood level rim of the waste receptor.
11. Not have a threaded connection at the end of such piping.
12. Not have valves or tee fittings.
13. Be constructed of those materials listed in section 605.4 or materials tested, rated and
approved for such use in accordance with ASME A112.4.1.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 76/505
Section 504.7.1; change to read as follows:
Section 504.7.1 Pan size and drain to read as follows: The pan shall be not less than 11/2 [1-1/2]
inches (38 mm) in depth and shall be of sufficient size and shape to receive all dripping or condensate
from the tank or water heater. The pan shall be drained by an indirect waste pipe having a diameter of
not less than 3/4 inch (19 mm). Piping for safety pan drains shall be of those materials listed in Table
605.4. Multiple pan drains may terminate to a single discharge piping system when approved by the
administrative authority and permitted by the manufactures installation instructions and installed with
those instructions.
Add Section 604.4.1, which shall read as follows:
604.4.1 State maximum flow rate. Where the State mandated maximum flow rate is more restrictive
than those of this section, the State flow rate shall take precedence.
Section 606.1; change to read as follows:
Section 606.1 Location of full-open valves. Full-open valves shall be installed in the following
locations:
1. On the building water service pipe from the public water supply near the curb.
2. On the water distribution supply pipe at the entrance into the structure.
3. On the discharge side of every water meter.
4. On the entrance to every water supply pipe to a dwelling unit, except where supplying a
single fixture equipped with individual stops.
5. On the water supply pipe to a gravity or pressurized water tank.
6. On the water supply pipe to every water heater.
Section 606.2; change to read as follows:
606.2 Location of shutoff valves. Shutoff valves shall be installed in the following two locations:
1. On the fixture supply to each plumbing fixture other than bathtubs and showers in oneand
two-family residential occupancies, and other than in individual sleeping units that are
provided with unit shutoff valves in hotels, motels, boarding houses and similar occupancies.
2. On the water supply pipe to each appliance or mechanical equipment.
Section 608.1; change to read as follows:
608.1 General. A potable water supply system shall be designed, installed and maintained in such a
manner so as to prevent contamination from non-potable liquids, solids or gases being introduced
into the potable water supply through cross-connections or any other piping connections to the
system. Backflow preventer applications shall conform to applicable local regulations, Table 608.1,
except and as specifically stated in sections 608.2 through 608.16.10.
Section 608.16.5; change to read as follows:
608.16.5 Connections to lawn irrigation systems. The potable water supply to lawn irrigation systems
shall be protected against backflow by an atmospheric-type vacuum breaker, a pressure-type vacuum
breaker, a double-check assembly, or a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer. A valve shall
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 77/505
not be installed downstream from an atmospheric vacuum breaker. Where chemicals are introduced
into the system, the potable water supply shall be protected against backflow by a reduced pressure
principle backflow preventer.
Section 608.17; change to read as follows:
608.17 Protection of individual water supplies. An individual water supply shall be located and
constructed so as to be safeguarded against contamination in accordance with applicable local
regulations. Installation shall be in accordance with sections 608.17.1 through 608.17.8.
Section 610.1; change to read as follows:
610.1 General. New or repaired potable water systems shall be purged of deleterious matter and
disinfected prior to utilization. The method to be followed shall be that prescribed by the health
authority or water purveyor having jurisdiction or, in the absence of a prescribed method, the
procedure described in either AWWA C651 or AWWA C652, or as described in this section. This
requirement shall apply to “on-site” or “in-plant” fabrication of a system or to a modular portion of a
system.
1. The pipe system shall be flushed with clean, potable water until dirty water does not
appear at the points of outlet.
2. The system or part thereof shall be filled with a water/chlorine solution containing at least
50 parts per million (50 mg/L) of chlorine, and the system or part thereof shall be valved off
and allowed to stand for 24 hours; or the system or part thereof shall be filled with a
water/chlorine solution containing at least 200 parts per million (200 mg/L) of chlorine and
allowed to stand for 3 hours.
3. Following the required standing time, the system shall be flushed with clean potable water
until the chlorine is purged from the system.
4. The procedure shall be repeated where shown by a bacteriological examination that
contamination remains present in the system.
Exception: With prior approval the Code Official may wave this requirement when
deemed un-necessary.
Add Section 614, which shall read as follows:
Section 614 - IRRIGATION SYSTEMS:
Subsection 614.1 - DEFINITIONS:
Irrigation System - Shall mean any system of underground pipes, valves, and irrigation
heads (2 or more), designed for application of water to exterior landscaping; which is
connected to the Town's water distribution system.
Substantially Rebuilt - Shall mean any irrigation system which existed prior to the date of
this ordinance, and which is being rebuilt or modified to the extent that a new main
service line is needed, or to the extent that any irrigation zone(s) is being reinstalled, or
new pipes and/or heads are installed on such zone or zones. This definition does not
include the repair of a broken pipe or repair of broken irrigation heads.
Main Service Line - Shall mean the pipe which extends from the water meter, on the
customer side, and extends to the vacuum breaker which is installed on the customer's
premises.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 78/505
Subsection 614.2 - METERING: Any new or substantially rebuilt irrigation system shall be
connected to a separate water meter and shall be separately billed for water consumption.
Subsection 614.3 - DESIGN:
(a) Any new or substantially rebuilt irrigation system shall be designed by a registered
professional engineer, architect, landscape architect, or licensed irrigator; except that a
homeowner can design and perform work on property of which he is the lawful owner.
(b) A permit shall be required for any new or substantially rebuilt irrigation system, and
the application for permit shall be accompanied by a drawing(s) of the proposed
installation. The drawing(s) shall be to scale, and indicate the site boundaries, pipe
location and sizes, and irrigation heads with design flow rate. The drawing(s) shall also
indicate the design pressure at the water meter, maximum flow rate, and design
application rate in inches per hour.
(c) No system shall be approved which has an application rate greater than two (2)
inches of water per hour.
(d) Any new or substantially rebuilt irrigation system shall be designed to limit over
spray onto adjacent properties, and to prevent run off during irrigation operation.
(e) Any substantially rebuilt irrigation system shall comply with all provisions of the
International Plumbing Code which requires backflow prevention devices.
(f) Any new or substantially rebuilt irrigation system shall provide a freeze gauge of a
type approved by the Town to prevent operation when temperature is at or below freezing.
(g) Any new or substantially rebuilt irrigation system shall provide a rain sensing
device of a type approved by the Town to prevent operation during periods of
precipitation.
Subsection 614.4 - OPERATION:
(a) A person commits an offense if he knowingly or recklessly irrigates, waters, or
causes or permits the irrigation or watering of a lawn or landscape located on premises
owned, leased, or managed by the person in a manner that causes:
(1) A substantial amount of water to fall upon impervious areas instead of upon
the lawn or landscape, such that a constant stream of water overflows from the lawn
or landscape onto a street or other drainage area; or
(2) An irrigation system or other lawn or landscape watering device to operate
during any form of precipitation.
(b) A person commits an offense if, on premises owned, leased, or managed by him, he
operates a lawn or landscape irrigation system or device that:
(1) Has any broken or missing irrigation head; or
(2) Has not been properly maintained in a manner that prevents the waste of
water.
(c) A person commits an offense if, on premises owned, leased, or managed by him, he
causes a discharge or otherwise permits a discharge to adjacent property, or which causes
ice to form on any public street, alley, or sidewalk.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 79/505
(d) All irrigation systems operated after January 1, 2006, shall be equipped with rain
sensing devices and freeze gauges.
(e) A person commits an offense if, during the period from April 1st through October
31st of any year and between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any day during that
period, he irrigates, waters, or causes or permits the irrigation or watering of any lawn or
landscape located on premises owned, leased, or managed by him. Handheld watering
with a hose or use of soaker hoses are permitted within these hours.
Section 703.6; Delete in its entirety.
Add Section 703.7 Sewer Repairs, which shall read as follows:
703.7 Sewer Repairs. Sewer line repairs requiring the replacement of more than fifty percent (50%)
of the yard line, the entire yard line must be replaced and a new tap made. Every abandoned building
(house) sewer shall be plugged or capped in an approved manner within five (5) ft. of the property
line. The property owner is responsible for removing abandoned sewer taps from the sewer main.
Add Section 704.5, which shall read as follows:
704.5 Single stack fittings. Single stack fittings with internal baffle, PVC schedule 40 or cast iron
single stack shall be designed by a registered engineer and comply to a national recognized standard.
Section 705.11.2; change to read as follows:
705.11.2 Solvent cementing. Joint surfaces shall be clean and free from moisture. A purple primer
that conforms to ASTM F 656 shall be applied. Solvent cement not purple in color and conforming to
ASTM D 2564, CSA B137.3, CSA B181.2 or CSA B182.1 shall be applied to all joint surfaces. The
joint shall be made while the cement is wet and shall be in accordance with ASTM D 2855. Solvent
cement joints shall be permitted above or below ground.
Section 708.3.2 shall be amended by adding the following which shall read as follows:
{existing text unchanged}
“A clean-out shall be located within five feet (5') of the property line.”
Add Section 712.5, which shall read as follows:
712.5 Dual Pump System. All sumps shall be automatically discharged and, when in any “public use”
occupancy where the sump serves more than 10 fixture units, shall be provided with dual pumps or
ejectors arranged to function independently in case of overload or mechanical failure. For storm
drainage sumps and pumping systems, see section 1113.
Section 714, deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following which shall read as follows:
SECTION 714
ENGINEERED DRAINAGE DESIGN
714.1 Design of drainage system. The sizing, design and layout of the drainage system shall be
designed by a registered engineer using approved design methods.
Added Section 804.2; which shall read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 80/505
804.2 Special waste pipe, fittings, and components. Pipes, fittings, and components receiving or
intended to receive the discharge of any fixture into which acid or corrosive chemicals are placed
shall be constructed of CPVC, high silicone iron, PP, PVDF, chemical resistant glass, or glazed
ceramic materials.
Section 903.1; change to read as follows:
903.1 Roof extension. Open vent pipes that extend through a roof shall terminate not less than six (6)
inches (152 mm) above the roof. Where a roof is to be used for assembly or as a promenade,
observation deck, sunbathing deck or similar purposes, open vent pipes shall terminate not less than 7
feet (2134 mm) above the roof.
Section 1002.10; shall be deleted in its entirety.
Add Section 1003.3.4.3, which shall read as follows:
1003.3.4.3 Fixture Flow Rates. For calculating the required sizes of grease interceptors, the rate of
discharge from each fixture connected to the interceptor shall be based upon the rates shown in the
following table:
Type of Fixture Rate of Flow in GPM
Single compartment sink with 1-1/2" waste 15
Double compartment sink with 1-1/2" waste 20
Triple compartment sink with 2" waste 25
Dishwashers up to 30 gallon water capacity 15
Up to 50 gallon water capacity 25
Up to 100 gallon water capacity 40
Floor Drain - each 5
Manufactured grease interceptors shall be selected to fit the flow rate requirements of the connected
fixtures from the manufacturer's rating schedule.
Concrete grease interceptors shall have a minimum size up to 7 gpm of 18"x18"x24" deep. For each
additional gpm flow rate, size shall be increased by 1 cubic foot.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 81/505
All grease interceptors shall be installed outside of the building unless approved by the Plumbing
Inspector.”
Section 1101.2; change to read as follows:
1101.2 Disposal. Permits issued for new construction, major remodels, additions and other
improvements shall require: roofs, paved areas, side and front yards to discharge onto a public street,
paved alley or sub-surface storm drainage system. This drainage shall be maintained per this subsection
during and following completion of construction.
Section 1101.8; change to read as follows:
1101.8 Cleanouts required. Cleanouts or manholes shall be installed in the storm drainage system and
shall comply with the provisions of this code for sanitary drainage pipe cleanouts.
Add [Section 1104.4], which shall read as follows:
1104.4 - Prohibited discharge into storm drainage system. The sanitary sewer and storm drainage
system shall be entirely separate. No kitchen waste, laundry waste, or sewage shall be allowed to
accumulate, discharge or flow into a storm drainage system, gutter, street, highway, or any public
place.
Add Section 1104.4, which shall read as follows:
1104.5 [1104.4] - Dog runs. Paved dog runs shall provide a minimum 3" diameter connection to the
sanitary sewer. The drain shall be trapped and provide a cover that will remain closed except when
the dog run is being cleaned. The dog run shall be designed to prevent collection and drainage of
stormwater into the sanitary sewer.
Section 1106.1; change to read as follows:
1106.1 General. The size of the vertical conductors and leaders, building storm drains, building storm
sewers, and any horizontal branches of such drains or sewers shall be based on six (6) inches per hour
rainfall rate.
Section 1108.3; change to read as follows:
1108.3 Sizing of secondary drains. Secondary (emergency) roof drain systems shall be sized in
accordance with section 1106. Scuppers shall be sized to prevent the depth of ponding water from
exceeding that for which the roof was designed as determined by Section 1101.7. Scuppers shall not
have an opening dimension of less than 4 inches (102 mm). The flow through the primary system
shall not be considered when sizing the secondary roof drain system.
Section 1109; shall be deleted in its entirety.
Section 1202.1; delete “exception 2.”
Sec. 3.04.036 Appendices adopted
The following appendices in the 2015 International Plumbing Code are hereby adopted as follows:
(1) Appendix “B,” Rates of Rainfall for Various Cities.
(2) Appendix “C,” Structural Safety.
(3) Appendix “D,” Degree Day and Design Temperatures.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 82/505
(4) Appendix “E,” Sizing of Water Piping System.
Sec. 3.04.037 Appendices not adopted
The following appendix in the 2015 International Plumbing Code are hereby deleted as follows:
(1) Appendix “A,” Fee Schedule.
Sec. 3.04.038 Permit required
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to install, alter or repair plumbing, plumbing fixtures,
fittings and/or appurtenances connected to the water or sewage systems until a plumbing permit has been issued.
Sec. 3.04.039 Permit fees
(a) Permit fees shall be established by Town Council resolution.
(b) All but $50.00 of the permit fee can be refunded if work has not commenced and request for refund is
made in writing no more than thirty (30) days from issuance of the permit.
Sec. 3.04.040 Penalty
Any person or entity that shall fail to comply with or that shall violate any of the terms of this division shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, may be fined as provided in section 1.01.009 of
this code. Any violation of the terms of this article shall authorize the Water Department to terminate water or
sewer service or both to the offending person or entity and to withhold further service until such time as the
terms of this article shall have been complied with and all fees or reconnect charges have been paid.
Secs. 3.04.041–3.04.060 Reserved
Division 3. Customer Service Inspection Certification and Cross-Connection Control Program
Sec. 3.04.061 Title
This division shall be known as the customer service certification and cross-connection control program, and
may be cited as such.
Sec. 3.04.062 Penalty
Any person or entity that shall fail to comply with or that shall violate any of the provisions of this division shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof may be fined as provided in section 1.01.009
of this code.
Sec. 3.04.063 Adoption of State rules
The TCEQ Rules and Regulations for Public Water Systems, section 290.38 (definitions), section 290.44(h)
(backflow, siphonage), and section 290.46(j) (customer service inspections), as amended, shall be and the same
are hereby made a part of this division by reference the same as if copied at length, and incorporated herein for
all purposes. Copies of said TCEQ Rules and Regulations for Public Water Systems shall be kept on file in the
office of the Building Inspector.
Sec. 3.04.064 Backflow assembly test reports
Backflow assembly test reports required by section 290.44(h)(4)(D) of the TCEQ Rules and Regulations for
Public Water Systems must be submitted to the Town not later than thirty (30) days from the date of issuance of
the permit for installation.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 83/505
Sec. 3.04.065 Inspection certification fee
Fees for customer service inspection certification shall be established by Town Council resolution.
(Ordinance 1999 adopted 6/27/16)
ARTICLE 3.05 GAS CODE
Sec. 3.05.001 Title
This article shall be known as the Town fuel gas code and may be cited as such, and will be referred to in this
article as “the gas code.”
Sec. 3.05.002 Adopted
The International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 edition, together with all amendments thereto, shall be and the same is
hereby made a part of this article by reference, the same as if copied herein, and made a part hereof for all
purposes, and copies of said International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 edition, together with all amendments thereto,
shall be kept on file in the office of the Plumbing Inspector.
Sec. 3.05.003 Requirements varying from or not covered by code
Any requirement considered necessary for the safety, strength or stability of an existing or proposed gas piping
installation and/or gas appliance which varies from provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 edition,
and all amendments thereto, or which is not specifically covered by the International Fuel Gas Code, 2015
edition, and all amendments thereto, shall be determined by the Plumbing Inspector subject to appeal to the
Town Council.
Sec. 3.05.004 References in code
The International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 edition, is hereby amended as follows:
(1) Throughout the International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 edition, and all amendments thereto,
wherever the term “Gas Official” is used, there may be substituted therefor the term “Plumbing
Inspector.”
(2) Throughout the International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 edition, and all amendments thereto,
wherever the term “Board of Adjustment and Appeals” is used, there shall be substituted therefor the
term “Town Council.”
Sec. 3.05.005 Amendments
The following deletions, additions, and amendments to the International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 edition, contained
herein, are hereby approved and adopted:
Section 102.2; add an exception to read as follows:
Exception: Existing dwelling units shall comply with section 621.2.
Section 102.8; change to read as follows:
102.8 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those
that are listed in Chapter 8 and such codes, when specifically adopted, and standards shall be
considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference.
Where differences occur between provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions
of this code shall apply. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 84/505
standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the amendments
as well.
Section 106.5.3; shall be amended in part as follows:
“Every permit issued shall become invalid unless work authorized by such permit is commenced
within ninety (90) days after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or
abandoned for a period of ninety (90) days after the time the work has commenced.”
Section 106.6.2 Fee schedule; shall be deleted.
Section 106.6.3 Fee refunds; shall be deleted.
Section 106.7; shall be added as follows:
106.6 [106.7] Registration of Contractors.
(a) Any contractor engaging in the design, installation, construction, maintenance, service
repair, alteration or modification of a product, or plumbing fuel gas system requiring a permit as
set forth in this ordinance shall be licensed by the State of Texas to perform such work.
(b) Plumbing contractors are required to register with the Town. Registration for plumbing
contractors shall be maintained annually, corresponding with their State-issued responsible
master plumber's license. Registration shall be made in writing on Department of Building
Inspection furnished forms for that purpose. This registration shall be accompanied by a copy
of the person's State-issued Master Plumber's license and driver's license.
Exception: a homeowner is not required to be licensed as a registered contractor to
perform work in his own home.
Section 108.2 shall be deleted in its entirety.
Section 108.3 shall be deleted in its entirety.
Section 108.4 shall be deleted in its entirety.
Section 109, means of appeal, shall be deleted in its entirety.
Add Section 110 as follows:
Section 110 - LICENSING OF GAS INSTALLERS.
Subsection 110.1 - GENERAL: Any person, firm or corporation engaging in the installation of
consumer's gas piping, gas appliances and related accessories, shall be qualified, as set forth
herein, and a license shall be obtained from the State of Texas as required by the Plumbing
License Law of 1947, Chapter 1301 Texas Occupations Code and any subsequent amendments
thereto. Where any plumbing work is being done a licensed Master or Journeyman Plumber
shall at all times be present on the job and in actual control, and in charge of the work being
done.
Subsection 110.2 - ILLEGAL WORK, REVOCATION OF LICENSE: Any person, firm or
corporation engaged in the gas installation business whose work does not conform to the rules
and regulations hereinafter set out, or whose workmanship or materials are of inferior quality,
shall on notice from the Plumbing Inspector make necessary changes or corrections at once so
as to conform to this code, if work has not been so changed after ten (10) days' notice from the
Plumbing Inspector; the Plumbing Inspector shall then refuse to issue any further permits until
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 85/505
such work has fully complied with the rules and regulations of this code. The Plumbing
Inspector may appear before the Governing Authority and request that all licenses be revoked
because of continuous violations. When the revocation of any such license is to be considered at
any meeting, the person, firm, company, association, or corporation to whom the license has
been issued shall have at least three (3) days' notice in writing of the time and place of such
meeting, together with a statement of the grounds upon which it is proposed to revoke such
license. Any person violating any provision of the Town Fuel Gas Code may be charged with a
violation regardless of whether the provisions of this section have been followed.
Subsection 110.3 - ALLOWING ONE'S NAME OR LICENSE TO BE USED TO OBTAIN
PERMIT FRAUDULENTLY: No person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of gas
installation shall allow its name to be used by any other person, firm, or corporation, directly or
indirectly, to obtain a permit, or for the construction of any work under its name or license.
Section 306.3; change to read as follows:
[M] 306.3 Appliances in attics. Attics containing appliances shall be provided . . . {bulk of paragraph
unchanged} . . . side of the appliance. The clear access opening dimensions shall be a minimum of 20
inches by 30 inches (508 mm by 762 mm), or larger where such dimensions are not large enough to
allow removal of the largest appliance. A walkway to an appliance shall be rated as a floor as
approved by the Building Official. As a minimum, for access to the attic space, provide one of the
following:
1. A permanent stair.
2. A pull down stair with a minimum 300 lb. (136 kg) capacity.
3. An access door from an upper floor level.
4. Access Panel may be used in lieu of items 1, 2, and 3 with prior approval of the code
official due to building conditions.
Exceptions:
1. The passageway and level service space are not required where the appliance is
capable of being serviced and removed through the required opening.
2. Where the passageway is not less than ... {bulk of section to read the same}.
Section 306.5; change to read as follows:
[M] 306.5 Equipment and appliances on roofs or elevated structures. Where equipment requiring
access and appliances are installed on roofs or elevated structures at an aggregate height exceeding
16 feet (4877 mm), such access shall be provided by a permanent approved means of access.
Permanent exterior ladders providing roof access need not extend closer than 12 feet (2438 mm) to
the finish grade or floor level below and shall extend to the equipment and appliances' level service
space. Such access shall . . . {bulk of section to read the same} . . . on roofs having a slope greater
than 4 unit's vertical in 12 unit's horizontal (33-percent slope). ... {bulk of section to read the same}.
Section 306.5.1; change to read as follows:
[M] 306.5.1 Sloped roofs. Where appliances, equipment, fans or other components that require
service are installed on roofs having slopes greater than 4 units vertical in 12 units horizontal and
having an edge more than 30 inches (762 mm) above grade at such edge, a catwalk at least 16 inches
in width with substantial cleats spaced not more than 16 inches apart shall be provided from the roof
access to a level platform at the appliance. The level platform shall be provided on each side of the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 86/505
appliance to which access is required for service, repair or maintenance. The platform shall be not
less than 30 inches (762 mm) in any dimension and shall be provided with guards. The guards shall
extend not less than 42 inches (1067 mm) above the platform, shall be constructed so as to prevent
the passage of a 21-inch-diameter (533 mm) sphere and shall comply with the loading requirements
for guards specified in the International Building Code.
Section 306; Add section 306.7 with exception and subsection 306.7.1 [sic] to read as follows:
306.7 Water heaters above ground or floor. When the attic, roof, mezzanine or platform in which a
water heater is installed is more than eight (8) feet (2438 mm) above the ground or floor level, it shall
be made accessible by a stairway or permanent ladder fastened to the building.
Section 401.5; add a second paragraph to read as follows:
Both ends of each section of medium pressure corrugated stainless steel tubing (CSST) shall identify
its operating gas pressure with an approved tag. The tags are to be composed of aluminum or
stainless steel and the following wording shall be stamped into the tag:
“WARNING
1/2 to 5 psi gas pressure
Do Not Remove”
Section 402.3; add an exception to read as follows:
Exception: Corrugated stainless steel tubing (CSST) shall be a minimum of 1/2" (18 EHD).
Section 404.12; change to read as follows:
404.12 Minimum burial depth. Underground piping systems shall be installed a minimum depth of 18
inches (458 mm) top of pipe below grade.
Section 406.1; change to read as follows:
406.1 General. Prior to acceptance and initial operation, all piping installations shall be inspected and
pressure tested to determine that the materials, design, fabrication, and installation practices comply
with the requirements of this code. The permit holder shall make the applicable tests prescribed in
sections 406.1.1 through 406.1.5 to determine compliance with the provisions of this code. The
permit holder shall give reasonable advance notice to the Code Official when the piping system is
ready for testing. The equipment, material, power and labor necessary for the inspections and test
shall be furnished by the permit holder and the permit holder shall be responsible for determining that
the work will withstand the test pressure prescribed in the following tests.
Section 406.4; change to read as follows:
406.4 Test pressure measurement. Test pressure shall be measured with a monometer or with a
pressure-measuring device designed and calibrated to read, record, or indicate a pressure loss caused
by leakage during the pressure test period. The source of pressure shall be isolated before the
pressure tests are made.
Section 406.4.1; change to read as follows:
406.4.1 Test pressure. The test pressure to be used shall be no less than 3 psig (20 kPa gauge), or at
the discretion of the Code Official, the piping and valves may be tested at a pressure of at least six (6)
inches (152 mm) of mercury, measured with a manometer or slope gauge. For tests requiring a
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 87/505
pressure of 3 psig, diaphragm gauges shall utilize a dial with a minimum diameter of three and one
half inches (3-1/2"), a set hand, 1/10 pound incrementation and pressure range not to exceed 6 psi for
tests requiring a pressure of 3 psig. For tests requiring a pressure of 10 psig, diaphragm gauges shall
utilize a dial with a minimum diameter of three and one-half inches (3-1/2"), a set hand, a minimum
of 2/10 pound incrementation and a pressure range not to exceed 20 psi. For welded piping, and for
piping carrying gas at pressures in excess of fourteen (14) inches water column pressure (3.48 kPa)
(1/2 psi) and less than 200 inches of water column pressure (52.2 kPa) (7.5 psi), the test pressure
shall not be less than ten (10) pounds per square inch (69.6 kPa). For piping carrying gas at a pressure
that exceeds 200 inches of water column (52.2 kPa) (7.5 psi), the test pressure shall be not less than
one and one-half times the proposed maximum working pressure.
Section 406.4.2; change to read as follows:
406.4.2 Test duration. Test duration shall be held for a length of time satisfactory to the Code
Official, but in no case for less than fifteen (15) minutes. For welded piping, and for piping carrying
gas at pressures in excess of fourteen (14) inches water column pressure (3.48 kPa), the test duration
shall be held for a length of time satisfactory to the Code Official, but in no case for less than thirty
(30) minutes. {Delete remainder of section.}
Section 409.1; add section 409.1.4 to read as follows:
409.1.4 Valves in CSST installations. Shutoff valves installed with corrugated stainless steel (CSST)
piping systems shall be supported with an approved termination fitting, or equivalent support,
suitable for the size of the valves, of adequate strength and quality, and located at intervals so as to
prevent or damp out excessive vibration but in no case greater than 12-inches from the center of the
valve. Supports shall be installed so as not to interfere with the free expansion and contraction of the
system's piping, fittings, and valves between anchors. All valves and supports shall be designed and
installed so they will not be disengaged by movement of the supporting piping.
Section 410.1; add a second paragraph and exception to read as follows:
Access to regulators shall comply with the requirements for access to appliances as specified in
section 306.
Exception: A passageway or level service space is not required when the regulator is capable of
being serviced and removed through the required attic opening.
Section 621.2; add exception as follows:
621.2 Prohibited use. One or more unvented room heaters shall not be used as the sole source of
comfort heating in a dwelling unit.
Exception: Existing approved unvented heaters may continue to be used in dwelling units, in
accordance with the code provisions in effect when installed, when approved by the Code
Official unless an unsafe condition is determined to exist as described in section 108.7.
Sec. 3.05.006 Appendices adopted
The following appendices in the International Fuel Gas Code, 2009 edition, and all amendments thereto, are
hereby adopted as follows:
(1) Appendix “A,” Sizing and Capacities of Gas Piping.
(2) Appendix “B,” Sizing of Venting Systems.
(3) Appendix “C,” Exit Terminals of Mechanical Draft and Direct-Vent Venting Systems.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 88/505
(4) Appendix “D,” Recommended Procedure For Safety Inspection Of An Existing Appliance
Installation.
Sec. 3.05.007 Permit required
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to install, alter or repair any gas piping, gas appliances or
gas equipment until a plumbing permit has been issued.
Sec. 3.05.008 Permit fees
(a) Permit fees covering the installation, alteration and repair of gas piping, gas appliances or gas equipment
shall be established by Town Council resolution.
(b) All but $50.00 of the permit fee can be refunded if work has not commenced and request for refund is
made in writing no more than thirty (30) days from issuance of the permit.
(Ordinance 2000 adopted 6/27/16)
ARTICLE 3.06 MECHANICAL CODE*
Sec. 3.06.001 Title
This article shall be known as the Town mechanical code and may be cited as such, and will be referred to in this
article as “the mechanical code.”
Sec. 3.06.002 Adopted
The International Mechanical Code, 2015 edition, together with all amendments thereto, shall be and same is
hereby made a part of this article by reference, the same as if copied herein and made a part hereof, and copies
of said International Mechanical Code, 2015 edition, and all amendments thereto, shall be kept on file in the
office of the Mechanical Inspector.
Sec. 3.06.003 Requirements varying from or not covered by code
Any requirement considered necessary for the safety, strength or stability of an existing or proposed mechanical
installation, or for the safety of the occupants thereof, which varies from provisions of the International
Mechanical Code, 2015 edition, and all amendments thereto, or which is not specifically covered by the
International Mechanical Code, 2015 edition, and all amendments thereto, shall be determined by the
Mechanical Inspector subject to appeal to the Town Council.
Sec. 3.06.004 References in code
The International Mechanical Code, 2015 edition, and all amendments thereto, is hereby amended as follows:
(1) Throughout the International Mechanical Code, 2015 edition, and all amendments thereto,
wherever the term “Mechanical Official” is used, there may be substituted therefor the term
“Mechanical Inspector.”
(2) Throughout the International Mechanical Code, 2015 edition, and all amendments thereto,
wherever the term “Board of Adjustment and Appeals” is used, there shall be substituted therefor the
term “Town Council.”
Sec. 3.06.005 Amendments
The following deletions, additions, and amendments to the International Mechanical Code contained herein are
hereby approved and adopted:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 89/505
Section 102.8; change to read as follows:
102.8 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced herein shall be those that
are listed in Chapter 15 and such codes, when specifically adopted, and standards shall be considered
part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where
differences occur between provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this
code shall apply. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards,
each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the amendments as well.
Any reference to NFPA 70 or the ICC Electrical Code shall mean the Electrical Code as adopted.
Section 106.4.3, expiration, shall be amended in part as follows:
Every permit issued shall become invalid unless work authorized by such permit is commenced
within ninety (90) days after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or
abandoned for a period of ninety (90) days after the time the work has commenced.
Add Section 106.6, which shall read as follows:
106.6 Registration of Contractors.
(a) Any person who installs, repairs or alters environmental air conditioning, refrigeration, or
process cooling or heating systems or ventilation shall be licensed by the State of Texas to
perform such work as a mechanical contractor.
(b) Mechanical contractors are required to register annually with the Town. Registration will
expire 365-days from issuance. To register, an application shall be made in writing on forms
furnished for that purpose by the Building Inspection Department along with a registration fee,
as established by Town Council resolution, and filed with the Building Inspection Department.
This application shall contain a copy of the person's State air conditioning and refrigeration
license and a copy of their driver's license.
Exception: a homeowner is not required to be licensed as a registered contractor to
perform work on his/her homestead.
Section 106.5.2, Fee Schedule; shall be deleted in its entirety.
Section 106.5.3, Fee Refunds; shall be deleted in its entirety.
Section 108.2 shall be deleted in its entirety.
Section 108.3 shall be deleted in its entirety.
Section 108.4 shall be deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:
“The penalty for violation of this Code is as set out in the Highland Park Code of Ordinances section
1.01.009.”
Section 306.3; change to read as follows:
306.3 Appliances in attics. Attics containing appliances requiring access shall be provided with an
opening and unobstructed passageway large enough to allow removal of the largest appliance. The
passageway shall be not less than 30 inches (762 mm) high and 22 inches (559 mm) in wide and not
more than 20 feet (6096 mm) in length measured along the centerline of the passageway from the
opening to the appliance. The passageway shall have continuous solid flooring not less than 24
inches (610 mm) wide. A level service space not less than 30 inches (762 mm) deep and 30 inches
(508 mm) wide shall be present at the front or service side of the appliance. The clear access opening
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 90/505
dimensions shall be a minimum of 20 inches by 30 inches (508 mm by 762 mm), or larger where
such dimensions are not large enough to allow removal of the largest appliance. A walkway to an
appliance shall be rated as a floor as approved by the Building Official. As a minimum, for access to
the attic space, provide one of the following:
1. A permanent stair.
2. A pull down stair with a minimum 300 lb. (136 kg) capacity.
3. An access door from an upper floor level.
4. Access Panel may be used in lieu of items 1, 2, and 3 with prior approval of the code
official due to building conditions.
Exceptions:
1. The passageway and level service space are not required where the appliance is
capable of being serviced and removed... {remainder of section unchanged}
Section 306.5; change to read as follows:
306.5 Equipment and appliances on roofs or elevated structures. Where equipment requiring access
or appliances are located on an elevated structure or the roof of a building such that personnel will
have to climb higher than 16 feet (4877 mm) above grade to access, a permanent interior or exterior
means of access shall be provided. Permanent exterior ladders providing roof access need not extend
closer than 12 feet (2438 mm) to the finish grade or floor level below and shall extend to the
equipment and appliances' level service space. Such access shall not require climbing over
obstructions greater than 30 inches (762 mm) in height or walking on roofs having a slope greater
than 4 units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33-percent slope). {remaining text unchanged}.
Section 306.5.1; change to read as follows:
306.5.1 Sloped roofs. Where appliances, equipment, fans or other components that require service are
installed on roofs having slopes greater than 4 units vertical in 12 units horizontal and having an edge
more than 30 inches (762 mm) above grade at such edge, a catwalk at least 16 inches in width with
substantial cleats spaced not more than 16 inches apart shall be provided from the roof access to a
level platform at the appliance. The level platform shall be provided on each side of the appliance to
which access is required for service, repair or maintenance. The platform shall be not less than 30
inches (762 mm) in any dimension and shall be provided with guards. The guards shall extend not
less than 42 inches (1067 mm) above the platform, shall be constructed so as to prevent the passage
of a 21-inch-diameter (533 mm) sphere and shall comply with the loading requirements for guards
specified in the International Building Code.
Add Section 306.6, which shall read as follows:
306.6 Water heaters above ground or floor. When the mezzanine or platform in which a water heater
is installed is more than eight (8) feet (2438 mm) above the ground or floor level, it shall be made
accessible by a stairway or permanent ladder fastened to the building.
Exception: A max 10 gallon water heater (or larger with approval) is capable of being accessed
through a lay-in ceiling and a water heater is installed is not more than ten (10) feet (3048 mm)
above the ground or floor level and may be reached with a portable ladder.
Section 307.2.3; amend item 2 to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 91/505
2. A separate overflow drain line shall be connected to the drain pan provided with the equipment.
Such overflow drain shall discharge to a conspicuous point of disposal to alert occupants in the event
of a stoppage of the primary drain. The overflow drain line shall connect to the drain pan at a higher
level than the primary drain connection. However, the conspicuous point shall not create a hazard
such as dripping over a walking surface or other areas so as to create a nuisance.
Section 403.2.1; add an item 5 to read as follows:
5. Toilet rooms within private dwellings that contain only a water closet, lavatory or combination
thereof may be ventilated with an approved mechanical recirculating fan or similar device designed
to remove odors from the air.
Section 501.3; add an exception to read as follows:
501.3 Exhaust discharge. The air removed by every mechanical exhaust system shall be discharged
outdoors at a point where it will not cause a nuisance and not less than the distances specified in
section 501.3.1. The air shall be discharged to a location from which it cannot again be readily drawn
in by a ventilating system. Air shall not be exhausted into an attic or crawl space, or be directed onto
walkways.
Exceptions:
1. Whole-house ventilation-type attic fans shall be permitted to discharge into the attic
space of dwelling units having private attics.
2. Commercial cooking recirculating systems.
3. Where installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and where
mechanical or natural ventilation is otherwise provided in accordance with Chapter 4,
listed and labeled domestic ductless range hoods shall not be required to discharge to the
outdoors.
4. Toilet room exhaust ducts may terminate in a warehouse or shop area when
infiltration of outside air is present.
Section 607.5.1; change to read as follows:
607.5.1 Fire Walls. Ducts and air transfer openings permitted in fire walls in accordance with section
705.11 of the International Building Code shall be protected with listed fire dampers installed in
accordance with their listing. For hazardous exhaust systems see section 510.1–510.9 IMC.
Sec. 3.06.006 Appendices adopted
The following appendix in the International Mechanical Code, 2015 edition, and all amendments thereto, are
hereby adopted as follows:
(1) Appendix “A,” Chimney Connector Pass-Throughs.
Sec. 3.06.007 Appendices not adopted
The following appendix in the International Mechanical Code, 2015 edition, are hereby deleted as follows:
(1) Appendix “B,” Fee Schedule, shall be deleted in its entirety.
Sec. 3.06.008 Permit required
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 92/505
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to install, alter, repair, or replace a mechanical system,
equipment, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances thereto, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air
conditioning and refrigeration systems, or other energy-related systems, until a mechanical permit has been
issued. Plans and specifications to cover proposed work must be submitted to and approved by the Mechanical
Inspector prior to issuance of a permit.
Sec. 3.06.009 Permit fees
(a) Permit fees covering the installation, alteration, repair, or replacement of mechanical systems, equipment,
fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration
systems or other energy-related systems, shall be established by Town Council resolution.
(b) Any and all fees shall be paid at the time of application by the person, or his representative, to whom the
permit is to be issued. All but $50.00 of the permit fee can be refunded if work has not commenced and request
for refund is made in writing no more than thirty (30) days from issuance of permit.
(Ordinance 1998 adopted 6/27/16)
ARTICLE 3.07 ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE*
Sec. 3.07.001 Title
This article shall be known as the Town energy conservation code and may be cited as such, and will be referred
to in this article as “the energy conservation code.”
Sec. 3.07.002 Adopted
The International Energy Conservation Code, 2015 edition, together with all amendments thereto, shall be and
same is hereby made a part of this article by reference, the same as if copied herein and made a part hereof, and
copies of said International Energy Conservation Code, 2015 edition, shall be kept on file in the office of the
Building Inspector.
Sec. 3.07.003 Amendments
The following deletions, additions, and amendments to the International Energy Conservation Code contained
herein are hereby approved and adopted:
Add Section C102.1.2, which shall read as follows:
C102.1.2 Alternative compliance. A building certified by a national, State, or local accredited energy
efficiency program and determined by the Energy Systems Laboratory to be in compliance with the
energy efficiency requirements of this section may, at the option of the Code Official, be considered
in compliance. The United States Environmental Protection Agency's Energy Star Program
certification of energy code equivalency shall be considered in compliance.
Add Section R102.1.2, which shall read as follows:
R102.1.2 Alternative compliance. A building certified by a national, State, or local accredited energy
efficiency program and determined by the Energy Systems Laboratory to be in compliance with the
energy efficiency requirements of this section may, at the option of the Code Official, be considered
in compliance. The United States Environmental Protection Agency's Energy Star Program
certification of energy code equivalency shall be considered in compliance. Regardless of the
program or the path to compliance, each 1- and 2-family dwelling shall be tested for air and duct
leakage as prescribed in section R402.4 and R403.3.3 respectively.
Section C202; add the following definition:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 93/505
PROJECTION FACTOR. The ratio of the horizontal depth of the overhang, eave or permanently
attached shading device, divided by the distance measured vertically from the bottom of the
fenestration glazing to the underside of the overhang, eave or permanently attached shading device.
Section R202; add the following definitions:
DYNAMIC GLAZING. Any fenestration product that has the fully reversible ability to change it
performance properties, including U-factor, solar heat gain coefficient (SHGC), or visible
transmittance (VT).
PROJECTION FACTOR. The ratio of the horizontal depth of the overhang, eave or permanently
attached shading device, divided by the distance measured vertically from the bottom of the
fenestration glazing to the underside of the overhang, eave or permanently attached shading device.
Section R402.3.2 Glazed fenestration SHGC; amend by adding a paragraph and table following the exception to
read as follows:
{existing text remains unchanged}
Where vertical fenestration is shaded by an overhang, eave, or permanently attached shading device,
the SHGC required in Table R402.1.2 shall be reduced by using the multipliers in Table R402.3.2
SHGC Multipliers for Permanent Projections.
Table R402.3.2 SHGC Multipliers for Permanent Projectionsa
Projection Factor SHGC Multiplier
(all Other Orientation)
SHGC Multiplier
(North Oriented)
0–0.10 1.00 1.00
>0.10–0.20 0.91 0.95
>0.20–0.30 0.82 0.91
>0.30–0.40 0.74 0.87
>0.40–0.50 0.67 0.84
>0.50–0.60 0.61 0.81
>0.60–0.70 0.56 0.78
>0.70–0.80 0.51 0.76
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 94/505
>0.80–0.90 0.47 0.75
>0.90–1.00 0.44 0.73
a North oriented means within 45 degrees of true north.
Section R402.4.1.2 Testing; add a last paragraph to read as follows:
{existing text remains unchanged}
Mandatory testing shall only be performed by individuals that are certified to perform air infiltration
testing certified by national or State organizations as approved by the Building Official. The certified
individuals must be an independent third-party entity, and may not be employed; or have any
financial interest in the company that constructs the structure.
Section R403.3.3 Duct Testing (Mandatory) Add a last paragraph to read as follows:
{existing text remains unchanged}
Mandatory testing shall only be performed by individuals that are certified to perform duct testing
leakage testing certified by national or State organizations as approved by the Building Official. The
certified individuals must be an independent third-party entity, and may not be employed; or have
any financial interest in the company that constructs the structure.
Add Section C402.2.9, which shall read as follows:
Section C402.2.7[9] Insulation installed in walls. To insure that insulation remains in place,
insulation installed in walls shall be totally enclosed on all sides consisting of framing lumber,
gypsum, sheathing, wood structural panel sheathing, netting or other equivalent material approved by
the Building Official.
Add Section R402.2.14, which shall read as follows:
Section R402.2.14 Insulation installed in walls. To insure that insulation remains in place, insulation
installed in walls shall be totally enclosed on all sides consisting of framing lumber, gypsum,
sheathing, wood structural panel sheathing, netting or other equivalent material approved by the
Building Official.
Section R405.6.2; add the following sentence to the end of paragraph:
{existing text remains unchanged}
Acceptable performance software simulation tools may include, but are not limited to, REM RateTM,
Energy Gauge and IC3. Other performance software programs accredited by RESNET BESTEST
and having the ability to provide a report as outlined in R405.4.2 may also be deemed acceptable
performance simulation programs and may be considered by the Building Official.
TABLE R406.4 MAXIMUM ENERGY RATING INDEX; amend to read as follows:
TABLE R406.41
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 95/505
MAXIMUM ENERGY RATING INDEX
CLIMATE ZONE ENERGY RATING INDEX
3 65
1 This table is effective until August 31, 2019.
TABLE R406.42
MAXIMUM ENERGY RATING INDEX
CLIMATE ZONE ENERGY RATING INDEX
3 63
2 The table is effective from September 1, 2019 to August 31, 2022.
TABLE R406.43
MAXIMUM ENERGY RATING INDEX
CLIMATE ZONE ENERGY RATING INDEX
3 59
3 This table is effective on or after September 1, 2022.
(Ordinance 2001 adopted 6/27/16)
ARTICLE 3.08 RESIDENTIAL CODE*
Sec. 3.08.001 Title
This article shall be known as the Town residential code and may be cited as such, and will be referred to in this
article as “the residential code.”
Sec. 3.08.002 Adopted
The International Residential Code, 2015 edition, and all amendments thereto, shall be, and the same are hereby
made, a part of this article by reference, the same as if copied herein and made a part hereof, and copies of said
International Residential Code, 2015 edition, and all amendments thereto, shall be kept on file in the office of
the Building Inspector.
Sec. 3.08.003 Requirements varying from or not covered by code
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 96/505
Any requirement considered necessary for the safety, strength or stability of an existing or proposed building or
structure, or for the safety or health of the occupants thereof, which varies from provisions of the International
Residential Code, 2015 edition, and all amendments thereto, or which is not specifically covered by the
International Residential Code, 2015 edition, and all amendments thereto, shall be determined by the Building
Inspector subject to appeal to the Town Council.
Sec. 3.08.004 References in code
The International Residential Code, 2015 edition, and all amendments thereto, hereby is amended as follows:
(1) Throughout the International Residential Code, 2015 edition, and all amendments thereto,
wherever the term “Building Official” is used, there may be substituted therefor the term “Building
Inspector.”
(2) Throughout the International Residential Code, 2015 edition, and all amendments thereto,
wherever the term “Board of Appeals” is used, there shall be substituted therefor the term “Town
Council.”
Sec. 3.08.005 Amendments
The following deletions, additions, and amendments to the International Residential Code contained herein are
hereby approved and adopted:
Section R102.4; change to read as follows:
R102.4 Referenced codes and standards. The codes, when specifically adopted, and standards
referenced in this code shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed
extent of each such reference. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and
standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the amendments
as well. Any reference made to NFPA 70 or the Electrical Code shall mean the Electrical Code as
adopted.
Section R104.10.1 Flood Hazard areas shall be deleted in its entirety.
Section R105.2, Work Exempt from Permit, shall be deleted in its entirety.
Section R105.3.1.1; shall be deleted in its entirety.
Section R105.5; amend to read as follows:
R105.5 Commencement, suspension, or abandonment of work.
1. A building permit shall automatically terminate if construction activities authorized by the
permit have not been commenced at the construction site on or before the ninetieth (90th) day
following the date on which the permit was issued; provided however, the date on which the
permit shall automatically terminate may be extended in accordance with the provisions of
subsection 2 immediately below.
2. If construction activities authorized by a permit have not been commenced at the
construction site and the permit has not already automatically terminated, the date on which a
permit shall automatically terminate may be extended by the Building Official for up to an
additional ninety (90) days; provided however, (i) a permit may be extended only one time; and
(ii) if a permit has already automatically terminated, it shall not be extended. An application for
an extension shall be in writing, shall be signed by the owner, shall demonstrate justifiable
cause for the extension, and shall be delivered to the Town. The permit shall be extended only
if, in the discretion of the Building Official, the owner demonstrates that justifiable cause exists
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 97/505
for the extension. In exercising discretion, the Building Official shall consider (i) the objectives
of the Town set forth below in R105.5.1.3 Intent; and (ii) such other matters as he/she may
deem relevant. Upon receipt of an application, the Building Official shall, as soon as reasonably
possible: (i) evaluate the application; (ii) exercise his/her discretion as to whether an extension
will be granted; (iii) determine the duration of any extension; and (iv) inform the owner in
writing of his/her decision, including, if an extension is granted, the new date on which the
permit shall automatically terminate.
3. A building permit shall automatically terminate, if after construction activities authorized
by the permit have been commenced at the construction site, such activities are suspended or
abandoned for a period of sixty (60) or more consecutive days.
Add Section R105.5.1, Major residential construction activities - time for completion, which shall read as
follows:
R105.5.1 Major residential construction activities - time for completion. Major residential
construction activities, as that term is defined below, shall be conducted and completed in compliance
with the following provisions:
R105.5.1.1 Definitions. The following definitions apply to section R105.5.1 and to no other
subsection:
1. The phrase “major residential construction activities” means any and all activities
involved in:
A. Building, erecting, or constructing: (i) a new residential structure; and (ii) any
other structure, facility, or feature associated with the new residential structure; or
B. Renovating, reconfiguring, repairing, improving, or adding to any: (i) existing
residential structure; or (ii) any structure, facility, or feature associated with an
existing residential structure which, in the judgment of the Building Official, will
likely require more than six (6) months to complete.
If the Building Official concludes that such activities will not likely require more
than six (6) months to complete, such activities shall not be deemed major
residential construction activities and this subsection R105.5.1 shall have no
application to such activities.
2. The phrase “residential building site” means any building site that is zoned “onefamily
residence (detached),” “one-family residence (attached) townhouse,” or “twofamily
residence duplex.”
3. The word “owner” means any natural person, proprietorship, corporation,
partnership, association, estate, trust, foundation, or other entity that owns, possesses, or
controls any interest in any residential building site located in the Town of Highland Park.
In any situation in which any such property is owned, possessed, or controlled by multiple
natural persons and/or multiple other such entities, the word “owner” (in the singular)
encompasses all such natural persons and other entities.
4. The phrase “highly extraordinary circumstances” refers to any objectives,
characteristics, conditions, and/or situations: (i) that are related to, or involved in,
proposed major residential construction activities; and (ii) that:
A. Are highly likely to preclude completion of construction activities within
twenty-four (24) months from the date of commencement of such activities;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 98/505
B. Significantly distinguish such construction activities from comparable
construction activities which have been, or could be, completed within twenty-four
(24) months from the date of commencement; and
C. Cannot be overcome, minimized, or eliminated through more thorough
planning, more intensified efforts, or use of alternative building materials or
techniques, provided however, the owner shall not be expected to unreasonably
compromise the design, quality, or function of the residence or incur unreasonable
additional expense.
R105.5.1.2 Application. The provisions of this subsection R105.5.1 shall apply to all major
residential construction activities that are conducted, or to be conducted, on a residential
building site, but this subsection shall not apply to other construction activities.
R105.5.1.3 Intent. The intent of section R105.5.1 is to assure that:
1. Prior to commencing any major residential construction activities at a residential
building site, the owner of the site and all architects, engineers, contractors,
subcontractors, vendors, and other persons who will participate in any such activities shall
design, plan, organize, manage, and oversee the contemplated construction activities to
the extent, and in a manner that, following commencement of construction activities at the
site:
A. The construction activities will be completed as rapidly as reasonably possible;
B. The interests of the Town, neighboring residents, and visitors in: (i)
maintaining a safe, orderly, and attractive neighborhood; and (ii) having easy access
to and along streets, sidewalks, driveways, alleyways and easements, will be
respected at all times; and
C. Any disruption, inconvenience, or aggravation experienced by residents and
visitors will be minimized to the extent reasonably possible; and
2. Upon commencement of any major residential construction activities at a residential
building site and throughout the performance of such activities, the owner of the site and
all architects, engineers, contractors, subcontractors, vendors, and other persons who
participate in any such activities shall diligently and persistently strive to: (i) complete
such activities as quickly as reasonably possible; and (ii) to achieve the objectives set
forth above in subsections “A,” “B,” and “C” of subsection 1 of section R105.5.1.3.
R105.5.1.4 Expiration date. The expiration date of a building permit issued for major residential
construction activities shall be determined in accordance with the following provisions:
1. Except as provided in the subsections below and/or in section R105.5.1.5,
extensions, all building permits for major residential construction activities shall require
that such activities be completed within a period of not more than twenty-four (24)
consecutive months commencing on the date on which the building permit is issued.
2. The owner of a residential building site may apply for the issuance of a building
permit that allows construction activities to continue for a period of more than twenty-four
(24) consecutive months by delivering to the Town a written, signed application. The
application shall: (i) set forth generally the owner's contentions concerning each of the
matters which are described immediately below in subsection 3 and which must be
established by the owner at a hearing before the administrative committee of the Town
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 99/505
Council (the “committee”); and (ii) state the number of months and days the owner seeks
to have allowed by the building permit for completion of the construction activities.
3. At the hearing before the committee, the owner shall have the burden of presenting
compelling reasons and information that establish the following with reasonable certainty:
A. That highly extraordinary circumstances exist in connection with the proposed
major residential construction activities; and
B. The number of months and days that will likely be required for completion of
the proposed construction activities, assuming that the construction activities are
conducted in a manner consistent with the objectives set forth above in subsection
“A,” “B,” and “C” of subsection 1 of section R105.5.1.3.
4. The committee may authorize issuance of a building permit that allows construction
activities to continue for a period of more than twenty-four (24) consecutive months, if
and only if, it finds that the owner met his/her/its burden set forth in subsection 3 above.
5. Any authorization for the issuance of such a permit shall state a specific number of
months and/or days for which construction will be allowed by the permit. Such number of
months and/or days shall not exceed the number reasonably required to complete the
construction activities if the activities are conducted in a manner consistent with the
objectives set forth above in subsections “A,” “B,” and “C” of subsection 1 of section
R105.5.1.3.
6. The committee may condition the issuance of any permit on the owner strictly
abiding by whatever practices, rules, or obligations the committee may reasonably
conclude are necessary to complete the construction activity as quickly as reasonably
possible.
R105.5.1.5 Extensions.
1. The owner of a residential building site for which a building permit has been issued
for major residential construction activities may apply for an extension of the expiration
date of the permit by delivering to the Town a written, signed application. The application
shall: (i) state a specific date to which the owner seeks to extend the duration of the
permit; (ii) explain the reasons why the owner seeks to extend the duration of the permit;
(iii) demonstrate that remaining construction activities can be fully completed by the date
to which the owner seeks to extend the permit; and (iv) establish that at all times prior to
the date on which the application was filed;
A. The construction activities have been performed diligently and persistently;
and
B. The owner of the site and all architects, engineers, contractors, subcontractors,
vendors, and other persons who participate in any such activities have striven to
achieve the objectives set forth above in section R105.5.1.3.
2. Upon receipt of an application for an extension of a permit:
A. The Building Official shall: (i) evaluate the application; (ii) assess any notice
of the occurrence of an alleged unforeseeable event made by the owner in
accordance with the provisions set forth below in section R105.5.1.6; and (iii) make
whatever inquiries he/she may deem appropriate.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 100/505
B. If the Building Official concludes that: (i) the requirements of section
R105.5.1.3 have been satisfied; and (ii) granting an extension is in the best interest
of the Town, he/she may extend the duration of the building permit for a specific
period not to exceed: (i) the number of days within which the construction activities
can reasonably be completed; or (ii) ninety (90) days following the original
expiration date of the building permit, whichever number of days is less.
C. The Building Official may condition any extension of the permit on the owner
strictly abiding by whatever practices, rules, or obligations such official may
reasonably conclude are necessary to complete such construction activity as quickly
as reasonably possible.
D. The Building Official may entertain and grant successive extensions of a
particular building permit, if in the exercise of his/her judgment, granting an
extension is appropriate under the terms of section R105.5.1.3 and is in the best
interest of the Town; provided however, the Building Official shall not grant an
extension that would extend the duration of a building permit more than ninety (90)
days beyond the original expiration date of the permit.
3. If the Building Official concludes in the exercise of his/her judgment that granting an
extension is not in the best interest of the Town, he/she shall deny the extension.
4. Within fifteen (15) [days] of his/her receipt of an application for an extension, the
Building Official shall render a decision and advise the owner in writing of his/her
decision.
5. If the Building Official concludes: (i) that construction activities cannot reasonably
be completed within ninety (90) days following the expiration date of the original building
permit; or (ii) that granting an extension is not in the best interest of the Town, the owner
may request that the Building Official's decision to deny the application for an extension
be appealed to the committee for its consideration.
6. Upon receipt of an owner's appeal as set forth in subsection 5 above, the committee
shall: (i) evaluate the application for an extension; (ii) assess any notice of the occurrence
of an alleged unforeseeable event made by the owner in accordance with the provisions
set forth below in section R105.5.1.6; and (iii) make whatever inquiries it may deem
appropriate. Thereafter, the committee may:
A. Deny the application to extend the duration of the building permit;
B. Extend the duration of the building permit for a specific period of time not to
exceed the number of days within which the construction activities can reasonably
be completed; and/or
C. Grant an extension conditioned on the owner strictly abiding by whatever
practices, rules, or obligations the committee may reasonably conclude are necessary
to complete the construction activity as quickly as reasonably possible.
7. Prior to the issuance of an extension of a building permit:
A. If the date to which a building permit is extended is a date that is no more than
ninety (90) days after the original expiration date of the permit, the owner shall pay
to the Town a building permit extension fee in an amount equal to twenty-five
percent (25%) of the original building fee; or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 101/505
B. If the date to which a building permit is extended is a date that is more than
ninety (90) days after the original expiration date of the permit, the owner shall pay
to the Town a building permit extension fee in an amount equal to fifty percent
(50%) of the original building fee.
8. Any extension of a building permit must be in writing, state the date to which the
permit is extended, and be signed by the Building Official.
9. All major residential construction activities shall be completed no later than the
expiration date of the building permit, including the date to which any permit is extended.
10. Any new building permit issued to an owner who is required to obtain a new permit
for the performance of any construction activities which were authorized in a previously
issued permit that was: (i) suspended; or (ii) terminated because construction activities
were abandoned, shall not have an expiration date beyond the expiration date of the
previously issued building permit; provided however, the provisions of this subsection
shall not preclude the owner from obtaining an extension of the new permit under the
provisions of section R105.5.1.5.
R105.5.1.6 Unforeseeable events or circumstances. A delay or possible delay in construction
activities directly resulting from an unforeseeable event or circumstance which is beyond the
control of the owner and the control of persons providing goods or services related to such
activities shall not be deemed to result from a lack of diligence or persistence if:
1. Upon learning of the delay or the possibility of a delay, the owner promptly delivers
to the Town a written, signed notice that: (i) describes the unforeseeable event or
circumstance in sufficient detail to permit a Building Official to understand the cause and
nature of the event or circumstance and to assess its potential impact on such construction
activities; and (ii) states the owner's best estimate of the duration of any delay the
unforeseeable event or circumstance has caused, and may thereafter cause; and
2. The Owner and such persons have acted, and are acting, diligently and persistently to
minimize any adverse impact of the unforeseeable event or circumstance on the timely
completion of the construction activity.
3. Any failure to perform any of the following responsibilities shall not constitute an
unforeseeable event or circumstance:
A. The responsibility to make timely decisions related to construction activities;
B. The responsibility to order or schedule the timely delivery of goods, materials,
or services;
C. The responsibility to employ or deploy sufficient person-power, tools, and
equipment to complete the construction activities as rapidly as reasonably possible;
or
D. The responsibility to make prudent decisions concerning pre-construction, and
construction-related activities.
4. Any difficulty or inability on the part of an owner to definitively estimate the likely
duration of any delay that may be caused by an unforeseeable event or circumstance shall
not excuse an owner from promptly delivering to the Town notice of any such event or
circumstance. If at any time an owner learns that any estimate of any delay is materially
incorrect, he/she/it shall promptly deliver to the Town a supplementary notice that states
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 102/505
his/her/its revised best estimate of the duration of the delay that will likely be caused by
the unforeseeable event or circumstance.
5. If an owner fails to comply with the provisions of subsections 1, 2, or 4 immediately
above, an event or circumstance that might otherwise be deemed an unforeseeable event
or circumstance may be disregarded by the Building Official or the committee.
Sections R110.1–R110.5 shall be deleted in their entirety.
Section R113.2 shall be deleted in its entirety.
Section R113.3 shall be deleted in its entirety.
Section R113.4 Violation penalties shall be deleted replaced with the following:
“The penalty for violation of this Code is as set out in the Highland Park Code of Ordinances section
1.01.009.”
Section R202; change definition of “Townhouse” to read as follows:
TOWNHOUSE. A Single-Family dwelling unit constructed in a group of two or more attached units
separated by property lines in which each unit extends from foundation to roof and with open space
on at least two sides.
Table R301.2(1); fill in as follows:
GROUND
SNOW LOAD
WIND DESIGN
SEISMIC DESIGN
CATEGORYf
SPEEDd (mph) Topographic Effectsk
5 lb/ft2 90 (3-sec-gust)/76
fastest mile
No A
SUBJECT TO DAMAGE FROM
Weatheringa Frost line depthb Termitec
Moderate 6" very heavy
WINTER
DESIGN TEMPe
ICE BARRIER
UNDER-LAYMENT
REQUIREDh
FLOOD
HAZARDSg
AIR
FREEZING
INDEXi
MEAN
ANNUAL
TEMPj
22°F No local code 150 64.9°F
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 103/505
{No change to footnotes}
Section R302.1; amend by adding exception #6 to read as follows:
Exceptions: {previous exceptions unchanged}
6. Open non-combustible carport structures may be constructed when also approved within
adopted ordinances.
Section R302.3; amend by adding Exception #3 to read as follows:
Exceptions:
1. {existing text unchanged}
2. {existing text unchanged}
3. Two-family dwelling units that are also divided by a property line through the structure
shall be separated as required for townhouses.
Section R302.5.1; change to read as follows:
R302.5.1 Opening protection. Openings from a private garage directly into a room used for sleeping
purposes shall not be permitted. Other openings between the garage and residence shall be equipped
with solid wood doors not less than 13/8 inches (35 mm) in thickness, solid or honeycomb core steel
doors not less than 13/8 inches (35 mm) thick, or 20-minute fire-rated doors.
Section R303.3, exception; amend by adding the following to read as follows:
Exception: {existing text unchanged} Exhaust air from the space shall be exhaust out to the outdoors
unless the space contains only a water closet, a lavatory, or water closet and a lavatory may be
ventilated with an approved mechanical recirculating fan or similar device designed to remove odors
from the air.
Section R313 Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems Delete subsections in their entirety.
Section R315.2.2 Alterations, repairs and additions. Amend by adding the following to read as follows:
Exception:
2. Installation, alteration or repairs of electrical powered {remaining text unchanged}
Section R322 Flood Resistant Construction. Delete section in its entirety.
Add Section R324 redevelopment of building sites.
R324.1 Permits issued for demolition of One- and Two-Family dwellings shall include demolition of
all nonconforming accessory structures. Clearing and grading of the site shall comply with all
requirements of section 3.08.010 of the Town Code.
Section R326 Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs. Amended to read as follows:
R326.1 General. The design and construction of pools and spas shall comply with the 2015 IRC
Appendix Q. Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 104/505
Section R401.2 Foundation Requirements, amend by adding the following to read as follows:
{existing text unchanged} ...
Every foundation and/or footing, or any size addition to an existing post-tension foundation,
regulated by this code shall be designed and sealed by a Texas-registered professional engineer.
“Foundations shall be designed and approved by a Texas-registered professional engineer for all new
One- & Two-Family dwellings and related accessory buildings. Foundation designs for additions and
renovations to One- & Two-Family dwellings and accessory buildings will include a Texas-registered
professional engineer's seal or the following provisions may be used without additional engineering
design:
Load bearing walls of buildings, except temporary or secondary buildings not used as living
area shall be supported on reinforced concrete grade beams and piers. Such grade beams shall
be not less than twelve (12) inches wide nor less than twenty-four (24) inches deep. All
concrete foundation grade beams shall be reinforced with not less than four (4) No. 5 round
continuous steel reinforcing bars, two (2) in the top and two (2) in the bottom with No. 3 ties
eighteen (18) inches on center. Such beams shall be supported on piers not less than twelve (12)
inches in diameter spaced not more than eight (8) feet on center. Each pier shall be provided
with one (1) No. 6 round steel dowel placed in a vertical position and extending to within three
(3) inches of the bottom of the pier and to within two (2) inches of the top of the beam. Dowels
shall be tied to top and bottom bars in the beam. Sufficient bearing area shall be obtained under
piers by extending to a sufficient depth to encounter rock or a change of soil of sufficient
bearing capacity.
Load bearing walls of one (l) story secondary buildings shall be supported on reinforced
concrete grade beams and piers. Such grade beams shall be not less than ten (10) inches wide
nor less than eighteen (18) inches deep. Foundation grade beams shall be reinforced with not
less than four (4) No. 4 round continuous steel reinforcing bars, two (2) in the top and two (2)
in the bottom with No. 3 ties eighteen (18) inches on center. Such beams shall be supported on
piers not less than ten (10) inches in diameter spaced not more than eight (8) feet on center.
Each pier shall be provided with one (1) No. 4 round steel dowel placed in a vertical position
and extending to within three (3) inches of the bottom of the pier and to within two (2) inches
of the top of the beam. Dowels shall be tied to the top and bottom bars in the beam. Sufficient
bearing area shall be obtained under piers by extending to a sufficient depth to encounter rock
or a change of soil of sufficient bearing capacity.
Concrete slabs shall be a minimum of four (4) inches thick with not less than No. 3 round
continuous steel reinforcing bars on sixteen (16) inch centers or equivalent reinforced.
Section 602.6.1; amended and replaced to read as follows:
R602.6.1 Drilling and notching of top plate. When piping or ductwork is placed in or partly in an
exterior wall or interior load-bearing wall, necessitating cutting, drilling or notching of the top plate
by more than 50 percent of its width, a galvanized metal tie not less than 0.054 inch thick (1.37 mm)
(16 Ga) and 5 inches (127 mm) wide shall be fastened across and to the plate at each side of the
opening with not less than eight 10d (0.148 inch diameter) having a minimum length of 1 1/2 inches
(38 mm) at each side or equivalent. Fasteners will be offset to prevent splitting of the top plate
material. The metal tie must extend a minimum of 6 inches past the opening. See figure R602.6.1.
Figure R602.6.1; delete the figure and insert the following figure:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 105/505
Section R703.8.4.1; add a second paragraph to read as follows:
{existing text unchanged}
In stud framed exterior walls, all ties shall be anchored to studs as follows:
1. When studs are 16 in (407 mm) o.c., stud ties shall be spaced no further apart than 24 in
(737 mm) vertically starting approximately 12 in (381 mm) from the foundation; or
2. When studs are 24 in (610 mm) o.c., stud ties shall be spaced no further apart than 16 in
(483 mm) vertically starting approximately 8 in (254 mm) from the foundation.
Section R902.1; Amend and add exception #5 to read as follows:
R902.1 Roofing covering materials. Roofs shall be covered with materials as set forth in sections
R904 and R905. Class A, B, or C roofing shall be installed. {remainder unchanged}
Exceptions:
1. {text unchanged}
2. {text unchanged}
3. {text unchanged}
4. {text unchanged}
5. Non-classified roof coverings shall be permitted on one-story detached accessory
structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor
area does not exceed 300 (area defined by jurisdiction).
Chapter 11 [RE] - Energy Efficiency is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 106/505
Chapter 11 [RE] Energy Efficiency
N1101.1 Scope. This chapter regulates the energy efficiency for the design and construction of
buildings regulated by this code.
N1101.2 Compliance. Compliance shall be demonstrated by meeting the requirements of the
residential provisions of 2015 International Energy Conservation Code.
Section M1305.1.3; change to read as follows:
M1305.1.3 Appliances in attics. Attics containing appliances shall be provided with an opening and a
clear and unobstructed passageway large enough to allow removal of the largest appliance, but not
less than 30 inches (762 mm) high and 22 inches (559 mm) wide and not more than 20 feet (6096
mm) long measured along the centerline of the passageway from the opening to the appliance. The
passageway shall have a continuous solid flooring in accordance with Chapter 5 not less than 24
inches (610 mm) wide. A level service space not less than 30 inches (762 mm) deep and 30 inches
(762 mm) wide shall be present along all sides of the appliance where access is required. The clear
access opening dimensions shall be a minimum of 20 inches by 30 inches (508 mm by 762 mm), or
larger and large enough to allow removal of the largest appliance. A walkway to an appliance shall be
rated as a floor as approved by the Building Official. As a minimum, for access to the attic space,
provide one of the following:
1. A permanent stair.
2. A pull down stair with a minimum 300 lb (136 kg) capacity.
3. An access door from an upper floor level.
Exceptions:
1. The passageway and level service space are not required where the appliance can be
serviced and removed through the required opening.
2. Where the passageway is unobstructed...{remaining text unchanged}
Section M1411.3; change to read as follows:
M1411.3 Condensate disposal. Condensate from all cooling coils or evaporators shall be conveyed
from the drain pan outlet to a sanitary sewer through a trap, by means of a direct or indirect drain.
{remaining text unchanged}
Section M1411.3.1, subsection 3. shall be amended to read as follows:
3. An auxiliary drain pan without a separate drain line shall be installed under the coils on which
condensation will occur. This pan shall be equipped with a water level detection device conforming
to UL 508 that will shut off the equipment served prior to overflow of the pan. The pan shall be
equipped with a fitting to allow for drainage. The auxiliary drain pan shall be constructed in
accordance with Item 1 of this section. A water level detection device may be installed only with
prior approval of the Building Official.
Section M1411.3.1 subsection 4, shall be amended to read as follows:
4. A water level detection device conforming to UL 508 shall be installed that will shut off the
equipment served in the event that the primary drain is blocked. The device shall be installed in the
primary drain line, the overflow drain line or the equipment-supplied drain pan, located at a point
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 107/505
higher than the primary drain line connection and below the overflow rim of such pan. A water level
detection device may be installed only with prior approval of the Building Official.
Section M1411.3.1.1; shall be amended to read as follows:
M1411.3.1.1 Water-level monitoring devices. On down-flow units and other coils that do not have
secondary drain or provisions to install a secondary or auxiliary drain pan, a water-level monitoring
device shall be installed inside the primary drain pan. This device shall shut off the equipment served
in the event that the primary drain becomes restricted. Devices shall not be installed in the drain line.
A water level detection device may be installed only with prior approval of the Building Official.
Section M1503.4 Makeup air required; amend and add exception as follows:
M1503.4 Makeup air required. Exhaust hood systems capable of exhausting in excess of 400 cubic
feet per minute (0.19 m3/s) shall be provided with makeup air at a rate approximately equal to the
difference between the exhaust air rate and 400 cubic feet per minute. Such makeup air systems shall
be equipped with a means of closure and shall be automatically controlled to start and operate
simultaneously with the exhaust system.
Exception: Where all appliances in the house are of sealed combustion, power-vent, unvented,
or electric, the exhaust hood system shall be permitted to exhaust up to 600 cubic feet per
minute (0.28 m3/s) without providing makeup air. Exhaust hood systems capable of exhausting
in excess of 600 cubic feet per minute (0.28 m3/s) shall be provided with a makeup air at a rate
approximately equal to the difference between the exhaust air rate and 600 cubic feet per
minute.
Section M2005.2; change to read as follows:
M2005.2 Prohibited locations. Fuel-fired water heaters shall not be installed in a room used as a
storage closet. Water heaters located in a bedroom or bathroom shall be installed in a sealed
enclosure so that combustion air will not be taken from the living space. Access to such enclosure
may be from the bedroom or bathroom when through a solid door, weather-stripped in accordance
with the exterior door air leakage requirements of the International Energy Conservation Code and
equipped with an approved self-closing device. Installation of direct-vent water heaters within an
enclosure is not required.
Section G2408.3 (305.5); shall be deleted in its entirety.
Section G2412.5 (401.5); amended by adding the following which shall read as follows:
{existing text unchanged}
Both ends of each section of medium pressure gas piping shall identify its operating gas pressure
with an approved tag. The tags are to be composed of aluminum or stainless steel and the following
wording shall be stamped into the tag:
“WARNING 1/2 to 5 psi gas pressure - Do Not Remove”
Section G2413.3 (402.4.3); add an exception to read as follows:
Exception: Corrugated stainless steel tubing (CSST) shall be a minimum of 1/2" (18 EDH).
Section G2415.12 (404.12); change to read as follows:
G2415.12 (404.12) Minimum burial depth. Underground piping systems shall be installed a
minimum depth of 18 inches (457 mm) below grade.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 108/505
Section G2417.1 (406.1); change to read as follows:
G2417.1 (406.1) General. Prior to acceptance and initial operation, all piping installations shall be
inspected and pressure tested to determine that the materials, design, fabrication, and installation
practices comply with the requirements of this code. The permit holder shall make the applicable
tests prescribed in sections 2417.1.1 through 2417.1.5 to determine compliance with the provisions of
this code. The permit holder shall give reasonable advance notice to the Building Official when the
piping system is ready for testing. The equipment, material, power and labor necessary for the
inspections and test shall be furnished by the permit holder and the permit holder shall be responsible
for determining that the work will withstand the test pressure prescribed in the following tests.
Section G2417.4; change to read as follows:
G2417.4 (406.4) Test pressure measurement. Test pressure shall be measured with a manometer or
with a pressure-measuring device designed and calibrated to read, record, or indicate a pressure loss
caused by leakage during the pressure test period. The source of pressure shall be isolated before the
pressure tests are made. {remainder of text unchanged}
Section G2417.4.1; change to read as follows:
G2417.4.1 (406.4.1) Test pressure. The test pressure to be used shall be not less than 3 psig (20 kPa
gauge), or at the discretion of the Building Official, the piping and valves may be tested at a pressure
of at least six (6) inches (152 mm) of mercury, measured with a manometer or slope gauge. For tests
requiring a pressure of 3 psig, gauges shall utilize a dial with a minimum diaphragm diameter of
three and one half inches (3-1/2"), a set hand, 1/10 pound incrementation and pressure range not to
exceed 6 psi for tests requiring a pressure of 3 psig. For tests requiring a pressure of 10 psig,
diaphragm gauges shall utilize a dial with a minimum diameter of three and one-half inches (3-1/2"),
a set hand, a minimum of 2/10 pound incrementation and a pressure range not to exceed 20 psi.
For welded piping, and for piping carrying gas at pressures in excess of fourteen (14) inches water
column pressure (3.48 kPa) (1/2 psi) and less than 200 inches of water column pressure (52.2 kPa)
(7.5 psi), the test pressure shall not be less than ten (10) pounds per square inch (69.6 kPa). For
piping carrying gas at a pressure that exceeds 200 inches of water column (52.2 kPa) (7.5 psi), the
test pressure shall be not less than one and one-half times the proposed maximum working pressure.
Diaphragm gauges used for testing must display a current calibration and be in good working
condition. The appropriate test must be applied to the diaphragm gauge used for testing.
Section G2417.4.2; change to read as follows:
G2417.4.2 (406.4.2) Test duration. The test duration shall be held for a length of time satisfactory to
the Code Official, but in no case for less than fifteen (15) minutes. For welded piping, and for piping
carrying gas at pressures in excess of fourteen (14) inches water column pressure (3.48 kPa), the test
duration shall be held for a length of time satisfactory to the Building Official, but in no case for less
than thirty (30) minutes.
Section G2420.1 (406.1); add section G2420.1.4 to read as follows:
G2420.1.4 Valves in CSST installations. Shutoff valves installed with corrugated stainless steel
(CSST) piping systems shall be supported with an approved termination fitting, or equivalent
support, suitable for the size of the valves, of adequate strength and quality, and located at intervals
so as to prevent or damp out excessive vibration but in no case greater than 12-inches from the center
of the valve. Supports shall be installed so as not to interfere with the free expansion and contraction
of the system's piping, fittings, and valves between anchors. All valves and supports shall be
designed and installed so they will not be disengaged by movement of the supporting piping.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 109/505
Section G2420.5.1 (409.5.1); add text to read as follows:
G2420.5.1 (409.5.1) Located within the same room. The shutoff valve ...{bulk of paragraph
unchanged}... in accordance with the appliance manufacturer's instructions. A secondary shutoff
valve must be installed within 3 feet (914 mm) of the firebox if appliance shutoff is located in the
firebox.
Section G2421.1 (410.1); add text and Exception to read as follows:
G2421.1 (410.1) Pressure regulators. A line pressure regulator shall be ... {bulk of paragraph
unchanged}... approved for outdoor installation. Access to regulators shall comply with the
requirements for access to appliances as specified in section M1305.
Exception: A passageway or level service space is not required when the regulator is capable of
being serviced and removed through the required attic opening.
Section G2422.1.2.3 (411.1.3.3); delete Exception #1 and Exception #4.
Section G2445.2 (621.2); add Exception to read as follows:
G2445.2 (621.2) Prohibited use. One or more unvented room heaters shall not be used as the sole
source of comfort heating in a dwelling unit.
Exception: Existing approved unvented room heaters may continue to be used in dwelling units,
in accordance with the code provisions in effect when installed, when approved by the Building
Official unless an unsafe condition is determined to exist as described in International Fuel Gas
Code section 108.7 of the Fuel Gas Code.
Section G2448.1.1 (624.1.1); change to read as follows:
G2448.1.1 (624.1.1) Installation requirements. The requirements for water heaters relative to access,
sizing, relief valves, drain pans and scald protection shall be in accordance with this code.
Section P2801.6.1; change to read as follows:
Section P2801.6.1 Pan size and drain. The pan shall be not less than 11/2 inches (38 mm) in depth
and shall be of sufficient size and shape to receive all dripping or condensate from the tank or water
heater. The pan shall be drained by an indirect waste pipe having a diameter of not less than 3/4 inch
(19 mm). Piping for safety pan drains shall be of those materials listed in Table 605.4. Multiple pan
drains may terminate to a single discharge piping system when approved by the administrative
authority and permitted by the manufactures installation instructions and installed with those
instructions.
Section P2804.6.1; change to read as follows:
Section P2804.6.1 Requirements for discharge piping. The discharge piping serving a pressure relief
valve, temperature relief valve or combination thereof shall:
1. Not be directly connected to the drainage system.
2. Discharge through an air gap.
3. Not be smaller than the diameter of the outlet of the valve served and shall discharge full
size to the air gap.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 110/505
4. Serve a single relief device and shall not connect to piping serving any other relief device
or equipment.
Exception: Multiple relief devices may be installed to a single T & P discharge piping
system when approved by the administrative authority and permitted by the manufactures
installation instructions and installed with those instructions.
5. Discharge , to an indirect waste receptor or to the outdoors.
[remainder unchanged]
Section P2801.7; amend by adding the following Exception to read as follows:
{existing text unchanged}
Exceptions:
1. Electric Water Heater.
Section P2902.5.3; changed to read as follows:
P2902.5.3 Lawn irrigation systems. The potable water supply to lawn irrigation systems shall be
protected against backflow by an atmospheric-type vacuum breaker, a pressure-type vacuum breaker,
a double-check assembly or a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer. A valve shall not be
installed downstream from an atmospheric vacuum breaker. Where chemicals are introduced into the
system, the potable water supply shall be protected against backflow by a reduced pressure principle
backflow preventer.
Section P3111 shall be deleted in its entirety.
Section P3112.2; delete and replace with the following:
P3112.2 Installation. Traps for island sinks and similar equipment shall be roughed in above the floor
and may be vented by extending the vent as high as possible, but not less than the drain board height
and then returning it downward and connecting it to the horizontal sink drain immediately
downstream from the vertical fixture drain. The return vent shall be connected to the horizontal drain
through a wye-branch fitting and shall, in addition, be provided with a foot vent taken off the vertical
fixture vent by means of a wye-branch immediately below the floor and extending to the nearest
partition and then through the roof to the open air or may be connected to other vents at a point not
less than six (6) inches (152 mm) above the flood level rim of the fixtures served. Drainage fittings
shall be used on all parts of the vent below the floor level and a minimum slope of one-quarter (1/4)
inch per foot (20.9 mm/m) back to the drain shall be maintained. The return bend used under the
drain board shall be a one (1) piece fitting or an assembly of a forty-five (45) degree (0.79 radius), a
ninety (90) degree (1.6 radius) and a forty-five (45) degree (0.79 radius) elbow in the order named.
Pipe sizing shall be as elsewhere required in this Code. The island sink drain, upstream of the return
vent, shall serve no other fixtures. An accessible cleanout shall be installed in the vertical portion of
the foot vent.
Appendix Q Reserved. Amended to read as follows:
Appendix Q. Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs.
SECTION AQ101 GENERAL.
AQ101.1 General. The provisions of this appendix shall control the design and construction of
swimming pools, spas and hot tubs installed in or on the lot of a one- or two-family dwelling.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 111/505
AQ101.2 Pools in flood hazard areas. Pools that are located in flood hazard areas established by
Table R301.2(1), including above-ground pools, on-ground pools and in-ground pools that involve
placement of fill, shall comply with section AQ101.2.1 or AQ101.2.2.
Exception: Pools located in riverine flood hazard areas which are outside of designated
floodways.
AQ101.2.1 Pools located in designated floodways. Where pools are located in designated
floodways, documentation shall be submitted to the Building Official which demonstrates that
the construction of the pool will not increase the design flood elevation at any point within the
jurisdiction.
AQ101.2.2 Pools located where floodways have not been designated. Where pools are located
where design flood elevations are specified but floodways have not been designated, the
applicant shall provide a floodway analysis that demonstrates that the proposed pool will not
increase the design flood elevation more than 1 foot (305 mm) at any point within the
jurisdiction.
SECTION AQ102 DEFINITIONS.
AQ102.1 General. For the purposes of these requirements, the terms used shall be defined as follows
and as set forth in Chapter 2.
ABOVE-GROUND/ON-GROUND POOL. See “Swimming pool.”
BARRIER. A fence, wall, building wall or combination thereof which completely surrounds the
swimming pool and obstructs access to the swimming pool.
HOT TUB. See “Swimming pool.” IN-GROUND POOL. See “Swimming pool.”
RESIDENTIAL. That which is situated on the premises of a detached one- or two-family
dwelling, or a one-family townhouse not more than three stories in height.
SPA, NONPORTABLE. See “Swimming pool.”
SPA, PORTABLE. A nonpermanent structure intended for recreational bathing, in which all
controls, water-heating and water-circulating equipment are an integral part of the product.
SWIMMING POOL. Any structure intended for swimming or recreational bathing that contains
water more than 24 inches (610 mm) deep. This includes in-ground, above-ground and onground
swimming pools, hot tubs and spas.
SWIMMING POOL, INDOOR. A swimming pool which is totally contained within a structure
and surrounded on all four sides by the walls of the enclosing structure.
SWIMMING POOL, OUTDOOR. Any swimming pool which is not an indoor pool.
SECTION AQ103 SWIMMING POOLS.
AQ103.1 In-ground pools. In-ground pools shall be designed and constructed in compliance with
ANSI/NSPI-5.
AQ103.2 Above-ground and on-ground pools. Above-ground and on-ground pools shall be designed
and constructed in compliance with ANSI/NSPI-4.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 112/505
AQ103.3 Pools in flood hazard areas. In flood hazard areas established by Table R301.2(1), pools in
coastal high-hazard areas shall be designed and constructed in compliance with ASCE 24.
SECTION AQ104 SPAS AND HOT TUBS.
AQ104.1 Permanently installed spas and hot tubs. Permanently installed spas and hot tubs shall be
designed and constructed in compliance with ANSI/NSPI-3.
AQ104.2 Portable spas and hot tubs. Portable spas and hot tubs shall be designed and constructed in
compliance with ANSI/NSPI-6.
SECTION AQ105 BARRIER REQUIREMENTS.
AQ105.1 Application. The provisions of this appendix shall control the design of barriers for
residential swimming pools, spas and hot tubs. These design controls are intended to provide
protection against potential drownings and near-drownings by restricting access to swimming pools,
spas and hot tubs.
AQ105.2 Outdoor swimming pool. An outdoor swimming pool, including an in-ground, aboveground
or on-ground pool, hot tub or spa shall be surrounded by a barrier which shall comply with
the following:
1. The top of the barrier shall be at least 48 inches (1219mm) above grade measured on the
side of the barrier, which faces away from the swimming pool. The maximum vertical clearance
between grade and the bottom of the barrier shall be 2 inches (51mm) measured on the side of
the barrier, which faces away from the swimming pool. Where the top of the pool structure is
above grade, such as an above-ground pool, the barrier may be at ground level, such as the pool
structure, or mounted on top of the pool structure. Where the barrier is mounted on top of the
pool structure, the maximum vertical clearance between the top of the pool structure and the
bottom of the barrier shall be 4 inches (102mm).
2. Openings in the barrier shall not allow passage of a 4-inch-diameter (102mm) sphere.
3. Solid barriers which do not have openings, such as a masonry or stone wall, shall not
contain indentations or protrusions except for normal construction tolerances and tooled
masonry joints.
4. Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and the distance
between the tops of the horizontal members is less than 45 inches (1143mm), the horizontal
members shall be located on the swimming pool side of the fence. Spacing between vertical
members shall not exceed 1.75 inches (44mm) in width. Where there are decorative cutouts
within vertical members, spacing within the cutouts shall not exceed 1.75 inches (44 mm) in
width.
5. Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and the distance
between the tops of the horizontal members is 45 inches (1143 mm) or more, spacing between
vertical members shall not exceed 4 inches (102 mm). Where there are decorative cutouts
within vertical members, spacing within the cutouts shall not exceed 1.75 inches (44 mm) in
width.
6. Maximum mesh size for chain link fences shall be a 2.25-inch (57 mm) square unless the
fence is provided with slats fastened at the top or the bottom which reduce the openings to not
more than 1.75 inches (44 mm).
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 113/505
7. Where the barrier is composed of diagonal members, such as a lattice fence, the maximum
opening formed by the diagonal members shall not be more than 1.75 inches (44 mm).
8. Access gates shall comply with the requirements of section AQ105.2, Items 1 through 7,
and shall be equipped to accommodate a locking device. Pedestrian access gates shall open
outward away from the pool and shall be self-closing and have a self-latching device. Gates
other than pedestrian access gates shall have a self-latching device. Where the release
mechanism of the self-latching device is located less than 54 inches (1372 mm) from the
bottom of the gate, the release mechanism and openings shall comply with the following:
8.1. The release mechanism shall be located on the pool side of the gate at least 3
inches (76 mm) below the top of the gate, and
8.2. The gate and barrier shall have not opening greater than 0.5 inch (13 mm) within
18 inches (457 mm) of the release mechanism.
9. Where a wall of a dwelling serves a part of the barrier one of the following conditions shall
be met:
9.1. The pool shall be equipped with a powered safety cover in compliance with ASTM
F1346; or
9.2. Doors with direct access to the pool through that wall shall be equipped with an
alarm which produces an audible warning when the door and/or its screen, if present, are
opened. The alarm shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 2017. The
deactivation switch(es) shall be located at least 54 inches (1372 mm) above the threshold
of the door; or
9.3. Other means of protection, such as self-closing doors with self-latching devices,
which are approved by the governing body, shall be acceptable as long as the degree of
protection afforded is not less than the protection afforded by Item 9.1 or 9.2 described
above.
10. Where an above-ground pool structure is used as a barrier or where the barrier is mounted
on top of the pool structure, and the means of access is a ladder or steps, then:
10.1. The ladder or steps shall be capable of being secured, locked or removed to
prevent access, or
10.2. The ladder or steps shall be surrounded by a barrier which meets the requirements
of section AQ105.2, Items 1 through 9. When the ladder or steps are secured, locked or
removed, any opening created shall not allow the passage of a 4-inchdiameter (102 mm)
sphere.
AQ105.3 Indoor swimming pool. Walls surrounding an indoor swimming pool shall comply with
section AQ105.2, Item 9.
AQ105.4 Prohibited locations. Barriers shall be located so as to prohibit permanent structures,
equipment or similar objects from being used to climb them.
AQ105.5 Barrier exceptions. Spas or hot tubs with a safety cover which complies with ASTM F
1346, as listed in section AQ107, shall be exempt from the provisions of this appendix.
SECTION AQ106 ENTRAPMENT PROTECTION FOR SWIMMING POOL AND SPA SUCTION
OUTLETS.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 114/505
AQ106.1 General. Suction outlets shall be designed and installed in accordance with ANSI/APSP-7.
SECTION AQ107 ABBREVIATIONS.
AQ107.1 General.
ANSI-American National Standards Institute
11 West 42nd Street
New York, NY 10036
APSP-Association of Pool and Spa Professionals
NSPI-National Spa and Pool Institute
2111 Eisenhower Avenue
Alexandria, VA 22314
ASCE-American Society of Civil Engineers
1801 Alexander Bell Drive
Reston, VA 98411-0700
ASTM-ASTM International
100 Barr Harbor Drive
West Conshohocken, PA 19428
UL-Underwriters Laboratories, Inc.
333 Pfingsten Road
Northbrook, IL 60062-2096
SECTION AQ108 REFERENCED STANDARDS.
AQ108.1 General.
ANSI/NSP
ANSI/NSPI-3-99 Standard for Permanently Installed
Residential Spas
AQ104.1
ANSI/NSPI-4-99 Standard for Above-ground/On-ground
Residential Swimming Pools
AQ103.2
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 115/505
ANSI/NSPI-5-03 Standard for Residential In-ground
Swimming Pools
AQ103.1
ANSI/NSPI-6-99 Standard for Residential Portable Spas AQ104.2
ANSI/APSP
ANSI/APSP-7-06 Standard for Suction Entrapment
Avoidance in Swimming Pools, Wading
Pools, Spas, Hot Tubs and Catchbasins
AQ106.1
ASCE
ASCE/SEI-24-05 Flood-resistant Design and Construction AQ103.3
ASTM
ASTM F 1346-91
(2003)
Performance Specification for Safety
Covers and Labeling Requirements for
All Covers for Swimming Pools Spas
and Hot Tubs
AQ105.2,
AQ105.5
UL
UL 2017-2000 Standard for General-purpose Signaling
Devices and Systems-with revisions through
June 2004
AQ105.2
Sec. 3.08.006 Appendices adopted
The following appendices in the International Residential Code, 2015 edition, and all amendments thereto, are
hereby adopted as follows:
(1) Appendix “A,” Sizing and Capacity of Gas Piping.
(2) Appendix “B,” Sizing of Venting Systems.
(3) Appendix “C,” Mechanical Draft and Venting Termination.
(4) Appendix “D,” Safety Inspection Procedures.
(5) Appendix “F,” Radon Control.
(6) Appendix “G,” Piping Standards for Various Applications.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 116/505
(7) Appendix “H,” Patio Covers.
(8) Appendix “J,” Existing Buildings and Structures.
(9) Appendix “K,” Sound Transmission.
(10) Appendix “N,” Venting Methods.
(11) Appendix “O,” Automatic Vehicular Gates.
(12) Appendix “P,” Sizing of Water Piping System.
(13) Appendix “Q,” Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs as amended by this Code.
Sec. 3.08.007 Appendices not adopted
The following appendices in the International Residential Code, 2015 edition, are hereby deleted as follows:
(1) Appendix “E,” Manufactured Housing.
(2) Appendix “I,” Private Sewage Disposal.
(3) Appendix “L,” Permit Fees.
(4) Appendix “M,” Home Day Care - R-3 Occupancy.
Sec. 3.08.008 Compliance
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, remove,
demolish, convert, equip, use, occupy, or maintain any building or structure in the Town contrary to or in
violation of any provisions of the residential code, or to cause, permit, or suffer the same to be done. The penalty
for violation of the this Code is as set out in this Code of Ordinances section 1.01.009.
Sec. 3.08.009 Building permit required
A building permit is required as provided in section 3.02.010.
Sec. 3.08.010 Building permit fees; razing or moving buildings
The building permit fees and the standards for razing or moving buildings are as provided in section 3.02.011.
Sec. 3.08.011 Registration of general contractors
Registration of general contractors is required as provided in section 3.02.012.
(Ordinance 1997 adopted 6/27/16)
ARTICLE 3.09 HOUSE NUMBERING
Sec. 3.09.001 Penalty
Any person or entity owning, occupying or having charge of any house/dwelling situated within the corporate
limits of the Town that fails, after being notified, to place upon such house/dwelling an official number in
accordance with the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction
thereof may be fined as provided in section 1.01.009 of this code. (1971 Code, sec. 5-7(e))
Sec. 3.09.002 Required; standards
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 117/505
(a) Posting of number required. It shall be the duty of the owner, agent of the owner, or occupant of any house
situated in the corporate limits of the Town to place or cause to be placed thereon, in some conspicuous place on
such house, an official street number so that such number may be plainly seen and observed from the street.
(b) Official numbers. All houses shall be considered officially numbered when numbered in strict accordance
and compliance with the terms of this section and in accordance with the plat delineating and prescribing the
method of numbering houses heretofore adopted and on file and of record in the office of the Town Secretary. It
shall be the duty of the Town Secretary, upon application, to give the proper number for houses to persons
requesting same, and such persons shall be required to state the street upon which the house is situated, together
with the lot and block number thereof, and the direction and distance the same is situated from the nearest crosssection.
(c) Duty to place number; notice. It shall be the duty of the owner of any house to have placed a metal number
thereon, but in case the owner is a nonresident of the Town it shall be the duty of the agent of the owner or the
occupant of such house, when such agent or occupant is notified by the Chief of Police, to place such official
number on the house. Such agent or occupant so notified shall be allowed five (5) days from the date of the
receipt of the notice to place such official number on the house.
(d) Size and materials. The official number herein referred to shall be at least three (3) inches high and
composed of metal which will not tarnish or corrode. Nothing herein shall prohibit any number from being
painted by any person when such character of material is used as will, in the judgment of the Town Engineer, be
equal in strength, durability and service to the metal numbers herein provided for.
(1971 Code, sec. 5-7(a)–(d))
Sec. 3.09.003 Posting of numbers in rear of property
(a) It shall be the duty and responsibility of every owner, agent of the owner, or occupant of any
house/dwelling situated in the corporate limits of the Town to also post or display the official street number
assigned to each house/dwelling in the rear of the property upon which the house/dwelling is situated in such a
manner as to be legible and plainly visible from the alley or easement. Such numbers shall be at least three (3)
inches high and shall be constructed of nondestructible, bright material or shall be painted on a permanent
structure. Such numbers shall not be located more than ten (10) feet from the rear property line and shall be
affixed to permanent structures such as fences, garages, carports, etc., at a height of not less than three (3) feet
and not more than ten (10) feet. In the absence of such permanent structure, the number shall be attached to a
post mounted in concrete and erected for this purpose.
(b) It shall be the duty and responsibility of every owner, agent of the owner, or occupant of any
house/dwelling in the Town limits to comply with the provisions and requirements of this section within six (6)
months from the date of passing of this section (August 26, 1997). Further, it shall be the duty and responsibility
of the owner, agent of the owner, or occupant of any house/dwelling to continuously maintain such number as to
be plainly visible and legible from the alley or easement at all times.
(1971 Code, sec. 5-8)
ARTICLE 3.10 FENCES
Sec. 3.10.001 Definitions
Certain words in this article are defined for purposes hereof as follows:
Building line. The line, established by law, beyond which a building shall not extend, except as specifically
provided by law.
Dwelling. Any building, or portion thereof, which is designed or used exclusively for residential purposes.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 118/505
Easement. The right that the Town has to use the land of another for a specific purpose.
Fence. A structure of wood, stone, iron, brick, tile or cement, connected together and designed for use in the
position fixed, erected upon the ground for decorative or functional purposes.
Lot. Land occupied, or to be occupied, by a building and its accessory buildings, and including such open spaces
as are required under the zoning ordinance of the Town.
Lot lines. The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.
Open space. Any unoccupied space on the lot that is open and unobstructed to the sky and occupied by no
building or structure whatever.
Street. A public thoroughfare more than twenty-five (25) feet wide.
Street line. The dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a contiguous street.
Structure. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground, or
attached to something having a fixed location on the ground.
(1971 Code, sec. 5-93)
Temporary construction fences. A metal, chain-link structure including gates, connected together, covered with
open mesh windscreen and designed for use on a construction site for which the Town has issued a building
permit for demolition or construction. (Ordinance 1702, sec. 1, adopted 7/23/07)
Yard, front. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a building between the building line and the street
line of the lot.
Yard, rear. An open space, unoccupied except by an accessory building, extending for the full width across the
rear of a lot. The depth of a rear yard is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear of
the main building or any projections thereof except steps. On corner lots, the rear yard shall be considered as
parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least dimension.
Yard, side. An open, unoccupied space, unobstructed to the sky, on the same lot with a building, situated between
the building and the side line of the lot and extending through from the street or from the front yard to the rear
yard or to the rear line of the lot. Any lot line not a rear line or a front line shall be deemed a side line. The width
of a side yard shall be the horizontal distance between the lot line and that portion of the building or any
projection thereof nearest to the lot line.
(1971 Code, sec. 5-93)
Sec. 3.10.002 Building permit
Any person desiring to erect or construct a fence within the Town shall first procure from the Building Inspector
a building permit. The application for such permit shall be in writing on a blank form to be furnished for that
purpose and shall be accompanied by a lot plan drawn to scale, showing the size and outline of the dwelling and
other structures on the lot, the location of the proposed fence, and a description of any specifications for such
fence. (1971 Code, sec. 5-94)
Sec. 3.10.003 Compliance with building code
The construction of all fences shall be in compliance with the building code of the Town. (1971 Code, sec. 5-95)
Sec. 3.10.004 Prohibited in front yard
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 119/505
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct a fence in the front yard in a residential area. (Ordinance 1702,
sec. 2, adopted 7/23/07)
Sec. 3.10.005 Temporary construction fences
Temporary construction fences are permitted to extend into the front yard in “G” multifamily zoning districts
provided the following conditions are met:
(1) The fences do not extend or protrude across the property line onto the sidewalk, alley, right-ofway,
or onto adjacent property.
(2) The height of the fences shall not exceed eight feet (8').
(3) A permit must be issued prior to the construction of the fence.
(4) The fences must be inspected by the Building Inspection Department.
(5) The fences shall not be out of vertical alignment by more than twenty (20) degrees.
(6) The fences shall be maintained in the same condition as when erected. All damaged or missing
portions of such fencing shall be replaced with comparable materials of a color comparable to the
remaining portions of the fences.
(7) The fences shall not obstruct or interfere with minimum sight line standards of section 8-402(8)
of the zoning ordinance or constitute a visibility hazard for any street, alley, or sidewalk adjacent
thereto.
(8) No encroachment on any public property, right-of-way, or easement shall be allowed except by
prior written approval of the Town Council.
(9) Gates shall be designed to prevent extending into, across, or blocking sidewalks, streets, or
alleys when open.
(10) Fences shall be removed upon completion of the exterior of the structure or as required by the
Building Official.
(Ordinance 1702, sec. 3, adopted 7/23/07)
Sec. 3.10.006 Prohibited in easements
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct a fence or any structure in any easement used by the Town for
utility or garbage collection purposes. (1971 Code, sec. 5-96)
Sec. 3.10.007 Fences along or within front building line
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct a fence along and within the front building line of a lot, which
fence is of wood or other flammable materials or is not compatible with the house behind the fence and the
houses next door. (1971 Code, sec. 5-97)
Sec. 3.10.008 Swimming pool fences
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to construct a swimming pool on a lot in a residential area within the
Town unless such pool is completely surrounded by a fence or wall not less than four (4) feet in height, which
shall be so constructed as not to have openings, holes or gaps larger than four (4) inches in any dimension,
except for doors and gates. If a picket fence is erected or maintained, the horizontal dimension shall not exceed
four (4) inches. A dwelling house or accessory building may be used as part of such enclosure.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 120/505
(b) All gates or doors opening through an enclosure required by this section shall be equipped with a selfclosing
and self-latching device for keeping the gates or doors securely closed at all times when not in actual
use, except that the door of any dwelling which forms a part of the enclosure need not be so equipped.
(1971 Code, sec. 5-98)
State law references–Swimming pool enclosures, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 214.101 et seq.; pool yard enclosure for
multiunit rental complex, property owners' association, etc., V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, ch. 757.
ARTICLE 3.11 ANTENNAS AND SATELLITE DISH ANTENNAS
Sec. 3.11.001 Definitions
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
Antenna. Any apparatus, external to or attached to the exterior of a building, together with any supporting
structure, for sending or receiving electromagnetic waves.
Dish antenna. Any antenna which incorporates a reflective surface that is designed to transmit or receive
microwave signals from terrestrial and/or orbitally based uses.
Ground-mounted antenna. Any antenna with its base mounted directly in the ground, even if such antenna is
supported by or attached to the wall of a building.
Person. Shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and
corporate as well as to individuals.
Reception window. That area within the direct line between the land-based antenna and the orbiting satellite.
(1971 Code, sec. 5-121)
Sec. 3.11.002 Permit required; exceptions
(a) It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article to erect, cause to be erected, maintain or cause to be
maintained any antenna except those listed in subsection (b) of this section, without first having obtained a
permit. It shall be the duty of the applicant to provide plans and specifications and to request a final inspection
upon completion of the installation.
(b) The following antennas shall be exempt from the permit requirements of this article, but shall comply with
all other provisions:
(1) Any roof-mounted antenna except dish antennas, where the boom or any active element of the
array is not longer than ten (10) feet; or
(2) Any dish antenna with a reflective surface which does not exceed eighteen (18) inches in any
dimension.
(1971 Code, sec. 5-122)
Sec. 3.11.003 Inspection; fee
It shall be the duty of the Town Building Inspection Department to inspect all antennas to determine compliance
with this article. For issuance of the permit, an inspection fee in the amount of one (1) percent of the cost of the
antenna plus installation, but not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00), shall be paid to the Building Inspection
Department prior to the issuance of such permit. (1971 Code, sec. 5-123)
Sec. 3.11.004 Design, construction and placement
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 121/505
All antennas shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the following requirements:
(1) All electrical apparatus of any antenna shall comply with the National Electrical Code, as
adopted and amended by the Town.
(2) All antennas shall be designed and installed in accordance with the Town building code and
amendments thereto and all other applicable ordinances.
(3) All ground-mounted antennas shall be restricted to placement in the rear yard area as defined in
section 22 of Ordinance No. 676, the Town's zoning ordinance, and any applicable amendments
thereto, or within the rear half of the lot within setback lines for the main building as established by
sections 8-500 and 8-600 of Ordinance No. 676, and any applicable amendments thereto, of the
Town's zoning ordinance.
(4) Ground-mounted antennas shall not exceed forty-five (45) feet in height and may not have any
horizontal element which exceeds fifteen (15) feet in length. Not more than one (1) ground-mounted
antenna shall be allowed per building site.
(5) Roof-mounted antennas shall not extend more than ten (10) feet above the peak elevation of the
roof upon which mounted or exceed the height limitations of section 10-102 of the zoning ordinance.
(6) No portion of an antenna array shall extend beyond the property lines or into any front yard
area. Guy wires shall not be anchored within any front yard area, but may be attached to the building.
(7) Any antenna, if painted, must be in a solid color without commercial messages or graphics.
(1971 Code, sec. 5-124)
Sec. 3.11.005 Dish antennas in residential districts
All dish antennas greater than eighteen (18) inches in any dimension constructed and maintained in any district
zoned for residential, two-family, or apartment uses shall be subject to the following additional restrictions and
limitations:
(1) All such antennas shall be permanently ground-mounted and restricted from placement on any
structure above ground level such as fences, house roofs, or other building improvements; and
(2) All such antennas shall conform to height restrictions as measured from the average grade of
the ground to the uppermost portion of the dish antenna. All dish antennas and the associated
screening or fencing shall not exceed an overall height of ten (10) feet, and placement must conform
to side and rear yard setback requirements for accessory buildings as defined in section 12 of
Ordinance Number 676, and any applicable amendments thereto, the Town's zoning ordinance; and
(3) All such antennas shall be screened at ground level from view from an adjacent lot, street, or
alley. Any existing dwelling on the lot, unbroken rear yard fencing, or continuous landscaping that is
effective year-round constitutes acceptable screening from view. Screening shall be ten (10) feet in
height, except dish antennas with a height of less than ten (10) feet may be screened the same height
as the dish. Screening shall be compatible with other improvements on the site. Compatible includes
materials used, color and quality of construction. Drawings and specifications for screening will be
submitted with the application for the dish antenna. Landscaping used for screening will be replaced
immediately if destroyed or damaged; and
(4) Each residence and apartment structure shall be limited to one (1) dish antenna. A duplex or
two-family dwelling unit shall be limited to one (1) dish antenna per dwelling unit.
(1971 Code, sec. 5-125)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 122/505
Sec. 3.11.006 Dish antennas in commercial or nonresidential districts
All dish antennas greater than eighteen (18) inches installed in commercial or nonresidential zoning districts
shall be subject to the following additional restrictions and limitations:
(1) Dish antennas in nonresidential areas may be mounted or placed on the primary or accessory
structure, provided the dish does not exceed ten (10) feet in height and is screened on all sides with a
screening material approved by the Town's building code and does not exceed the height limits for
the structure on which it is mounted.
(2) Dish antennas that are ground-mounted and adjacent to residential property shall meet the
requirements of section 3.11.005 of this article.
(1971 Code, sec. 5-126)
Sec. 3.11.007 Review Board; appeal procedure
(a) There shall be and is hereby created a Planning Review Board for the Town, which shall consist of five (5)
members, including a Chairman, to be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Town Council.
Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointments.
(b) The members of the Planning Review Board shall serve for a term of two (2) years.
(c) It shall be the duty of the Planning Review Board to hear and decide any appeal, decision, order or
interpretation pertaining to this article, and it shall have the authority to approve deviations from requirements in
this article on a concurring vote of four (4) members.
(d) Where in a specific case an application for a variation of any decision of the Town Building Inspection
Department is made by a written application, it shall be accompanied by the payment of a two hundred dollar
($200.00) filing fee payable to the Town, and explanation of the certain exceptions peculiar to the applicant's
property or its environment such that strict application of the regulations of this article would result in practical
difficulties and hardships upon the applicant. Where applicable, the following shall be submitted prior to board
consideration:
(1) Demonstration by the applicant that compliance with sections 3.11.004 and 3.11.005 of this
article would result in the obstruction of the antenna's reception window, and furthermore, such
obstruction involves factors beyond the control of the applicant.
(2) The height of the proposed installation does not exceed the maximum height restriction for
structures for the district.
(3) If mounted on a structure, the application must include certification by a registered engineer
that the proposed installation complies with regulations of the building code and electrical code as
adopted by the Town. Written documentation of such compliance, including load distribution within
the building's support structure, shall be furnished.
(4) The application must include a site plan showing adjacent properties, views and screening
features.
(5) In considering approval, the following may be required to mitigate any negative impacts from
installation:
(A) Wire-mesh dishes instead of solid.
(B) Painting to blend with the surroundings.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 123/505
(C) Screening compatible with the design of the primary structure.
(D) Location of roof-mounted installation in relation to property lines.
(E) Minimum height to obtain obstruction-free reception window.
(F) Roof-mounted dish antennas or ground-mounted dish antennas over ten (10) feet in
height shall not exceed eight (8) feet in diameter.
(e) The Planning Review Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an appeal, giving public notice
by publication in the official publication of the Town stating the time and place of such hearing, which time shall
not be earlier than fifteen (15) days from the date of publication. In addition, all property owners within two
hundred (200) feet of the applicant's property shall be mailed a copy of the notice of the hearing and a copy of
the applicant's appeal not earlier than fifteen (15) days thereof.
(f) The Planning Review Board, when in its judgment the public convenience and welfare will be substantially
served and the appropriate use of the neighboring properties will not be substantially injured, subject to
appropriate conditions and safeguards, may authorize the issuance of a permit in such case.
(1971 Code, sec. 5-127)
Sec. 3.11.008 Enforcement; time limit for filing appeal
This article shall be enforced by the Town Building Inspection Department, and appeals from decisions by the
Building Inspector shall be made in writing to the Planning Review Board within thirty (30) days thereafter.
(1971 Code, sec. 5-128)
Sec. 3.11.009 Removal of nonconforming installations
Any person or owner who has erected or has caused to be erected or maintains an antenna in violation of the
provisions of this article shall have a period of thirty (30) days from the date of the passage of this article
(September 8, 1986) to bring the existing antenna into compliance. (1971 Code, sec. 5-129)
Sec. 3.11.010 Exemptions
Antennas located in specific use zones, or for use by the Town in any municipal communication, shall be exempt
from the provisions of this article. (1971 Code, sec. 5-130)
ARTICLE 3.12 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.12.001 Statutory authorization
The legislature of the State has, in Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes (V.T.C.A., Water Code, sections 16.315 to
16.318), delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood
losses. Therefore, the Town does ordain as follows. (1971 Code, sec. 7 1/2-1)
Sec. 3.12.002 Findings of fact
(a) The flood hazard areas of the Town are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and
property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 124/505
(b) These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an
increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods
and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from
flood damage.
(1971 Code, sec. 7 1/2-2)
Sec. 3.12.003 Purpose
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public
and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
(1) Protect human life and health;
(2) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(3) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally
undertaken at the expense of the general public;
(4) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric,
telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains;
(6) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone
areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and
(7) Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
(1971 Code, sec. 7 1/2-3)
Sec. 3.12.004 Methods of reducing flood losses
In order to accomplish its purposes, this article uses the following methods:
(1) Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or
cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities;
(2) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected
against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
(3) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers,
which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters;
(4) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage;
(5) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters
or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
(1971 Code, sec. 7 1/2-4)
Sec. 3.12.005 Definitions
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted to give them the
meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 125/505
Alluvial fan flooding. Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates
at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and
deposition; and unpredictable flow paths.
Apex. A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed
the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur.
Area of shallow flooding. A designated AO, AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map
(FIRM), subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year, to an average depth of one
(1) to three (3) feet, where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable
and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
Area of special flood hazard. The land in the floodplain within a community that is subject to a one (1) percent
or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard
boundary map (FHBM). Zone A usually is refined into zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30, VE and V.
Base flood. The flood having a one (1) percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Basement. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Critical feature. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood
protection provided by the entire system would be compromised.
Development. Any manmade change in improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to
buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
storage of equipment or materials.
Elevated building. A nonbasement building (i) built, in the case of a building in zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO,
AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in zone V1-30, VE, or V, to
have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the elevated floor, elevated above the ground level
by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water, and (ii)
adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the
magnitude of the base flood. In the case of zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, “elevated
building” also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings
sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In the case of zone V1-30, VE, or V, “elevated
building” also includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of “elevated building,” even though the
lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls, if the breakaway walls met the standards of section 60.3(e)
(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.
Existing construction. For the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction
commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that
date. “Existing construction” may also be referred to as “existing structures.”
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community.
Flood insurance study. The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report
contains flood profiles and the water surface elevation of the base flood, as well as the flood boundary-floodway
map.
Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land
areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 126/505
(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Floodplain management. The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for
reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and
floodplain management regulations.
Floodplain management regulations. Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health
regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control
ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such State or local regulations, in any
combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
Floodplain or floodprone area. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see
definition of “flood or flooding”).
Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures
which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
Flood protection system. Those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated,
and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of
the areas within a community subject to a special flood hazard and the extent of the depths of associated
flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These
specialized flood-modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
Floodway (regulatory floodway). The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that
must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than a designated height.
Functionally dependent use. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out
in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair facilities, but does not include
long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the
proposed walls of a structure.
Historic structure. Any structure that is:
(1) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(3) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation
programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(4) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified either:
(A) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(B) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 127/505
Levee. A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with
sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from
temporary flooding.
Levee system. A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as
closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering
practices.
Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant
enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement
area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the
structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the National Flood
Insurance Program regulations.
Mean sea level. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum
(NGVD) of 1929, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate
map are referenced.
New construction. For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, “new
construction” means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a
floodplain management regulation adopted by a community, and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
Recreational vehicle. A vehicle which is:
(1) Built on a single chassis;
(2) Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
(3) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and
(4) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Start of construction. For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier
Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or
other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basements, footings, piers or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory
buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
Structure. A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground.
Subdivision. The division or alteration of any tract of land situated within the corporate limits in two (2) or more
parts for the purpose of laying out any subdivision of any tract of land or any addition to the Town, or for laying
out or altering an existing building site or any building sites, streets, alleys or parts or other portions intended for
public use or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting thereon or adjacent thereto, for the purpose,
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 128/505
whether immediate or future, of creating building sites. Subdivision includes resubdivision or the alteration of
established building sites composed of all or portions of previously established lots or tracts.
Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to
its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before
the damage occurred.
Substantial improvement. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the
cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before start of construction
of the improvement. This includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
(1) Any project for improvement of a structure where the work to be performed is limited to, and
for the sole purpose of, correcting any and all existing violations of State or local health, sanitary, or
safety code specifications which have been identified by the local Code Enforcement Official; or
(2) Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration would not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a historic structure.
Variance. A grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this article when specific enforcement would
result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner
otherwise prohibited by this article. (For full requirements see section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations.)
Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain
management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) of
the National Flood Insurance Program regulations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
Water surface elevation. The height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or
other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or
riverine areas.
(1971 Code, sec. 7 1/2-11)
Sec. 3.12.006 Lands to which article applies
The article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the Town. (1971 Code, sec. 7
1/2-16)
Sec. 3.12.007 Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and
engineering report entitled “The Flood Insurance Study for the Town of Highland Park,” dated August 23, 2001,
with accompanying flood insurance rate maps and flood boundary-floodway maps (FIRM and FBFM) and any
revisions thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. (1971 Code, sec. 7
1/2-17)
Sec. 3.12.008 Development permits required
Development permits (floodplain permit, building permit) shall be required to ensure conformance with the
provisions of this article and other applicable ordinances and regulations required. (1971 Code, sec. 7 1/2-18)
Sec. 3.12.009 Compliance
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 129/505
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the
terms of this article and other applicable Town ordinances and regulations. (1971 Code, sec. 7 1/2-19)
Sec. 3.12.010 Abrogation and greater restrictions
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.
However, where this article and another chapter, ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (1971 Code, sec. 7 1/2-20)
Sec. 3.12.011 Interpretation
In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be:
(1) Considered as minimum requirements;
(2) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State statutes.
(1971 Code, sec. 7 1/2-21)
Sec. 3.12.012 Warning and disclaimer of liability
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is
based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur, and
flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the
areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages.
This article shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any
flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
(1971 Code, sec. 7 1/2-22)
Secs. 3.12.013–3.12.030 Reserved
Division 2. Administration
Sec. 3.12.031 Designation of Floodplain Administrator
The Town Engineer is hereby appointed as the Floodplain Administrator to administer and implement the
provisions of this article and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (National Flood Insurance Program
regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. (1971 Code, sec. 7 1/2-29)
Sec. 3.12.032 Duties of Floodplain Administrator
Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this
article.
(2) Review, approve or deny floodplain permit applications to determine whether proposed
building sites/improvements will be reasonably safe from flooding.
(3) Review, approve or deny all applications for development/floodplain permits required by
adoption of this article.
(4) Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been
obtained from those federal, State or local governmental agencies (including section 404 of the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 130/505
federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334) from which prior approval
is required.
(5) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions), the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
(6) Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the State coordinating agency, which is
the State Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
(7) Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any
watercourse is maintained.
(8) When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 3.12.007, the
Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data
and floodway data available from a federal, State or other source, in order to administer the
provisions of division 3 of this article.
(9) When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the Floodplain Administrator must
require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill)
shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated
that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood at any point
within the community.
(10) Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in zones A1-30, AE, and AH
on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than
the Town's permissible increase of the base flood elevation, provided that the community first applies
for a conditional FIRM revision through FEMA.
(1971 Code, sec. 7 1/2-30)
Sec. 3.12.033 Permit procedures
(a) Application for a floodplain permit shall be presented to the Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished
by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location,
dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, and the location
of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required:
(1) Elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and
substantially improved structures;
(2) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be
floodproofed;
(3) A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential
floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of section 3.12.062(2);
(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development;
A record of all such information shall be maintained in accordance with section 3.12.032(1).
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 131/505
(b) Approval or denial of a development/floodplain permit by the Floodplain Administrator shall be based on
all of the provisions of this article and the following relevant factors:
(1) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(2) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of
such damage on the individual owner;
(3) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
(4) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
(5) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(6) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including
maintenance and repair of streets and bridges and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems;
(7) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters
and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site;
(8) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
(9) The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the
proposed use;
(10) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area.
(1971 Code, sec. 7 1/2-31)
Sec. 3.12.034 Variances
(a) The Town Board of Adjustment (herein referred to as “Appeal Board”) as established by the community
shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this article.
(b) The Appeal Board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in
any requirement, decision, or determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this article.
(c) Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board may appeal such decision in the
courts of competent jurisdiction.
(d) The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report
variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
(e) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or the State inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of this section.
(f) Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of onehalf
(1/2) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the
base flood level, providing the relevant factors in section 3.12.033(b) have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond one-half (1/2) acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(g) Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this article, the Appeal Board may attach
such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 132/505
article (section 3.12.003).
(h) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the
base flood discharge would result.
(i) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the
proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and
the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
(j) Prerequisites for granting variances:
(1) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum
necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(2) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(A) Showing a good and sufficient cause;
(B) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to
the applicant; and
(C) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety or extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud
on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(3) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will
be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the
cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced
lowest floor elevation.
(k) Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other
development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
(1) The criteria outlined in subsections (a) through (i) of this section are met; and
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages
during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
(1971 Code, sec. 7 1/2-32)
Secs. 3.12.035–3.12.060 Reserved
Division 3. Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
Sec. 3.12.061 General standards
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial
improvements:
(1) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and
adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
(2) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and
practices that minimize flood damage;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 133/505
(3) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant
to flood damage;
(4) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed
and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding;
(5) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the systems;
(6) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and
(7) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during flooding.
(1971 Code, sec. 7 1/2-39)
Sec. 3.12.062 Specific standards
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in section
3.12.007, section 3.12.032(8), or subsection (3) of this section, the following provisions are required:
(1) Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated one (1) foot above the base flood
elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification
to the Floodplain Administrator that the standard of this subsection, as proposed in section
3.12.033(a)(1), is satisfied.
(2) Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any
commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated to or above the base flood level or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered
professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and
plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in
accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such
certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such
structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the Floodplain Administrator.
(3) Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below
the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(A) A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square
inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
(B) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 134/505
(C) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices
provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(1971 Code, sec. 7 1/2-40)
Sec. 3.12.063 Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones)
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 3.12.007 are areas designated as shallow
flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where
velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following
provisions apply:
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the
lowest floor (including basement) elevated one (1) foot (minimum) above the base flood elevation
highest adjacent grade, which shall be at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the
community's FIRM (at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified). A registered professional
engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the Town Engineer that the
standard of this section is satisfied.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures:
(A) Shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at or above the highest
adjacent grade, which shall be at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the
community's FIRM (at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified); or
(B) Shall together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the
base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage
of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy.
(3) A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the Floodplain
Administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in section 3.12.033(a)(1), are satisfied.
(4) Require within zone AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
(1971 Code, sec. 7 1/2-41)
Sec. 3.12.064 Floodways
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 3.12.007 are areas designated as floodways.
Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters, which carry debris,
potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply:
(1) Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements
and other development, within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated
through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering
practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within
the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) If subsection (1) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements
shall also comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this article.
(3) Under the provisions of 44 CFR, chapter 1, section 65.12, of the National Flood
Insurance regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 135/505
floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community
first applies for a conditional FIRM and floodway revision through FEMA.
(1971 Code, sec. 7 1/2-42)
ARTICLE 3.13 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.13.001 Certain ordinances relating to streets not affected by code
Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall affect any ordinance:
(1) Dedicating, accepting, naming, renaming, establishing, locating, opening, paving, widening or
vacating any street or other public way in the Town;
(2) Providing for street improvements and assessments therefor;
(3) Establishing or prescribing grades for streets; or
(4) Relating to municipal street maintenance agreements with the State;
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set
out at length in this code.
(1971 Code, sec. 14-1)
Sec. 3.13.002 Adoption of State law relating to street improvements and assessments
The Town hereby accepts and adopts the provisions of V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, chapter 313, which article
relates to street improvements and assessments in cities, towns and villages having more than one thousand
(1,000) inhabitants. (1971 Code, sec. 14-2)
Secs. 3.13.003–3.13.030 Reserved
Division 2. Construction or Repair of Sidewalks, Curbs, Gutters and Driveways†
Sec. 3.13.031 Definitions
For the purpose of construing and enforcing this division, certain abbreviations, words, terms, phrases and their
derivatives shall be construed as set out herein, unless the context indicates otherwise. Words relating to
buildings and structures on private property and their use shall be construed to conform to the meaning set out in
the Town building code and the Town zoning ordinance. All other words shall have their usual meaning. The
following words, when used in this division, are defined as follows:
Abutting property owner. Any person who owns real property which abuts any public sidewalk, curb or gutter, or
street right-of-way.
Angle parking. Parking where the longitudinal axis of a vehicle forms an angle with the alignment of the
roadway.
ASTM. American Society for Testing and Materials. Any publication, pamphlet, booklet, book or document
referred to by number, letter or other designation in connection with this definition, and any amendment thereto,
shall be a part of this division and shall be on file in the Town Secretary's office.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 136/505
Contractor. Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of installing or altering walks, drives,
curbs, gutters, or pavements or appurtenances on public property. This term shall also include those who
represent themselves to be engaged in the business, whether actually doing the work or not, and includes any
person who subcontracts to do such work.
Curb. A vertical or sloping member along the edge of a pavement forming part of a gutter, strengthening or
protecting the pavement edge and clearly defining the pavement edge to vehicle operators. The surface at the
curb facing the general direction of the pavement is called the face.
Driveway. A roadway for vehicular traffic on private property.
Driveway approach. An area, construction or facility between the roadway of a public street and private property
intended to provide access for vehicles from the roadway of a public street to private property.
Gutter. The artificially surfaced and generally shallow waterway provided, usually at the side of the street
adjacent to and part of the curb, for the drainage of surface water.
Intersection. The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the edges of the roadway of two (2) or
more streets which join at an angle, whether or not one such street crosses the other. Where a street includes two
(2) roadways thirty (30) feet or more apart, then each crossing of each roadway of such divided street by an
intersecting street shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the event such intersecting street also includes
two (2) or more roadways thirty (30) feet or more apart, then each crossing of each roadway of such street shall
be regarded as a separate intersection.
Lot. Land occupied, or to be occupied, by a building and its accessory building, and including such open spaces
as are required under the zoning ordinance of the Town, to which reference is herein made.
Off-street parking. A type of parking wherein the maneuvering of the vehicle while parking and unparking, as
well as the actual parking itself, is done entirely on private property.
Person. A human being, his heirs, executors, administrators, or assigns, and where the context permits the term
also includes a firm, partnership, association, or corporation, its or their successors or assigns, or the agent of
any of the aforesaid.
Roadway. That portion of a highway, street or road improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. In
the event a street includes two (2) or more separate roadways, the term “roadway” shall refer to any such
roadway separately but not to all such roadways collectively.
Sidewalk or walk. That portion of a street between the curblines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent
property lines, for the use of pedestrians.
Street. A term denoting a public way for purposes of vehicular travel, including the entire area within the rightof-
way.
Traffic island. A barrier within a roadway to exclude vehicles, designed for the purpose of separating or
directing streams of vehicular traffic.
Yard, front. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a building, between the building and the street line
of the street upon which the lot is platted to the front.
Yard, side. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a building, between the building and the street line
of a street which intersects the street upon which the lot is platted to the front.
(1971 Code, sec. 14-21)
Sec. 3.13.032 Purpose and intent
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 137/505
The purpose and intent of this division is to provide minimum standards, provisions and requirements for safe
and convenient access to abutting private property along streets, roads and highways and to provide for suitable
materials and methods of construction of sidewalks, driveways, curbs, gutters and appurtenances on public
property which are constructed, surfaced, paved, changed, altered, repaired, replaced, removed or eliminated or
changed in use. The intent herein is to assure that access is provided to abutting private property with a
minimum of interference with the free and safe movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic, to prevent traffic
congestion along the streets and to prevent or alleviate traffic congestion arising from vehicular entry to or exit
from abutting private property. This division shall be deemed to be remedial and is enacted for the beneficial
interests of the public and for the public safety and general welfare. The right of the public to free and
unhampered passage on the streets and sidewalks shall be held paramount to other interests. (1971 Code, sec.
14-22)
Sec. 3.13.033 Powers and duties of Building Inspector
(a) The provisions of this division shall be administered and enforced by the Building Inspector and, for this
purpose, he shall have police power.
(b) When action is taken by the Building Inspector to enforce the provisions of this division, such action shall
be in the name of and on behalf of the Town, and the Building Inspector, so acting for the Town, shall not render
himself personally liable for any damage which may accrue to persons or property as a result of any action
committed in good faith in the discharge of his duties, and any suit brought against the Building Inspector by
reason thereof shall be defended by the Town Attorney throughout the proceedings.
(c) The Building Inspector shall have authority to take the legal steps necessary to secure compliance with the
provisions of this division.
(d) The Building Inspector shall have the right to enter any premises in the discharge of his official duties or
for the purpose of making any inspection, reinspection or test or otherwise to insure compliance with this
division.
(e) The Building Inspector shall have the power to inspect or reinspect surfacing and the laying of surfacing
materials and issue notices or affix them to premises or to reject surfacing materials not meeting the standards
provided in this division, and shall have such other powers as are provided in this division. The Building
Inspector shall have the power to control and regulate improvements and facilities placed upon public property
and the power to cause to be removed all obstructions and encroachments not in conformance with a valid
permit and the requirements of this division.
(1971 Code, sec. 14-23)
Sec. 3.13.034 Bond
(a) No person, or any of his agents, servants or employees, shall construct, reconstruct or repair any sidewalk,
curb, gutter or driveway approach in the Town without executing and delivering to the Town a bond in the sum
of two thousand dollars ($2,000), payable to the Town, with a good and sufficient corporate surety thereon,
authorized to do business in the State, which bond shall be conditioned as follows:
(1) All work shall be done in a good and workmanlike manner, and such person shall faithfully and
strictly comply with the specifications and with the terms of the building code and such ordinances,
resolutions or regulations that may be passed by the Town Council governing and relating to the
construction, reconstruction or repair of sidewalks, curbs, gutters, or driveway approaches; and
(2) The Town shall be fully indemnified and be held whole and harmless from any and all costs,
expense or damage, whether real or asserted, on account of any injury done to any person or property
in the prosecution of said work, or that may arise out of or be occasioned by the performance of said
work; and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 138/505
(3) Such person shall, without additional cost to the person for whom the work was done, maintain
all such construction for a period of five (5) years from the date of such construction, reconstruction
or repair, to the satisfaction of the Building Inspector of the Town, and shall reconstruct or repair
same to the satisfaction of the Building Inspector of the Town at any time within five (5) years after
the construction, reconstruction or repair of such facility and after ten (10) days' notice from the
Building Inspector to reconstruct or repair the same, and the opinion of the Building Inspector as to
the necessity of such reconstruction or repair shall be binding on the parties thereto and such bond
shall, for such purpose, be in force for five (5) years after the construction, reconstruction or repair of
such facility, and one recovery shall not exhaust said bond, but such bond shall be a continuing
obligation against the sureties thereon until the entire amount therein provided for shall have been
exhausted.
(b) In case the bond provided for above shall be decreased on account of any recovery which may be
obtained, arising out of the violation of any condition of the same, the Council shall require, upon notice to it of
such fact, an additional bond in an amount sufficient, when added to the unexhausted amount of the original
bond, to be at all times equal to the sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00).
(c) The Town may, for itself or for the use and benefit of any person injured or damaged by reason of any
defective construction, reconstruction or repair of any sidewalk, curb, gutter, or driveway approach by the
principal of the bond required by this section, maintain suit on such bond in any court having jurisdiction
thereof, or suit may be maintained thereon by any person injured or damaged by reason of the failure of such
principal to observe the conditions of such bond.
(1971 Code, sec. 14-24)
Sec. 3.13.035 Permit
(a) No person shall construct, reconstruct, alter, repair, remove, replace, pave, repave, surface or resurface any
walk, drive, curb, gutter, paved area or appurtenance on public property or private property in the Town, without
first obtaining from the Building Inspector a permit to do so.
(b) To obtain a permit required by this section, the bonded contractor or his authorized representative shall file
with the Building Inspector an application therefor in writing, on a form to be furnished for that purpose. Such
bonded contractor shall be registered with the Building Inspector, and the contractor shall furnish a list of the
authorized representatives who are to secure permits for him.
(c) Each application for a permit under this section shall describe the abutting property adjacent to which the
proposed work on public property is to be done, either by lot, block, or tract and house number, location on the
street or similar description which will readily identify and definitely locate the site of the proposed work. Each
applicant shall give such other pertinent information as shall be required by the Building Inspector.
(d) When required by the Building Inspector, an applicant for a permit under this section shall file a lot or plot
plan, in triplicate, showing the following:
(1) The exact location of the proposed building or structure;
(2) Every existing building or structure on abutting property;
(3) Every existing facility on public property adjacent thereto, to the centerline of the street rightof-
way;
(4) All proposed walks, drives, curbs, gutters, pavements, public utility poles, fire hydrants, gas
meters, water meters, storm sewer inlets, manholes, or any other appurtenances.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 139/505
Such plan shall be drawn to scale upon substantial paper and shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature,
character and extent of the work proposed, and shall show in detail that the work will conform to this division
and to all related ordinances, rules and regulations. Plans submitted at the time an application is made as
provided in the building code, for construction on abutting property, may be used to meet this requirement.
(e) No person having a bond to construct, reconstruct, alter, repair, remove or replace sidewalks, curbs,
gutters, or driveways on public property within the Town shall be permitted to take out a permit for the
reconstruction, alteration or repair of any such facility on any public property within the Town and allow any
person, other than the bona fide holder of such bond, to do any of the work. No permit for the reconstruction,
alteration or repair of any sidewalk, curb, gutter, or driveway on any public property within the Town shall be
granted unless the bond required by section 3.13.034 shall be in full force and effect at the time of request for
such permit and the doing of the work.
(f) No permit shall be granted for angle parking on public property or on abutting private property where a
portion of public property is required for maneuvering into or out of the angle parking space.
(g) Each permit issued under this section shall expire and become null and void if the work authorized therein
is not commenced within six (6) months from the date of the permit or if the work authorized by the permit is
suspended or abandoned after the expiration of the initial six-month period. Before the work may be
recommenced, a new permit shall be obtained. No permit issued in violation of this division shall operate as
granting any vested right, and such permit shall be deemed to be null and void and confer no right whatsoever
under it.
(1971 Code, sec. 14-25)
Sec. 3.13.036 General standards
(a) Compliance. Materials used in sidewalks, drives, curbs, gutters, and pavements shall be in accordance with
the standards prescribed in this section.
(b) Cement. Portland cement shall conform to the standard specifications for Portland cement (Serial
Designation C-150-56) of the ASTM. High-early-strength Portland cement shall conform to the standard
specifications for high-early-strength Portland cement (Serial Designation C-150-56) of the ASTM.
(c) Water. Water used in mixing and curing concrete and mortar shall be clean and free from oil, acid, alkali,
foreign organic matter or other deleterious substances.
(d) Fine aggregate. Fine aggregate shall consist of a natural sand, or a combination of natural sand and not
more than fifty (50) percent of stone screenings. Sand shall be uniformly graded and composed of clean, hard,
durable particles of natural materials free from adherent coatings. It shall contain no lumps, soft or flaky
particles, clay, loam, or foreign organic or other deleterious matter. Stone screenings shall consist of the clean,
dustless product resulting from the crushing of stone or gravel, meeting all the requirements for coarse aggregate
except for grading. Fine aggregate containing more than five (5) percent by weight of deleterious substances
shall not be used. Fine aggregate shall be well graded in size from coarse to fine, and shall conform to the
following requirements, the percentages to be determined by weight:
Retained on 3/8-inch screen 0%
Retained on 1/4-inch screen 0 to 5%
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 140/505
Retained on no. 20 mesh sieve 15 to 50%
Retained on no. 100 mesh sieve 85 to 100%
All tests for fine aggregate shall be made in accordance with the current applicable methods of tests of the
ASTM.
(e) Coarse aggregate. Coarse aggregate shall consist of the uniformly graded, clean, hard, durable, uncoated
particles of natural gravel or crushed stone or gravel, free from adhering coatings. Coarse aggregate shall not
contain more than five (5) percent by weight of deleterious substances. Coarse aggregate shall be well graded in
size from coarse to fine, and shall conform to the following requirements, the percentages to be determined by
weight:
Retained on 3-inch screen 0%
Retained on 2-inch screen 0 to 20%
Retained on 1/4-inch screen 95 to 100%
All tests for coarse aggregate shall be made in accordance with the current applicable methods of tests of the
ASTM.
(f) Reinforcement. Material for reinforcement shall conform to requirements of the standard specifications for
billet steel bars for concrete reinforcement (ASTM Designation A-15-57T) for structural, intermediate or hard
grade, or for rail steel bars for concrete reinforcement (ASTM Designation A-16-57-T), or for axle steel bars for
concrete reinforcement (ASTM Designation A-160-57T), or for cold-drawn steel wire for concrete
reinforcement (ASTM Designation A-82-34), or for welded steel wire fabric for concrete reinforcement (ASTM
Designation A-185-56T). All reinforcement shall be free from rust, scale, oil, paint and other substances which
prevent binding to the concrete.
(g) Expansion joint filler. Expansion joint filler shall be of the premolded type, 1/2 inch in thickness; the
width shall conform to the section of concrete in which incorporated. Expansion joint filler shall be placed
where new work abuts old concrete work. Upon completion of the work, expansion joint filler shall be cut off
level with the top of the finished concrete. Expansion joint filler shall conform to the standard specification for
bituminous types (ASTM Designation D-994-53) or nonextruding and resilient types (ASTM Designation 4-
544-56T) or other approved types.
(h) Foundation. Foundations or subgrades for all work shall be set at the grades determined by the Building
Inspector. Inspection of such foundation or subgrade may be made and approved by the Building Inspector
before concrete is placed thereon.
(i) Forms. Forms shall be straight, smooth, free from warps, and aligned with the stakes set by the Building
Inspector and shall be of sufficient strength to retain this alignment. Depth shall be not less than the total
thickness of the section for which used. Forms shall be securely staked, anchored, braced and set to the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 141/505
established line and grade, the upper edge conforming to the grade of the finished work. Forms shall be cleaned
of all mortar and dirt. Surfaces for forms next to concrete may be required to be oiled. Forms shall be of either
wood or metal.
(j) Concrete. Concrete shall consist of a mixture of Portland cement, fine and coarse aggregate, and water in
such proportions that will secure a dense, plastic, workable concrete of the strength specified at twenty-eight
(28) days. The quantity of water specified per sack of Portland cement shall include the moisture on the surface
of the aggregate, but shall not include the amount of water absorbed by the aggregate in thirty (30) minutes.
Concrete which has partially set shall not be retempered or remixed by adding additional ingredients. Concrete
shall not be fixed during freezing weather, and shall not be placed when the temperature is 40°F and falling, but
may be placed when the temperature is above 35°F and rising. No frozen ingredients or conglomerates shall be
used in concrete. Tests for slump of concrete shall be made in accordance with the method of test for consistency
of Portland cement concrete (Serial Designation C-143-52) of the ASTM. All tests for ingredients and concrete
shall be made in accordance with the current applicable methods of tests of the ASTM.
(k) Placing concrete. Concrete shall be placed in as near its final position as possible, and in such manner as to
prevent separation or segregation of the ingredients. Concrete shall be placed in such quantities that, after being
thoroughly compacted, it will be the required thickness, the upper surface true, uniform, and parallel to the
finished surface.
(l) Protection of concrete. Concrete shall be protected against freezing or excessive heat. Concrete shall be
kept continuously moist for four (4) days. Concrete shall be protected from traffic until it has developed eighty
percent (80%) of the required strength. A membrane curing method may be used.
(1971 Code, sec. 14-26)
Sec. 3.13.037 Sidewalk standards
(a) Compliance. Sidewalks shall comply with the standards prescribed by this section.
(b) Width and thickness. Sidewalks shall be a minimum width of four (4) feet and shall be four (4) inches
thick.
(c) Concrete. Concrete for walks shall have a minimum compressive strength of two thousand five hundred
(2,500) pounds per square inch at twenty-eight (28) days. The quantity of mixing water shall not exceed seven
(7) U.S. gallons per sack (94 lbs.) of Portland cement. The slump of the concrete shall not exceed four (4)
inches.
(d) Forms. Forms shall be set to provide for drainage from the property line to the curbline. The slope in
general will be one-fourth (1/4) inch per foot of width of sidewalk, and it shall not exceed one-fourth (1/4) inch
per foot of width of sidewalk.
(e) Joints. One-half-inch expansion joints shall be spaced at 25- to 30-foot intervals or as otherwise specified
and shall be placed where new work abuts old work, or where new work is constructed adjacent to either
concrete work, walls, foundations, etc. The expansion joints shall be filled with pre-molded bituminous
expansion joint filler or other approved type and shall extend the entire depth and width of the concrete section.
Sidewalk markings shall be grooved three-eighths (3/8) inch deep on four- to five-foot centers.
(f) Placing concrete. The Building Inspector will inspect the foundation and forms before concrete is poured.
Concrete shall be thoroughly compacted so that the minimum thickness is four (4) inches. Concrete shall be free
from honeycombing, rock pockets, and segregation of ingredients. The addition of neat cement to concrete in
order to absorb excess water to accelerate hardening is prohibited.
(g) Finish. The surface may have a monolithic finish by floating with a wooden float until a slight excess of
sand appears on the surface or may be brushed after troweling in lieu of floating. In no case shall the surface be
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 142/505
left slick or with a glossy finish. The edges of the sidewalk, markings, and expansion joints shall be tooled to a
smooth finish, not less than two (2) inches in width. Exposed edges of the sidewalk shall be rounded with an
edge to a radius of one-half (1/2) inch.
(h) Access walks. Walkways constructed between the sidewalk and curb shall provide expansion joint filler
between the walk and curb.
(i) Curb ramps. On corner lots, sidewalks and curb and gutter replaced shall include installation of curb ramps
complying with the current federal Americans with Disabilities Act and the State program for the elimination of
architectural barriers.
(1971 Code, sec. 14-27)
Sec. 3.13.038 Curb and gutter standards
(a) Compliance. Curbs, curbs and gutters, and separate gutters shall comply with the standards prescribed in
this section.
(b) Dimensions. Curb and gutter shall have the back twelve (12) inches deep and vertical. Curb shall be six (6)
inches thick at the top, face battered 1:3 ratio. The gutter shall be uniformly six (6) inches thick and a minimum
of twenty-four (24) inches in width as measured from the face of the curb, and shall slope down no less than
one-half (1/2) inch per foot toward the face of the curb.
(c) Concrete. Concrete shall have a minimum compressive strength of three thousand (3,000) pounds per
square inch at twenty-eight (28) days. The quantity of mixing water shall not exceed seven (7) U.S. gallons per
sack (94 lbs.) of Portland cement. The slump of the concrete shall not exceed three (3) inches.
(d) Mortar. Mortar shall be composed of one (1) part Portland cement, one and one-half (1-1/2) parts fine
aggregate and water.
(e) Joints. Three-fourths-inch expansion joints shall be spaced at 25- to 30-foot intervals or as otherwise
specified. The three-fourths-inch expansion joints shall be filled with a three-fourths-inch premolded bituminous
expansion joint filler or other approved type and shall extend the entire depth and width of the concrete section.
Curb and gutter shall be grooved three-eighths (3/8) inch deep on five-foot centers.
(f) Forms. Wooden forms shall have a nominal thickness of two (2) inches, surfaced one (1) side and one (1)
edge, and shall be straight and devoid of warps, twists, knot holes, and other defects to prevent leakage of
concrete or mortar.
(g) Placing concrete and mortar. Foundation or subgrade for all work shall be set at the grades determined by
the Building Inspector. The Building Inspector may inspect the foundation, subgrade and reinforcing before
concrete is poured. Concrete shall be thoroughly compacted so that the minimum thickness conforms to the
requirements of this division. Concrete shall be free from honeycombing, rock pockets, and separation and
segregation of ingredients. Upon completion of the concrete core, the one-half-inch mortar surface shall be
placed while the core is still green, the work being carried on uniformly so that a perfect bond is obtained
between the concrete core and mortar surface.
(h) Finish. The mortar surface shall be thoroughly troweled, not less than twice, to a uniformly smooth surface
and brush finished. Exposed edges of the gutter and back of curb shall be rounded to a one-half-inch radius.
(i) Protection. Curb, curb and gutter, and separate gutter shall be protected from vehicular traffic for not less
than six (6) days.
(j) Backfill. Earth or sand shall be used for backfill and shall be thoroughly compacted, care being taken not to
injure the completed work.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 143/505
(k) Drain lines. Drain lines from abutting property shall terminate on private property ten (10) feet from the
property line or extend underneath the sidewalk and terminate in the gutter. A minimum of 1.5 inches of
concrete shall cover the drain line in the curb.
(1971 Code, sec. 14-28)
Sec. 3.13.039 Driveway approaches generally
(a) Compliance. Driveway approaches shall conform to the standards prescribed in this section.
(b) Construction generally. Driveway approaches shall be constructed of one (1) course concrete, reinforced,
six (6) inches minimum thickness.
(c) Concrete. Concrete shall have a minimum compressive strength of three thousand (3,000) pounds per
square inch at twenty-eight (28) days. The quantity of mixing water shall not exceed seven (7) U.S. gallons per
sack (94 lbs.) of Portland cement. The slump of the concrete shall not exceed four (4) inches.
(d) Reinforcement. Reinforcement shall consist of no. 3 (three-eighths-inch-diameter) round bars placed not
more than twenty-four (24) inches on centers, both directions. Where steel is lapped, the lap shall not be less
than fifteen (15) inches.
(e) Placing concrete. The Building Inspector shall inspect the foundation, forms, and reinforcing before
concrete is poured. Concrete shall be thoroughly compacted with an open-faced tamper and struck off with a
straight edge so that the minimum thickness is six (6) inches. Concrete shall be free from honeycombing, rock
pockets, and segregation of ingredients.
(f) Finish. The surface may have a monolithic finish by floating with a wooden float until a slight excess of
sand appears on the surface or may be brushed after troweling in lieu of floating. In no case shall the surface be
left slick or with a glossy finish. Exposed edges of the driveway shall be rounded with an edger to a radius of
one-half (1/2) inch.
(g) Protection. Driveways shall be protected from vehicular traffic for not less than six (6) days.
(1971 Code, sec. 14-29)
Sec. 3.13.040 Residential driveway approaches
(a) Compliance. Residential driveway approaches shall comply with the standards prescribed in this section.
(1971 Code, sec. 14-30)
(b) Width. Residential driveway approaches shall not be less than nine (9) feet nor more than twenty (20) feet
in width measured at the property line. Driveways shall be so constructed as to width as to conform to the width
of driveway approaches at point of contact. (1971 Code, sec. 14-30; Ordinance adopting Code)
(c) Number permitted. No more than a total of two (2) driveway approaches shall be permitted into the front
yard and/or the side yard of any lot.
(d) Driveways located in front or side yards. Driveways located in front yards or side yards shall not be less
than nine (9) feet nor more than twenty (20) feet in width. Driveways in front yards or side yards may be
straight, curved or semicircular.
(e) All-weather surfaced area required. Driveways connecting to driveway approaches and located in front
yards or side yards shall not be permitted unless there is provision for an enclosed or unenclosed all-weather
surfaced area of not less than one hundred eighty (180) square feet (measuring approximately nine (9) feet by
twenty (20) feet) on the property, and not on a public street or alley.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 144/505
(f) Maximum paved area. Total paved area in front yards of residential building sites, including driveways,
walks, porches, or other impermeable surfaces, shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the front yard area.
(g) Radius. Residential driveway approaches shall be constructed with the return curbs having a rolled face
disappearing at the sidewalk and joining the street curb with a five-foot minimum radius, except that on major
thoroughfares the minimum radius shall be ten (10) feet. Driveways eighteen (18) feet in width and greater may
have a five-foot radius on major thoroughfares.
(h) Separation. Where more than one driveway approach is required to serve the front yard of a residential lot,
a traffic island shall separate the driveway approaches. The minimum distance between points of tangency of
curb returns shall be twenty (20) feet.
(i) Sidewalk to be removed. Where the residential driveway approach is designed to cross an existing
sidewalk, the sidewalk included in the driveway approach area shall be removed and reconstructed as a driveway
approach.
(j) Curb and gutter to be removed. Where a driveway is to be constructed at a location where there exists a
curb and gutter, said curb and gutter shall be removed to the nearest construction joint. The driveway approach
shall extend to the back side of the existing or future sidewalk. The breakout line of the street will be twentyfour
(24) inches from the face of the curbline and shall be parallel to it. The gutter shall slope down one-half
(1/2) inch per foot to the curbline.
(1971 Code, sec. 14-30; Ordinance 1929 adopted 9/23/13)
Sec. 3.13.041 Commercial driveway approaches
(a) Compliance. Driveway approaches to provide access to premises used for other than residential purposes
shall be constructed, provided or repaired in accordance with the standards and requirements prescribed in this
section.
(b) Width. The width of any commercial driveway approach shall be not less than twelve (12) feet nor more
than forty (40) feet measured along the property line, except driveway approaches for motor vehicle docks
within a building shall not exceed sixty (60) feet in width at the property line. Where more dock space is
required, the driveway approaches shall be separated by a traffic island meeting the standards set out in
subsection (e) of this section.
(c) Maximum space to be occupied. Driveway approaches shall not occupy more than seventy (70) percent of
the frontage abutting the roadway of the tract of ground devoted to one use which abuts the roadway.
(d) Number allowed. Not more than two (2) driveway approaches shall be permitted on any parcel of property
with a frontage of one hundred fifty (150) feet or less.
(e) Separation. When more than one (1) driveway approach is required to serve a parcel of property, a traffic
island shall separate the driveway approaches. The width of the traffic island at the property line shall be a
minimum of twenty (20) feet. Where the grade at the property line is the same as the sidewalk, a six-inch raised
curb shall be constructed at the back of the traffic island along the property line, and on private property. The
raised curb shall be constructed so as to end twenty-four (24) inches from the intersection of the driveway
approach with the property line.
(f) Provision for joint approaches. Driveway approaches shall be located entirely within the frontage of the
premises abutting the work and shall be located not less than five (5) feet from each side of the property line,
except that joint driveway approaches with adjoining property holders may be permitted provided joint
application is made by all interested parties and the width set out in subsection (b) is not exceeded.
(g) Angle. The angle of the driveway approach with the curbline shall be not less than forty-five (45) degrees.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 145/505
(h) Radius. Commercial driveway approaches shall be constructed with the return curbs having a roll face
disappearing at the sidewalk and joining the street curb with a five-foot minimum radius.
(i) Sidewalk to be removed. Where a commercial driveway approach is to be built, the sidewalk shall be
removed and the entire area replaced as a driveway. The driveway approach shall extend to the back side of the
existing or future sidewalk.
(j) Curb and gutter to be removed. Where a driveway is to be constructed at a location where there exists a
curb and gutter, said curb and gutter shall be removed to the nearest construction joint. The driveway approach
shall extend to the back side of the existing or future sidewalk. The breakout line in the street will be twenty-four
(24) inches from the face of the curbline and shall be parallel to it. The gutter shall slope down one-half (1/2)
inch per foot to the curbline.
(k) Driveway approaches near intersections. Where existing right-of-way permits, driveway approaches near
an intersection of two (2) streets shall meet the following minimum requirements: The corner rounding shall
have curbs constructed with a minimum radius of twenty (20) feet continuously between the points of tangency
of the curblines of both streets. The first driveway may start from the point of tangency of the curbline and
corner radius and be cut in with a five-foot minimum radius.
(l) Traffic safety. Driveway approaches at or near streets and traffic interchanges, grade separations, and
traffic circles shall be so located that traffic entering or leaving the street will not impede, confuse, imperil or
otherwise interfere with vehicular traffic.
(m) Prohibited locations. Driveway approaches shall not be located at street intersections or at established
pedestrian crossings.
(n) Driveway approaches in angle parking areas. Driveway approaches shall not be constructed in existing
angle parking areas except where the curb is restored to its normal location along the roadway in front of the
premises.
(o) Use for standing or parking of vehicles. Driveway approaches shall not be constructed or designed for use
for the standing or parking of vehicles or for use as angle parking.
(p) Motor vehicle service stations and parking lots. Premises used as motor vehicle service stations or parking
lots shall have a six-inch raised curb or other approved traffic barrier along the entire street frontage, except at
the driveway approaches and access walks. The curb shall be placed so that automobile bumpers shall not extend
over the sidewalk or public property.
(1971 Code, sec. 14-31)
Sec. 3.13.042 Inspection of materials
The Building Inspector may inspect any and all materials before the pouring of concrete in connection with work
authorized by a permit issued under this division. The contractor shall furnish the required samples when
requested for the making of tests and other required examinations prior to the use of same. (1971 Code, sec. 14-
32)
Sec. 3.13.043 Alignment; grade and line stakes
Work authorized by a permit issued under this division shall be aligned with the stakes and set to the grade as
determined by the Building Inspector. Grade and line stakes shall be set by the Building Inspector upon request
and, when so set, shall be protected by the contractor. (1971 Code, sec. 14-33)
Sec. 3.13.044 Safeguards during construction; projections or structures on public property
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 146/505
(a) A contractor performing work under this division shall provide necessary red lanterns and flares and
safeguards so placed that pedestrians will not be injured and vehicular traffic shall not be unnecessarily impeded
and shall be protected from injury. Provisions shall be made for the passage of water in the street gutter.
(b) No buttresses, steps, projections, retaining walls or fences shall be constructed on any public property by
persons doing work under this division, unless such construction is approved by the Town Council.
(1971 Code, sec. 14-34)
Sec. 3.13.045 Cleanup when work completed
Immediately upon completion of work authorized by a permit issued pursuant to this division, the contractor
shall remove from the area all unused material, dirt, debris and loose concrete. He shall see that the entire area is
broom clean and usable. (1971 Code, sec. 14-35)
Sec. 3.13.046 Alternate materials or methods of construction
The provisions of this division shall not prevent the use of types of construction or materials or methods of
construction offered as an alternate for the types of construction or materials or methods of construction
specifically required by this division, but such alternate types of construction or materials or methods of
construction to be given consideration shall be offered for approval by the Building Inspector as being sufficient,
safe and equal to the standards set out in this division. (1971 Code, sec. 14-36)
Sec. 3.13.047 Variances
(a) In unusual circumstances, the terms and provisions of this division may be varied by resolution of the
Town Council. Written notice of the public meeting to consider a request for a variance shall be sent to all
owners of real property as described in subsection (c) below as well as due notice to the parties in interest. Such
notice shall be given not less than fifteen (15) days before the date set for hearing by posting such notice
properly addressed and postage-paid to each taxpayer as the ownership appears on the last approved Town tax
roll. In addition, notice shall be given by publication in the official publication of the Town stating the time and
place of such hearing, which time shall not be earlier than fifteen (15) days from the date of publication.
(b) The owner and/or applicant for the variance shall pay to the Town, at the time the application is made, that
fee set forth in section 14.01.002 of this code, as amended.
(c) Written notice of the hearing on the request for a variance shall be sent to all owners of real property
contiguous to and/or surrounding the property on which the variance is requested as follows:
(1) In instances where the property on which the variance is requested does not front and/or abut
an intersection, all other properties located on the same street block as the subject property;
(2) In instances where the property on which the variance is requested does front and/or abut an
intersection, all other properties located on the same street block as the subject property, in addition
to the properties located on and abutting all corners of said intersection; or
(3) In instances where the property on which the variance is requested is located on a street block
where there are less than three (3) other properties on said block, all properties located within two
hundred (200) feet of that street frontage upon which the subject property is located.
(1971 Code, sec. 14-37)
Sec. 3.13.048 Duty of abutting property owner to repair defective conditions
When a sidewalk, driveway, curb, gutter or appurtenance becomes defective, unsafe or hazardous, it shall be the
duty of the owner of the abutting property to reconstruct or repair same, and the expense of such work shall be
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 147/505
borne by the abutting property owner. When a sidewalk, driveway, curb, gutter or appurtenance is found to be
defective, unsafe or hazardous, the Building Inspector shall notify the owner of the abutting property to
reconstruct or repair same. Any owner who fails to reconstruct or repair such defective, unsafe or hazardous
condition within thirty (30) days from the date of the written notice from the Building Inspector to do so shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor. (1971 Code, sec. 14-38)
Sec. 3.13.049 Restoration of curb when driveway abandoned
Whenever the use of any driveway approach is abandoned and it is no longer used for vehicular access to the
abutting property, it shall be the duty of the abutting property owner to restore the curb according to the
standards provided in this division. (1971 Code, sec. 14-39)
Sec. 3.13.050 Liability for damages resulting from defects; replacement of sidewalk and curb and gutter
(a) Liability generally. This division shall not be construed to relieve from or to lessen the responsibility or
liability of any person owning, controlling or installing any surfaces for damages to persons or property caused
by any defect therein.
(b) Liability of abutting owner or occupant. The abutting property owner or person enjoying the use of any
property abutting on a sidewalk or curb that has become defective and has resulted in causing damage or injury
as a result of such defective condition shall be primarily liable in damages for any loss or damage sustained as a
result of such defective condition. The Town shall not be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the
inspections authorized by this division or by reason of the approval or disapproval of any access facilities,
surfacing or appurtenance not made in accordance with the standards or specifications of this division.
(c) Liability of special users. It shall be the duty of any property owner, landlord, tenant, lessee, sublessee,
person, firm or corporation making special use of any sidewalk or curb for the purpose of ingress or egress, for
loading elevators, downspout drains, or any other special use of whatsoever kind or character, whether recited
herein or not, to keep said sidewalk, parkway, curb and driveway abutting said property in a good and safe
condition and free from any defects and hazards of whatsoever kind and character. Such special user shall be
liable in damages for any loss or damage sustained as a result of any defective condition of the sidewalk,
driveway, curb, loading elevator, downspout drain or any other special use or facility of whatsoever kind or
character.
(d) Replacement of sidewalk and curb and gutter on new construction sites. The abutting property owner of
new construction sites shall be responsible for replacing all existing sidewalk and curb and gutter prior to the
Town issuing an occupancy permit as required by the building code. Any sidewalk or curb and gutter not
replaced shall meet requirements of this division except the portion of section 3 [3.13.038] that requires a
minimum curb width of twenty-four (24) inches as measured from the face of the curb. Any sidewalk or curb
and gutter not replaced shall be free of defects or deterioration.
(e) Replacement of sidewalk and curb and gutter at existing residences or businesses. The abutting property
owner when replacing a portion of the sidewalk or curb and gutter adjacent to the property shall be responsible
for replacing all sidewalk and/or curb and gutter whenever fifty (50) percent or more of the existing sidewalk
and/or curb and gutter is being replaced. Any sidewalk or curb and gutter not replaced shall meet requirements
of this division except the portion of section 3.13.038 that requires a minimum curb width of twenty-four (24)
inches as measured from the face of the curb. Any sidewalk or curb and gutter not replaced shall be free of
defects or deterioration.
(1971 Code, sec. 14-40)
Secs. 3.13.051–3.13.080 Reserved
Division 3. Reserved*
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 148/505
Secs. 3.13.081–3.13.160 Reserved
Division 4. Trees and Shrubs
Sec. 3.13.161 Title
This division shall be known and may be cited as the municipal tree ordinance of the Town. (1971 Code, sec. 15
1/2-1)
Sec. 3.13.162 Definitions
For the purpose of this division, the following terms, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given
herein:
Director. The Director of Parks for the Town.
Park Department. The Park Department of the Town.
Person. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or organization of any kind.
Private tree. Any tree or shrub located on private property.
Property line. The outer edge of the street or highway.
Public land. Any public land of the Town, including but not limited to parks, public parkways, streets, alleys,
easements, and land around public buildings.
Public tree. Any tree or shrub located in a public place.
Resident or property owner. The person owning such property as shown on property records of the Town.
Street or highway. The entire width of every public way or right-of-way.
Tree Advisory Committee. An advisory committee of the Town.
(1971 Code, sec. 15 1/2-2)
Sec. 3.13.163 Tree Advisory Committee; urban forestry plan
(a) There is hereby created and established a Tree Advisory Committee for the Town, which shall consist of
the Town Administrator, the Director of Public Works and the Director of Parks. In addition, the Mayor may
appoint as many additional members as deemed necessary with the approval of the Town Council. This
Committee shall serve in an advisory capacity to the Town Council.
(b) It shall be the responsibility of the Committee to develop a written plan for the planting, preservation,
trimming, care and removal of trees, shrubs, and other plant material in the public parkways, streets, alleys, and
easements within the Town. Such plan, when approved by the Town Council, shall constitute the official
comprehensive urban forestry plan of the Town. The plan shall be reviewed annually and updated as deemed
appropriate by the Town Council.
(1971 Code, sec. 15 1/2-13)
Sec. 3.13.164 Jurisdiction of Park Department
The Park Department of the Town shall have jurisdiction over all trees, shrubs and grassy areas in all public
places within the Town. (1971 Code, sec. 15 1/2-3)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 149/505
Sec. 3.13.165 Waiver of requirements during emergencies
During a period of Town emergency such as a hurricane, tropical storm, freeze or flood, or any other act of God,
the requirements of this division may be waived by the Town Council. (1971 Code, sec. 15 1/2-12)
Sec. 3.13.166 Care by abutting property owners
Any resident of the Town who resides contiguous to the public right-of-way is specifically granted authority by
the Town to care for those trees and shrubs in that portion of the right-of-way contiguous to his or her property.
The authority granted to the resident of any property contiguous to the public right-of-way to care for trees and
shrubs in the public right-of-way shall include the right to prune, cut or spray such trees and shrubs as he or she
may see fit, as it is the policy of the Town to encourage its residents to be responsible for the care and beauty of
the parkways of the Town adjacent to their property. The authority here given to any resident to care for the
public right-of-way contiguous to his or her parkways shall not be construed in any manner to infringe upon the
superior rights of the Town and its residents to use the parkway and streets for the purposes for which they were
dedicated. (1971 Code, sec. 15 1/2-4)
Sec. 3.13.167 Removal
It shall be the responsibility of the Town to remove from the public land trees or shrubs which are diseased or
dying, and trees or shrubs which, due to their existing condition, constitute, in the opinion of the Town, a threat
to the safety and welfare of the general public. The owners of private property contiguous to a public right-ofway
may, upon the written approval of the Town, remove trees and shrubs from the right-of-way. All stumps of
street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not
project above the surface of the ground. (1971 Code, sec. 15 1/2-5)
Sec. 3.13.168 Damaging or destroying
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally damage, cut or carve any public tree or shrub. Unless
specifically authorized by the Town, no person shall transplant or remove any public tree or shrub. It shall be
unlawful for any person to attach any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters or other contrivance to any public tree
or shrub; allow any gaseous liquid or solid substance which is harmful to such public trees or shrubs to come in
contact with any public tree or shrub; or set fire or permit any fire to burn when such fire or heat thereof will
injure any portion of any public tree or shrub. (1971 Code, sec. 15 1/2-6)
Sec. 3.13.169 Planting of trees on public property
(a) The following listed tree species are the only trees that shall be planted on any public land within the
Town, and they shall be planted no closer to another tree than twenty (20) feet:
Small Trees Medium Trees Large Trees
Redbud Golden raintree Live oak
Hawthorn Bald cypress Bur oak
Flowering dogwood Sweetgum Red oak (Shumard)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 150/505
Crape myrtle Caddo maple Water oak
Gum elastic Slash pine Chinese pistachio
Mesquite Big tooth maple Cedar elm
River birch Pecan
Western soap berry
Chinese elm (Parvifolia)
Austrian pine
Calleryana pear
(b) Any person desiring to plant a tree or shrub in any public place within the Town other than the approved
trees shall submit their request in writing to the Tree Advisory Committee for consideration.
(c) No trees may be planted closer to any curb or sidewalk than the following: small trees, two (2) feet;
medium trees, three (3) feet; and large trees, four (4) feet.
(d) No public tree or shrub shall be planted closer than twenty-five (25) feet of any street corner, measured
from the point of the nearest intersection, curbs or curblines. No public tree shall be planted within ten (10) feet
of any fire hydrant, streetlight, traffic-control device or alley intersection.
(e) No public trees other than those species listed as small trees in subsection (a) of this section may be
planted under or within ten (10) lateral feet of any overhead utility wire. No public tree may be planted which is
located more than twelve (12) inches into any alley or easement used for sanitation collection or public or
private utilities.
(1971 Code, sec. 15 1/2-7)
Sec. 3.13.170 Rights of Town
The Town shall have the right to plant, trim, spray, preserve and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines
of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, and public grounds, as may be necessary when servicing Town utilities or to
preserve the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. The Town may remove, or cause to be removed, any
tree, plant or shrub, or any part thereof, which is located on public streets, parkways, easements, and other
municipal-owned property which is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines or other
public improvements or interferes with maintenance or replacement thereof. (1971 Code, sec. 15 1/2-8)
Sec. 3.13.171 Protection during excavation and construction work
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 151/505
(a) All trees and shrubs on any street or other publicly owned property within ten (10) feet of any excavation
or construction of any building, structure, or street work shall be guarded and all building material, dirt, or other
debris shall be kept outside the barrier.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to excavate any ditches, tunnels, or trenches or construct any drive
within a radius of ten (10) feet from any public tree or shrub without first obtaining a written permit from the
Town.
(1971 Code, sec. 15 1/2-10)
Sec. 3.13.172 Depositing materials interfering with roots
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, place, store, or maintain upon any public place of the municipality
any stone, brick, sand, concrete, or other materials which may impede the free passage of water, air, and
fertilizer to the roots of any tree or shrub growing therein, except by written permit from the Town. (1971 Code,
sec. 15 1/2-11)
Sec. 3.13.173 Pruning of trees on private property abutting right-of-way
(a) It shall be the responsibility of any person or persons owning or occupying real property contiguous to the
public right-of-way, upon whose property there may be trees or shrubs, to prune such trees or shrubs in such
manner that they will not obstruct or shade the streetlights, obstruct the passage of pedestrians on public
sidewalks, obstruct vision of traffic signs, or obstruct the public view of any street or alley intersection. The
minimum clearance of any overhanging portion of a tree or shrub shall be eight (8) feet over sidewalks, and ten
(10) feet over all streets except Preston Road, which shall have a clearance height of sixteen (16) feet over the
street.
(b) Should any person or persons owning or occupying real property bordering on any street fail to prune trees
or shrubs as hereinabove provided, the Town shall order such person or persons, within ten (10) days after
receipt of written notice, to so prune such trees or shrubs. Failure to prune such tree or shrub shall constitute a
violation of this division.
(1971 Code, sec. 15 1/2-9)
Sec. 3.13.174 Trees or plants on private property causing hazard to public place
(a) Prohibited conditions. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to grow any tree, bush, or
plant abutting a public place which causes a hazard to public places or interferes with the proper lighting of
public streets.
(b) Trimming or removal by Town. Should any owner of any lot or lots within the Town fail to trim or remove
any tree, bush, or plant which causes a hazard to a public place or which interferes with proper lighting of public
streets within ten (10) days after notice in writing by the Town or by letter addressed to such owner at his post
office address to do so, then in that event, the Town may do such trimming and cutting down and/or removing of
any tree, bush, or plant which causes a hazard to a public place or which interferes with proper lighting of public
streets, or cause the same to be done and may pay therefor, and charge the expenses incurred in doing such work
or having such work done to the owner of such lot or lots or real estate; and if such work is done by the Town
then such expenses shall be assessed on the real estate or lot or lots on which such expenses were incurred.
(c) Lien for Town's expenses. The Mayor, Town Administrator, or Director of Public Works shall file with the
County Clerk a statement of such expenses incurred under subsection (b) of this section giving the amount of
such expenses and the date on which the work was done; and the Town shall have a privileged lien on such lot or
lots or real estate upon which said work was done to secure the expenditures so made in accordance with the
provisions of V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, chapter 342, which said lien shall be second only to tax liens
and liens for street improvements; and said amount shall bear ten percent (10%) interest from the date said
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 152/505
statement was filed. It is further provided that, for any such expenditures and interest, as aforesaid, suit may be
instituted and recovery and foreclosure of said lien shall be had in the name of the Town; and the statement of
expenses so made, as aforesaid, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended
for such work.
(d) Penalty. Any person or entity violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof may be fined as provided in section 1.01.009 of this code. In case the
owner or occupant of any lot, lots or premises under the provisions of this section shall be a corporation, and
shall violate any provision of this section, the president, vice-president, secretary, and/or treasurer of such
corporation, and/or any manager, agent, or employee of such corporation, shall be also severally liable for the
penalties herein provided.
(1971 Code, sec. 14-9)
Secs. 3.13.175–3.13.190 Reserved
Division 5. Driveway Ramps for Parking Structures
Sec. 3.13.191 Compliance
Driveway ramps for parking structures shall conform to the standards prescribed in this division.
Sec. 3.13.192 Definitions
For the purpose of construing and enforcing this division, certain abbreviations, words, terms, phrases and their
derivatives shall have the same meaning and/or be consistent with their use and meaning in division 2 of this
article. All other words shall have their usual meaning.
Sec. 3.13.193 Plans and profiles; general standards
(a) The width of the ramp, radii for all curves, length of the landing area and the percent of slope, the length of
the ramp at the specified slope, and design elevations on both sides of the ramp at all break points (plus along
the center of travel lanes in curves) must be shown on the plan and profile presented to the building inspection
department with an application for a building permit for a parking structure, either above-ground or
underground, that requires a ramp up or down from the grade of the base of the structure.
(b) All horizontal and vertical curves for ramps shall have adequate sight stopping distance and entrance and
exit points to ensure public safety.
(c) Horizontal alignment that approximates the geometric requirements of circular curves and tangents shall
be used. All vertical curves shall be parabolic, have equal tangents, and a change in curvature that is constant.
(d) The principal control in the design of crest vertical curves is to ensure that stopping sight distance (SSD) is
available throughout the vertical curve.
(e) The principal control in the design of sag vertical curves is to ensure that stopping sight distance (SSD) is
available for headlight illumination throughout the sag vertical curve.
Sec. 3.13.194 Criteria for measuring design elements
(a) Design speed (DS): 5 mph.
(b) Design vehicle (high-profile vehicle): 80.0 inches.
(c) Design vehicle (minimal under-body clearance): 5.6 inches.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 153/505
(d) Stopping sight distance (SSD) object height: 2.0 feet.
Sec. 3.13.195 Longitudinal street drainage
The driveway within the right-of-way shall have a minimum elevation change of +0.5 feet. Sidewalks shall meet
slope criteria of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
Sec. 3.13.196 Landing area
All ramps shall have a landing area with a maximum slope of one (1) vertical unit in twelve and one-half (12.5)
horizontal units, or eight percent (8%). The landing area shall have a minimum length of fifteen feet (15')
measured from the intersection of the ramp and the property side of the sidewalk of the site. No vertical curve
shall be allowed within the landing.
Sec. 3.13.197 Number of ramps
(a) Parking garages on commercial properties that provide twenty-five (25) or fewer parking spaces shall
have, at a minimum, one (1) access ramp to facilitate two-way traffic.
(b) Parking garages that provide twenty-six (26) or more parking spaces shall have, at a minimum, one (1)
access ramp to facilitate two-way traffic. Sites with parking structures that provide twenty-six (26) or more
parking spaces may have two (2) or more one-way access ramps in lieu of one (1) two-way access ramp.
Sec. 3.13.198 Grades
(a) The maximum slope for the ramp, other than the landing area, shall be one (1) vertical unit in eight (8)
horizontal units, or twelve and one-half percent (12.5%).
(b) At the top and bottom of the ramps, vertical curves shall be used to provide smooth transitions at all
changes in slope.
(c) The driveway surface entering into a subterranean parking structure shall not be more than thirty (30)
inches below the natural front yard grade when the driveway is located between the front property line and the
front building line.
Sec. 3.13.199 Width
(a) The minimum width for a one-way ramp is twelve feet (12'), with an additional one foot (1') on each side
for clearance to the structure and/or retaining wall, or a total minimum width of fourteen feet (14').
(b) Ramp widths shall be measured from face to face of any side curbs, walls or structures, and shall be the
width of the actual driving surface. On sites providing twenty-six or more parking spaces, ramps less than
twenty feet (20') in width shall be posted for one-way traffic. On sites where a single ramp less than twenty feet
(20') wide is allowed, signage shall be posted warning drives of potential oncoming ramp traffic.
(c) Convex mirrors, placed on private property, are required where opposing motorists cannot readily view
each other and/or where ramps are too narrow to permit vehicles to bypass each other.
Sec. 3.13.200 Sight lines
All ramps shall have at least ten feet (10') sight triangles through which drivers can see pedestrians in the rightof-
way. The ten feet (10') sight triangles shall be measured from the intersection of the ramp and the property
side of the sidewalk of the site.
(Ordinance 1929 adopted 9/23/13)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 154/505
ARTICLE 3.14 PUBLIC WORKS CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS
Sec. 3.14.001 Adopted
The Town hereby accepts and adopts the provisions of the Public Works Construction Standards - North Central
Texas Council of Governments, dated October 2004, and as may be amended from time to time, as the Town's
standards for specifications and drawings for public works construction.
Sec. 3.14.002 Authority to make changes and revisions
The Town Engineer will have authority to make changes and revisions to specifications and/or drawings, as
necessary, on all public works projects.
(Ordinance 1704 adopted 8/13/07)
ARTICLE 3.15 PERMIT APPLICATION REVIEW PROCEDURES AND VESTED RIGHTS
DETERMINATIONS
Sec. 3.15.001 Applicability
This article applies to any application for a permit authorized under this chapter, which is submitted for filing
after the effective date of this article, including expressly any permit application which has expired under the
provisions of such articles, or under the provisions of this article, except as otherwise provided in this article.
The separate articles of this chapter collectively shall be referenced as the code hereinafter. For purposes of this
article, a permit issued under the code has expired if the activity authorized by the permit has not been
completed within the period prescribed by the code.
Sec. 3.15.002 Application review and decision procedures
(a) Completeness determination. Every application for approval of a permit authorized by this Code shall be
subject to a determination of completeness by the Building Inspection Department. No application shall be
accepted for processing unless it is accompanied by all documents required by and prepared in accordance with
the requirements of this code, as specified in the article authorizing the permit for which the application is made,
and including without limitation illustrations, site plans or other information demonstrating compliance with the
Town's zoning ordinance. The Building Inspection Department may promulgate a fee for review of the
application for completeness.
(b) Incompleteness as grounds for denial. The processing of an application by any Town official or employee
prior to the time the application is determined to be complete shall not be binding on the Town as the official
acceptance of the application for filing, and the incompleteness of the application shall be grounds for denial or
revocation of the application. A determination of completeness shall not constitute a determination of
compliance with the substantive requirements of this code.
(c) Preapplication conference. An applicant may request a preapplication conference with the Building
Inspection Department for purposes of identifying requirements that are applicable to a proposed application.
The request shall be made in writing on a form prepared by the Building Inspection Department and shall state
that any proposed construction concept discussed at the preapplication conference is not intended as a plan of
development or application for permit approval. The applicant shall execute the form prior to requesting
information from any Town official regarding standards applicable to an application for a building permit.
(d) Time for making determination. Following submission of a permit application, the Building Inspection
Department shall make a determination whether the application constitutes a complete application for the permit
not later than the tenth (10th) business day after the date the application is submitted and shall notify the
applicant in writing of the determination in a manner agreed to by the applicant. The written notification shall
specify the documents or other information needed to complete the application and shall state the date the
application will expire if the documents or other information is not provided.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 155/505
(e) When deemed complete. An application for approval of a permit authorized by this code shall be deemed
complete on the eleventh (11th) business day after the application has been received, if the applicant has not
otherwise been notified that the application is incomplete.
(f) Time for completing application. If an application for a permit is not completed in accordance with the
Building Inspection Department's written notification on or before the forty-fifth (45th) day after the application
is submitted, the application will be deemed to have expired and it will be returned to the applicant together with
any accompanying documents. Thereafter, a new application for approval of the permit must be submitted. The
Town may retain any fee paid for reviewing the application for completeness.
(g) Vested rights. No vested rights accrue solely from the filing of an application that has expired pursuant to
this section, or from the filing of a complete application that is subsequently denied.
(h) Priority of permit applications. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, no
application for an electrical permit, plumbing permit, mechanical permit, fence permit, irrigation system permit,
HVAC permit, drainage system permit, alarm permit, fire sprinkler permit, private flatwork permit, public
flatwork permit, curb/gutter permit, pool permit, fountain permit, or signage permit may be submitted or
accepted for filing until the applicant has filed an application for a building permit under article 3.02 or for a
permit under article 3.08, unless the applicant avers in writing that the permit application is not associated with a
permit for construction of, reconstruction of, or addition to a structure and waives any subsequent claim that the
permit was required for such purpose.
(i) Decision on application. Once an application for a permit for erection or improvement of a building, as
authorized under article 3.02 or 3.08 of this code, is deemed or determined to be complete, the Building
Inspection Department shall grant or deny the permit application within forty-five (45) days of the date the
application is deemed complete or the date the Building Inspection Department notifies the applicant in writing
that the application is complete. The applicant and the department may agree in writing to a longer period for a
decision on the permit. If the permit application meets the requirements of the code, the Building Inspection
Department shall notify the applicant in writing that the permit will be issued upon payment of all permit fees.
The department shall issue the permit within five (5) business days of receipt of the permit fees to be paid by the
applicant. If the applicant fails to pay the permit fees within five (5) business days of receiving such notification,
the permit shall be deemed denied.
(j) Prior review and decision procedures superseded. To the extent that any permit application review and
decision procedures incorporated in this code are in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this section,
such provisions hereby are superseded to the extent of the conflict by the provisions of this section, including
without limitation those procedures contained in the 2006 International Building Code, section 105, as may be
amended by article 3.02; in the 2006 International Plumbing Code, section 106, as may be amended by article
3.04; in the 2006 International Fuel Gas Code, section 106, as may be amended by article 3.05; in the 2006
International Mechanical Code, section 106, as may be amended by article 3.06; and in the 2006 International
Residential Code, section R105, as may be amended by article 3.08.
Sec. 3.15.003 Vested rights appeal
(a) Vested rights petition.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of a vested rights petition is to determine whether one or more standards
of this code should not be applied to a permit application by operation of State law, or whether
certain permits are subject to expiration.
(2) Applicability. A vested rights petition may be filed with an application for any permit
authorized by this code.
(3) Effect. Upon granting of a vested rights petition in whole or in part, the permit application shall
be decided in accordance with the standards specified in the relief order based on prior permit
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 156/505
requirements or development standards, or the approved permit otherwise subject to expiration shall
be extended.
(b) Petition requirements.
(1) Who may petition. A vested rights petition may be filed only by a property owner or the
owner's authorized agents with the permit application.
(2) Form of petition. The vested rights petition shall allege that the petitioner has a vested right for
the land subject to the permit application under Texas Local Government Code, chapter 245 or
successor statute that requires the Town to review and decide the application under standards in effect
prior to the effective date of the currently applicable standards. The petition shall include the
following information and documents:
(A) A narrative description of the grounds for the petition;
(B) A copy of each approved or pending permit application which is the basis for the
contention that the Town may not apply current standards to the application which is the subject
of the petition, or a copy of construction drawings, sketch plan or other information that was
presented to the Town (hereinafter, a “concept plan”);
(C) The date of submittal of the permit application or concept plan;
(D) The date the project for which the permit application or concept plan was commenced;
(E) Identification of all standards otherwise applicable to the permit application from which
relief is sought;
(F) Identification of the standards which the petitioner contends apply to the permit
application;
(G) Identification of any current standards which petitioner agrees can be applied to the
permit application at issue;
(H) A copy of any prior vested rights determination by the Town involving the same land;
and
(I) Any other information the petitioner wishes to be considered for a determination of vested
rights, including matters pertaining to common law vested rights.
(3) Time for filing petition. A vested rights petition shall be filed with a permit application for
which a vested right is claimed. The petition shall be accompanied by a waiver of the time for
deciding the permit application, pending decision on the vested rights petition.
(c) Processing of petition and decision.
(1) Responsible official. The building inspections department shall process the vested rights
petition and prepare a report. The petition and report shall be forwarded to the Town Administrator
with a copy to the Town Attorney. The Town Administrator shall initially decide the vested rights
petition. The Town Administrator may refer the matter to the Town Council for decision, after
preparing a report, in lieu of initially deciding the petition. The Town Administrator shall notify the
petitioner in writing of his decision.
(2) Appeal of decision on petition. The petitioner may appeal the Town Administrator's decision on
the vested rights petition within ten (10) business days of the date of such decision to the Town
Council.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 157/505
(3) Decision by Town Council. After considering the Building Inspection Department's report and
the Town Administrator's decision, the Town Council on appeal shall render a decision on the vested
rights petition. The Town Council's decision shall be final.
(d) Action and order on petition.
(1) Action on the petition. The decision-maker on the vested rights petition may take any of the
following actions:
(A) Deny the relief requested in the petition, and direct that the permit application shall be
reviewed and decided under currently applicable standards;
(B) Grant the relief requested in the petition, and direct that the permit application shall be
reviewed and decided in accordance with the standards contained in identified prior regulations;
or
(C) Grant the relief requested in part, and direct that certain identified current standards shall
be applied to the permit application, while standards contained in identified prior regulations
also shall be applied.
(2) Order on petition. Each decision on the vested rights petition shall be memorialized in an order
identifying the following:
(A) The nature of the relief granted, if any;
(B) The approved or filed permit application(s) or other development application(s) upon
which relief is premised;
(C) Current standards which shall apply to the permit application for which relief is sought;
(D) Prior standards which shall apply to the permit application for which relief is sought,
including any procedural standards; and
(E) The basis upon which the decision-maker denies, in whole or in part, the relief sought.
(e) Criteria for approval. The decision-maker shall decide the vested rights petition based upon the following
factors:
(1) The nature and extent of prior permit or other development applications filed or approved for
the land subject to the petition;
(2) Whether any prior vested rights determinations have been made with respect to the property
subject to the petition;
(3) Whether any prior approved applications for the property have expired or have been terminated
in accordance with local or State law;
(4) Whether any exception to vested rights laws applies to the standards in the current regulations
from which the applicant seeks relief;
(5) Whether any prior approved permit or other development applications relied upon by the
petitioner have expired;
(6) Whether any concept plan presented to or filed with the Town by the petitioner or in petitioner's
behalf gave the Town fair notice of the nature of the project contemplated and the permit application
to be submitted; and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 158/505
(7) Whether the project defined by the application or concept plan, if any, has changed since the
date of first application or presentation to the Town.
(f) Application following relief order. Following the Town's final decision on the vested rights petition, the
property owner shall conform the permit application for which relief is sought to such decision. If the permit
application on file is consistent with the relief granted on the vested rights petition, no revisions are necessary.
Where proceedings have been stayed on the permit application pending referral of the vested rights petition to
the Town Council, proceedings on the application shall resume after the Council's decision on the vested rights
petition.
(g) Expiration. Relief granted on a vested rights petition shall expire on occurrence of one of the following
events:
(1) The petitioner or property owner fails to submit a required revised permit application consistent
with the relief granted within thirty (30) days of the final decision on the petition;
(2) The permit application for which relief was granted on the vested rights petition subsequently
is denied in accordance with the standards applicable to the permit under the relief order; or
(3) The permit application for which relief was granted on the vested rights petition expires.
(h) Prior appellate procedures superseded. To the extent that appellate review procedures incorporated in this
code are in conflict with the provisions of this section, such provisions hereby are superseded to the extent of the
conflict or inconsistency by the provisions of this section, including without limitation those procedures
contained in the 2006 International Building Code, section 111.2, as may be amended by article 3.02; in the 2006
International Plumbing Code, section 109, as may be amended by article 3.04; in the 2006 International Fuel
Gas Code, section 109, as may be amended by article 3.05; in the 2006 International Mechanical Code, section
109, as may be amended by article 3.06; and in the 2006 International Residential Code, section R112, as may
be amended by article 3.08.
(Ordinance 1779 adopted 1/26/09)
ARTICLE 3.16 EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL
Sec. 3.16.001 Intent of article
The intent of this article is to prevent erosion nuisances within the Town.
Sec. 3.16.002 Scope of authority
The provisions of this article apply to any person, firm, corporation, or business, who owns, possesses, is in
custody of, or exercises control over property within the Town. In this article, said person, firm, corporation, or
business, shall be referred to individually and/or collectively as an “owner.”
Sec. 3.16.003 Erosion nuisance; defined
An erosion nuisance is a situation in which erosion of, or sediment from, one owner's property causes damage to
a public property and/or a public right-of-way. Such a situation includes, but is not limited to, dirt, silt, sand,
mud, rocks, or similar debris originating from an owner's property being transported off of and from owner's
property by drainage and being deposited onto said public property and/or a public right-of-way.
Sec. 3.16.004 Related ordinances
Besides this article, the Town has other ordinances, regulations, and specifications possibly affecting erosion and
sedimentation control. In the event of a conflict between this article and any other ordinances of the Town, the
most restrictive provisions shall govern.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 159/505
Sec. 3.16.005 Responsibility of owner
An owner shall be responsible for any dirt, silt, sand, mud, rocks or similar debris transported off of and from an
owner's property by drainage of any kind. In this article, said dirt, silt, sand, mud, rocks or similar debris shall be
referred to individually and/or collectively as “sediment.”
Sec. 3.16.006 Public nuisance
It shall be unlawful for an owner to fail to prevent an erosion nuisance from occurring on and/or originating
from an owner's property.
Sec. 3.16.007 Variances
The Town Council may grant a written variance from the requirement of the standards and specifications of this
article if strict adherence to the requirements will result in unnecessary hardship and not fulfill the intent of this
article. In that regard, an owner shall submit a written request for a variance to the Town. The request shall state
the specific variance sought and the basis for said request.
Sec. 3.16.008 Notice provisions
(a) It shall be the duty of the Town Engineer or his designee to give forty-eight (48) hours notice, in writing to
an owner or an agent in charge of any property believed to be in violation of this article:
(1) To correct the erosion nuisance; and/or
(2) To clean up and to move the offending and burdensome sediment.
(b) In the event that the Town Engineer discovers a situation that is in violation of this article and poses a
substantial and immediate threat to public health, safety, environment and welfare of the Town, the Town
Engineer may give notice of said violation to an owner or agent in charge of said property and which provides
less than forty-eight (48) hours for said owner or agent:
(1) To correct the erosion nuisance; and/or
(2) To clean up and to move the offending and burdensome sediment.
Sec. 3.16.009 Stop-work order and abatement of nuisance
(a) In instances where an owner's land disturbing activities are in violation of the provisions of this article, the
Town Engineer shall have the right to halt and to stop said unlawful activities by any reasonable means
including, but not limited to, issuing a “stop-work order.” In instances where section 3.16.008(b) above is
inapplicable, the Town Engineer shall not issue such a stop-work order unless and until:
(1) The Town Engineer or his designee fully satisfies the notice provisions of section 3.16.008(a)
above; and
(2) The owner or agent of the property fails to perform the necessary, corrective measures within
said 48 hours.
(b) In addition, or in the alternative, the Town has the right, but not the obligation, to take such reasonable
steps to abate such unlawful activities. When this occurs, the Town Engineer, or his designee, shall then notify
said owner in writing of the Town's actions and shall also submit a statement of the cost incurred by the Town to
abate such condition. The owner shall pay the amount of the statement to the Town within thirty (30) days of the
date of his/her receipt.
Sec. 3.16.010 Administration; engineer
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 160/505
The Town Engineer is hereby appointed to administer and implement this article. The duties of the Town
Engineer or his designee shall include, but not limited to:
(1) Inspecting properties to determine compliance with this article;
(2) In instances where construction activity occurs on a property, determine if appropriate permits
have been obtained and approved plans and standards are being practiced; and
(3) In instances where an erosion nuisance exists on property where construction activity occurs,
determine if a stop-work order shall issue, and if so, the conditions under which the Town Engineer
shall withdraw said stop-work order and thereby permit said construction activity to recommence.
Sec. 3.16.011 Submission of erosion/sedimentation control plan to town
(a) In instances where an owner or an agent in charge of any property seeks to conduct and/or to perform work
which will necessarily involve land disturbing activities including, but not limited to, excavation, grading,
demolition, drainage work, and/or stock piling of unprotected soil(s) and sand(s) within the Town (as determined
by the Town's Building Inspection Department), prior to the commencement of said work, the owner or agent
shall first submit to the Town Engineer for review an erosion and/or sedimentation control plan. The Town
Engineer or his designee will review each proposed plan to determine its conformance with the provisions of the
regulation. Within ten (10) business days after receiving a proposed plan, the Town Engineer shall, in writing:
(1) Approve the proposed plan, and issue a permit for said work;
(2) Approve the proposed plan subject to and under the reasonable conditions as may be necessary
to secure substantially the objectives of this regulation, and issue the permit for said work subject to
those conditions; or
(3) Disapprove the proposed plan, with the reason(s) for same, and also include the necessary
items, procedures and/or conditions for the applicant to cover and/or to satisfy in a revised, proposed
plan.
(b) For subsection (a)(2) above, and where the Town Engineer conditions the approval of a proposed plan on
the installation of certain sediment control devices, no grading or construction at or on the property shall begin
until the approved sediment control devices are installed, inspected, and approved by the Town Engineer or his
designee.
(c) The applicant shall conduct all land disturbing activities in strict accordance with the applicant's approved
plan.
(d) By approval of the plan, should it in fact occur, neither the Town nor the Town Engineer stipulates or
warrants that the proposed controls will be sufficient to prevent adverse impacts onto private or public
properties. Accordingly, the Town shall not be deemed to waive, in whole or in part, its rights to pursue its legal
remedies in order to prevent or to stop erosion nuisances, both under this article, and all other applicable
ordinances and laws.
Sec. 3.16.012 Acknowledgment
All applicants must sign an acknowledgment, on the attached form marked exhibit A to Ordinance 1907,
indicating that they have reviewed and fully understood the Town's prescribed methods for eliminating and/or
reducing erosion nuisances.
Sec. 3.16.013 Engineering department's standards
When reviewing, disapproving and/or approving an applicant's proposed plan, the engineering department shall
use the following standards:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 161/505
(1) Whether the applicant's erosion and sediment control measures necessarily meet the objectives
of this regulation throughout all phases of construction or land disturbance activities and after
completion of the proposed work; and
(2) Whether the applicant's grading, erosion control measures and practices, sediment control
measures and practices, and waterways protections meet design criteria set forth in the most recent
version of the North Central Texas Council of Governments (NCTCOG) Best Management Practices
(BMP) manual and shall be adequate to prevent transportation of sediment from the site.
Sec. 3.16.014 Town's disclaimer of liability
Nothing in this article or in this code shall create liability on the part of the Town, or any officer or employee
thereof, for any flood damages, or erosion or sedimentation damages, whether to persons, environment or
property, that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
(Ordinance 1907 adopted 1/28/13)
CHAPTER 4
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 4.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 4.02 ALARM SYSTEMS*
Sec. 4.02.001 Definitions and terms
The following words and terms, as used herein, shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them, as follows:
Alarm agent. Any person employed by an alarm business (as defined herein) whose duties include the altering,
installing, maintaining, moving, repairing, replacing, selling, leasing, servicing, responding to, or causing others
to respond to an alarm device. However, “alarm agent” does not include persons who engage in the manufacture
or sale of alarm systems from a fixed location and who neither visit the alarm site (as defined herein) where the
alarm system is to be installed, nor design the scheme for the physical location of the alarm system at an alarm
site (as defined herein).
Alarm business. Any individual, company, partnership, corporation, or proprietorship, along with any of its
officers, directors, agents or employees, which alters, installs, leases, maintains, moves, repairs, replaces, sells,
services, or responds to an alarm system (as defined herein), or which causes any of those activities to take
place. As required under present State law, those employees, agents, and/or sub-contractors of an alarm business
who provide any of the aforesaid goods and services shall be licensed by the State for same and be in good
standing with the State. Such licenses shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) For burglar, panic, and/or medical emergency alarm systems, a license issued by the State
Department of Public Safety Private Security Bureau for such purpose.
(2) For fire alarm systems, a license issued by the State Department of Insurance State Fire
Marshal's Office for such purpose.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 162/505
An “alarm business” does not and shall not include the Town's Department of Public Safety, the Town, or their
past, present, and/or future officers and employees.
Alarm monitoring center. A business and/or office (other than the Town's Department of Public Safety) that
receives and/or monitors alarm systems (as defined herein) and which an alarm user retains for the purpose of
providing alarm notification (as defined herein). The alarm monitoring center must be licensed by the State
Commission on Private Security.
Alarm notification. That communication to the dispatch center of the Town's Department of Public Safety that is
by and through a direct connect alarm system (as defined herein) or by and through a remote signaling system
(as defined herein). By design, such communication is either to be initiated purposely by a person or by an alarm
system (as defined herein), and is caused by and/or is in response to a stimulus characteristic of unauthorized
intrusion into the structure (hereinafter, the “burglar alarm mode”), excessive smoke and/or fire (hereinafter, the
“fire alarm mode”), or a medical emergency (hereinafter, the “medical emergency mode”). An “alarm
notification” occurs contemporaneously with an activation of an alarm system.
Alarm site. A single premises or multifamily location in the Town that utilizes and/or operates an alarm system
or a local alarm system (as defined herein).
Alarm system. An assembly of equipment (or a single device such as a solid state unit which plugs directly into a
one hundred ten (110) volt AC [“110VAC”] line) arranged to cause and/or give an alarm notification. An “alarm
system” does not include, however, a security alarm installed on a vehicle.
Alarm system upgrade. An upgrade of an existing burglar/fire alarm control panel of an alarm system or an
addition of fire alarm devices to an existing alarm system, such as are commonly used for smoke, heat and
carbon monoxide detection.
Alarm user. The person (as defined herein) who is the occupant of an alarm site. “Alarm user” shall also mean
that individual who registers either an alarm system or a local alarm system (as defined herein) with the Town's
Department of Public Safety.
Annunciator. The instrumentation on an alarm console at the alarm site which through both visual and audible
signals indicate when an alarm activation device at a particular location at the alarm site has been activated, or,
when a component of the alarm system is malfunctioning.
ANSI. The American National Standards Institute.
Answering service. Refers to a telephone answering service providing among its services the service of receiving
on a continuous basis through trained employees, emergency signals from alarm systems, and thereafter
immediately relaying the message by live voice to the Department of Public Safety.
Automatic dialing device. Refers to an alarm system which automatically sends over regular telephone lines, by
direct connection otherwise, a prerecorded voice message or coded signal indicating the existence of the
emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect.
Burglar alarm. See security alarm.
Business/commercial establishment. Any structure intended or used for the purpose of conducting a commercial
business enterprise.
Department or Department of Public Safety. The Town's Department of Public Safety.
Direct connect alarm system, direct monitored alarm system or DCAS. An alarm system which has the capability
of transmitting an alarm notification directly from the alarm site to the Department.
Fire alarm. A component of an alarm system designed or intended to:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 163/505
(1) Passively detect and signal the presence of smoke, heat, fire, or carbon monoxide hazards;
(2) Signal a fire hazard through manual activation such as a fire pull station or button.
Emergency medical alarm. A component of an alarm system designed or intended to summon a medical
response to a location.
Interconnect. To connect an alarm system to a telephone line, either directly or through a mechanical device that
utilizes a standard telephone, for the purpose of using the telephone line to transmit an alarm notification.
Local alarm system. A device and/or system designed to alert and/or warn inhabitants of and on a premises of a
burglar, panic, medical, smoke and/or fire emergency, but which does not use an alarm notification in
conjunction therewith.
Invalid alarm or false alarm. The activation of an alarm system through mechanical or electronic failure,
malfunction, improper installation or the negligence of the owner or lessee of an alarm system, or, the
negligence of their employees or agents. The following circumstances and/or occurrences shall not, however, be
considered an instance of an invalid alarm:
(1) Alarm notifications caused by the failure or malfunction of the Department's monitoring and/or
signal receiving systems;
(2) Alarm notifications occurring on a repeated basis but without an apparent cause, and where, in
the sole opinion of the Department, the alarm business responsible for the alarm system's installation
and/or servicing, is taking prompt action to remedy the malfunction;
(3) An alarm notification followed by an immediate call to the Department of Public Safety
canceling the alarm notification (by giving the proper code number or word), and where such call has
been made to the Department prior to one of the Department's officer's arrival at the alarm site; and
(4) Alarm notifications resulting from the servicing of an alarm system by an alarm business when,
prior to said servicing, the alarm user or his agent has informed the Department that the alarm system
will be repaired or serviced at that particular date and time that coincides with said alarm
notifications.
Owner. The record titleholder of real property.
Person. Any individual, corporation, organization, partnership, association, or any other legal entity. In addition,
a word in this article importing the masculine gender only shall extend to and be applied to females and to
corporations, organizations, partnerships, associations, or any other legal entities, as well as to males.
Radio frequency signaling device. That communication device in a direct connect alarm system that, when
activated, transmits by radio an alarm notification to the Department of Public Safety's dispatch center.
Remote signaling system. An alarm system that, when activated, transmits a signal to an alarm monitoring
center.
Residence or residence site. A structure intended as a dwelling unit including, but not limited to, one-family
dwelling units, apartments, condominiums, townhouses and duplexes.
Security alarm. A component of an alarm system designed or intended to signal:
(1) The unauthorized entry or attempted unauthorized entry into a residence, business, or protected
area;
(2) The occurrence of a robbery, hostage situation, or other law enforcement emergency.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 164/505
Security system or security systems. Alarm systems and local alarm systems, individually or collectively, as
appropriate, in the context of the provisions of this article.
Telephone company. Any entity that furnishes telephone services to any area within the Town, and is licensed by
the State for such purpose.
Town. The Town of Highland Park, Texas.
Town Council. The members of the Town Council of the Town of Highland Park, Texas, individually and/or
collectively.
UL. Underwriters Laboratories.
(Ordinance 1684, sec. 2, adopted 2/26/07)
Sec. 4.02.002 Standards for alarm systems and local alarm systems
(a) It is the responsibility of an alarm user to insure that his security system operates properly. To that end, an
alarm user shall be responsible for the maintenance of his security system, as well as the reliability of its
operation.
(b) The Department may regulate the types of alarm systems that it will permit to function in the capacity of a
direct connect alarm system. In addition, the Department may test certain alarm systems to insure their
compatibility with the Department's monitoring and/or signal receiving systems. The aforesaid acts of the
Department shall not, however, serve as any warranty, representation, and/or guarantee that said alarm system
shall operate properly and reliably at all times.
(c) A single or multistation fire alarm system which complies with the National Fire Protection Association
(“NFPA”) Standards (current edition) and the Texas Insurance Code article 5.43-2 (Fire Detection and Alarm
Devices) and title 28, Texas Administrative Code, section 34.600 et seq. (Fire Alarm Rules) shall be provided
throughout:
(1) All new, Assembly Group A, Business Group B, Educational Group E, Factory Industrial
Group F, Hazardous Group H, Institutional Group I, Mercantile Group M, Storage Group S,
Residential Group R, or Single-Family and Multifamily Residence, as defined in the 2003
International Fire Code regardless of floor area, height, fire partitions, exits, sprinkler systems,
manual alarm systems, other requirements or code requirements.
(2) All existing and new sections of any existing building whenever additions or alterations result
in a fifty percent (50%) increase or a fifty percent (50%) alteration in the original floor area, or a new
alarm system is installed, in any Assembly Group A, Business Group B, Educational Group E,
Factory Industrial Group F, Hazardous Group H, Institutional Group I, Mercantile Group M, Storage
Group S, Residential Group R, or Single-Family and Multifamily Residence, as defined in the 2003
International Fire Code, regardless of floor area, height, fire partitions, exits, sprinkler systems,
manual alarms, other requirements or code requirements.
(3) All Residential Group R or Multifamily individual dwelling units shall be individually
permitted and each individual dwelling unit shall have an individual alarm annunciator as defined in
the 2003 International Fire Code, section 902.
(4) Any alteration, modification, or change to an existing fire alarm system must meet NFPA
Standards (current edition).
(5) For an alarm system in the fire alarm mode, the alarm site's annunciator must continue to
indicate and/or signal the presence of smoke and/or fire until manually reset.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 165/505
(6) All fire alarm initiating devices shall be connected to a UL listed control panel to communicate
alarm signals to either the Town's monitoring center or other monitoring station as specified in
section 4.02.001, alarm monitoring center. Single station 110VAC smoke detectors installed either in
stand-alone or tandem configuration do not meet the requirements of this section.
(Ordinance 1684, sec. 3, adopted 2/26/07)
(7) Reserved. (Ordinance 1816 adopted 1/11/10)
(d) Except where modified or qualified elsewhere herein, the following standards are required for security
systems (and a copy of all standards shall be available for public inspection at the Department of Public Safety):
(1) UL and/or ANSI standards:
(A) All security systems installed in business/commercial establishments after the effective
date of this article shall utilize equipment, components, and methods of installation equal to or
exceeding the following minimum applicable UL or ANSI standards: UL 609 (ANSI SE2.1-
1972) “Local Burglar Alarm Units and Systems;” UL 636 (ANSI SE2.7- 973) “Hold-up Alarm
Units and Systems;” UL 681 (ANSI SE2.3- 972) “Installation and Classification of Mercantile
and Bank Burglar Alarm Systems.” All such installations shall be made by an alarm business.
(B) All security systems installed in residences after the effective date of this article shall
utilize equipment and components which shall be equivalent to or exceed the minimum
applicable UL Standard 1023 (ANSI SE2.4-1972) “Household Burglar Alarm Systems Units.”
All installations shall be made by an alarm business. If the security system is to include fire
protection, then the alarm business, as well as the alarm agent installing the fire alarm system,
must be licensed with the State Department of Insurance, State Fire Marshal as required in
section 5 of the Texas Insurance Code article 5.43-2 (Fire Detection and Alarm Devices) and
title 28, Texas Administrative Code, section 34.601 et seq. (Fire Alarm Rules), as amended,
issued by the State Fire Marshal. All alarm systems equipped with fire protection must meet all
requirements as set out in the National Fire Alarm Codes as stated in the National Fire
Protection Association Standards (current edition).
(C) In those instances where UL and/or ANSI have not established standards for certain
categories of equipment or where new equipment is undergoing field testing, the Department
may require that the security system be inspected at the expense of the alarm user by a
registered professional engineer who shall certify in writing that the security system is safe and
reliable.
(D) In accordance with the Texas Occupations Code, “An alarm systems company shall
notify the municipality in which the alarm system is located of an installation or activation of an
alarm system not later than the 30th day after the date of the installation or activation.”
(2) Department standards:
(A) All security systems shall have a standby power supply for the control panel and the
attached equipment. This secondary source of power shall be so installed that if the main source
of power fails, the system shall not cause an invalid alarm. All standby power supplies shall be
of the rechargeable type and shall be capable of operating the system for a minimum of seven
(7) continuous hours. It is the responsibility of the alarm user to insure that all batteries utilized
as standby power sources in his security system are tested at least once annually and replaced
when found to be defective. All new installations shall have rechargeable power supplies
installed at the time of the initial installation of the security system.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 166/505
(B) When the alarm site is a business/commercial establishment, and said alarm site uses the
telephone line to transmit an alarm notification when in the fire alarm mode, the alarm system
must be equipped with a digital alarm communicator transmitter (ACT) as described in the
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA 72), as amended.
(C) All activation devices utilized in security systems shall be adjusted so as to reasonably
prevent invalid indications of fire or intrusion. In particular, security systems are not to be
activated by natural phenomena including, but not limited to, transient pressure changes in
water pipes, short flashes of light, wind noises or exterior pressure changes (such as rattling or
vibration of windows or sonic booms) and vehicular noises adjacent to the alarm site.
(Ordinance 1684, sec. 3, adopted 2/26/07)
Sec. 4.02.003 Direct monitoring of alarm systems by the Department of Public Safety
(a) Direct monitoring by the Department. As a condition of an alarm user having DCAS, an alarm user shall
have:
(1) The alarm system comply with the Department's standards for DCAS' installation, maintenance
and connections to the Department and/or the Department's dispatch center;
(2) The alarm system currently registered with the Department as provided herein;
(3) Paid all fees applicable to DCAS, as set forth by the Town under the provisions of this article;
and
(4) The alarm system maintained and/or serviced by an alarm business currently licensed by the
State.
(b) Cancellation of direct monitoring. For alarm users who no longer desire to use DCAS, the cancellation of
said service may be accomplished by the alarm user providing a signed written request to cancel DCAS, giving
the address of the alarm site and the date that the alarm user desires for DCAS to terminate. The Department of
Public Safety may inspect the DCAS alarm site upon cancellation to verify proper termination of DCAS alarm
service.
(c) Termination of direct monitoring. Upon reasonable notice to the alarm user provided by two attempts,
thirty days apart, to deliver such notice by certified mail, the Department of Public Safety may terminate DCAS
under the following circumstances:
(1) The alarm user vacates the alarm site and the alarm user cancels the Town's utility services at
and to the alarm site;
(2) The alarm user fails to obtain or renew the annual alarm registration as required by ordinance;
(3) The alarm user fails to pay all fees incurred by invalid alarm signals activated by the
burglar/fire alarm system as required by Town ordinance.
(d) Restoration of direct monitoring. A former DCAS alarm user may restore DCAS at an alarm site by
complying with the provisions in subsection (a), above. If a person purchases or occupies an alarm site which
formerly operated with DCAS, said person may restore DCAS at said alarm site by complying with the
provisions in subsection (a), above.
(e) Restrictions on automatic dialing devices. No alarm system with automatic dialing devices shall be keyed
to the Department of Public Safety or otherwise connected to the Department terminals. Any such alarm system
that is keyed to a primary or secondary trunk line of the Department shall be immediately disconnected at the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 167/505
expense of the alarm user and/or the alarm agent. Failure to disconnect any automatic dialing device of an alarm
system which is keyed to the Department shall constitute a violation of this article.
(Ordinance 1684, sec. 4, adopted 2/26/07)
Sec. 4.02.004 Testing of alarm systems monitored by the Department of Public Safety
(a) Testing of direct connect alarm systems.
(1) As a condition to obtaining DCAS, an alarm user shall permit the Department to test the alarm
system's operation to insure its compatibility with the Department's monitoring and/or signal
receiving systems. The Department shall complete all such tests of an alarm system
contemporaneously with the alarm system becoming connected to the Department for use and/or
operation. Upon request, and prior to the Department conducting such tests, the Department shall
provide notice to an alarm user of the date and time that the Department shall conduct said tests.
(2) If, in the course of the Department's testing at an alarm site as provided herein, the Department
discovers that the alarm system and/or the alarm site is in violation of the provisions of this article, as
amended, the Department shall prepare and promptly deliver a written report to the alarm user
explaining and/or specifying such violation(s). Said report shall also require the alarm user to remedy
and/or rectify said violation(s) within thirty (30) days after the Department's delivery of the report to
the alarm user. If an alarm user fails to remedy and/or rectify said violation(s) within that time period
allotted by the Department for same, then the alarm user's registration for his alarm system shall be
automatically revoked. The Department's written report described herein shall also provide notice to
the alarm user of the conditions under which the Department shall automatically revoke the alarm
user's registration of his alarm system.
(3) If the Department discovers that a direct connect alarm system is damaged such that it is
unable, for whatever the cause, to provide the Department with a reliable alarm notification, the
Department shall provide a written report to the alarm user of same. Such written report shall require
the alarm user to remedy and/or rectify said damage within thirty (30) days after the Department's
delivery of the report to the alarm user. If an alarm user fails to remedy and/or rectify said damage
within this thirty-day time period, then the alarm user's registration for his alarm system shall be
automatically revoked. The Department's written report described herein shall also provide notice to
the alarm user of the conditions under which the Department shall automatically revoke the alarm
user's registration of his alarm system.
(b) Testing of non-DCAS alarm systems. For all alarm systems with a remote signaling system, and which a
person and/or an alarm business installs or upgrades at an alarm site after the effective date of this article, the
Department reserves the right and is hereby given authority to inspect and test said alarm system to insure its
compliance with the provisions of this article. At such time, the Department may also review the associated
alarm monitoring center's manner and means of providing an alarm notification, so as to determine its
compatibility with the communication and receiving system used by the Department for same. During such tests,
in the event that the Department discovers that said alarm system does not comply with this article and/or that
the Department's communication and receiving system is incompatible with that alarm monitoring center's
system that is to provide the Department with an alarm notification, the Department will notify the alarm user in
writing of same. The Department will then give the alarm user thirty (30) days to bring said alarm system into
compliance with this article. If an alarm user fails to come into compliance within this thirty-day time period,
then the alarm user's registration for his alarm system shall be automatically revoked.
(Ordinance 1684, sec. 5, adopted 2/26/07)
Sec. 4.02.005 Limits on a security system's sound-producing devices
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 168/505
All security systems equipped with exterior sound-producing devices, including but not limited to gongs,
buzzers, sirens, bells or horns shall be equipped with a timer and/or an automatic shut-off mechanism which
limits the continuous operation of such sound-producing device to fifteen (15) minutes. However, in such
instance where the alarm site is a business/commercial establishment, said exterior sound-producing device shall
be equipped to limit its continuous operation to thirty (30) minutes. (Ordinance 1684 sec. 6, adopted 2/26/07)
Sec. 4.02.006 Registration of an alarm system or a local alarm system
(a) Registration required for security systems. A person who desires to install and/or operate an alarm system
or a local alarm system in the Town after the effective date hereof shall register said security system with the
Department. The Department shall provide the registration form and assess that fee which is provided for same
by Town resolution.
(b) Registration information. The Department's registration form shall be signed by the alarm user and shall
include, among other things, the following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the alarm user;
(2) The name, address, and telephone number of the alarm business responsible for installing the
security system;
(3) The name, address, and telephone number of the alarm business that the alarm user will use for
purposes of servicing the security system;
(4) When the alarm system is not DCAS, the name, address and telephone number of the alarm
monitoring center for that alarm system;
(5) The name, address and telephone number of at least three (3) other persons with access to the
alarm site protected by the alarm system; and
(6) A description of the specific alarm activation devices to be installed at the alarm site, along
with the manufacturer and model number of said security system's control panel.
(c) Annual renewal of registration. The registration described herein shall be valid for a twelve-month period
from the date that the Department issues same. Thereafter, and upon the condition that the Department has not
revoked said registration as provided for herein, an alarm user shall renew his security system's registration on
an annual basis. If an alarm user fails to renew his security system's registration within the thirty (30) days
following the expiration of said twelve-month period, then that alarm system's registration with the Department
will automatically cancel. Moreover, no security system registration shall be renewed unless the security system
is in compliance with all the provisions of this article, as amended.
(d) Continuance of present alarm registrations. All alarm registrations on file with the Department prior to this
article taking effect and not in conflict with this article, shall continue in full force and effect.
(e) Penalties for alarm registration violations.
(1) If an alarm user fails to register his security system with the Department, such act and/or
omission shall constitute a violation of this article;
(2) If an alarm user operates a nonregistered security system, such act and/or omission shall
constitute a violation of this article; and
(3) Failure of any alarm user to update any of the information requested in the registration form, as
changes occur with the alarm user's information, chosen alarm monitoring center, or any alarm
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 169/505
system upgrades, shall constitute a violation of this article.
(Ordinance 1684, sec. 7, adopted 2/26/07)
(f) Reserved. (Ordinance 1816 adopted 1/11/10)
Sec. 4.02.007 Fees
(a) Alarm system registrations. The annual fee that an alarm user shall pay to the Town for the registration of
his alarm system with the Department shall be set by Town Council resolution. All fines owing to the Town for
violations of this article, as amended, and/or all delinquent penalty payments owing to the Town under the
provisions hereof, must be paid in full before the Department shall renew an alarm system registration.
(b) Testing. No fee shall be charged for an initial testing by the Department to verify a security system's
compliance with the regulatory provisions of this article. If and when it is necessary that, within any twelvemonth
period, the Department “retests” a security system in order to verify said security system's compliance
with the regulatory provisions of this article, the fee for same shall be set by Town Council resolution. The fee
for any subsequent retesting of that alarm system during said twelve-month period shall also be set by Town
Council resolution.
(c) Re-registration. The fee for each re-registration of an alarm system which the Department previously
revoked under the provisions of this article shall be set by Town Council resolution.
(d) All fees and service charges authorized in this article shall be billed to the alarm user through the Town's
utility billing system and shall be payable, including any late charges or penalties, as provided in Town
Ordinance Number 851, as amended, which regulates the payment and collection of utility bills.
(Ordinance 1684, sec. 8, adopted 2/26/07)
(e) Reserved. (Ordinance 1816 adopted 1/11/10)
Sec. 4.02.008 Charges for invalid alarms
(a) Charges for invalid alarms. The first five (5) invalid alarms at an alarm site during any twelve-month
period, and to which the Department responds by sending one of the Department's officers to the alarm site, shall
not result in a service charge to the alarm user. Thereafter, and during said twelve-month period, each such
additional response shall result in a fee set by Town Council resolution. Each Department response to an invalid
alarm shall remain on file with the Department.
(b) Alarm registration revocation. The Department reserves the right to revoke an alarm user's security system
registration with the Department if more than five (5) invalid alarms at his alarm site are responded to by the
Department, as described above, in the same calendar month, or, more than twelve (12) in any twelve-month
period. In addition, the Department may revoke an alarm user's registration if said alarm user fails to pay all
invalid alarm charges to the Town within thirty (30) days of that invalid alarm to which the penalty set forth
herein applies.
(c) Re-registration. In such instances where the Department revokes an alarm user's registration of his security
system, nothing herein shall prevent said alarm user from coming into compliance with the provisions of this
article, and re-registering his security system with the Department.
(Ordinance 1684, sec. 9, adopted 2/26/07)
Sec. 4.02.009 Notice
(a) Any notice provided for in this article, and to be given by the Department, shall be in writing and shall be
deemed given when personally delivered to the alarm user, or two (2) business days after being deposited in the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 170/505
United States mail, postage prepaid, certified, and return receipt requested, to the address stated in the alarm
user's registration form for the alarm system in question, or, two (2) business days after the Department affixes
such notice on the doorway/entryway of the alarm site in question.
(b) The Department of Public Safety shall prepare a written notice of the requirements of this article to be
distributed by the Building Inspection Department at the time application for a building permit is made. By
obtaining a building permit for work within the scope of this article, the applicant agrees to abide by this article
and allow the reasonable inspection of the premises by the Department of Public Safety for compliance with this
article.
(Ordinance 1684, sec. 10, adopted 2/26/07)
Sec. 4.02.010 Penalty
In addition to those penalties previously set forth herein, any person that shall fail to comply with or that shall
violate any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction
thereof, may be fined as provided in section 1.01.009 of this code. (Ordinance 1684, sec. 11, adopted 2/26/07)
ARTICLE 4.03 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.03.001 Sale near church or school
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association, club or corporation, to sell alcohol and/or alcoholic
beverages from their principal place of business if it is within the distances prescribed in and measured in
accordance with V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code, chapter 109. (Ordinance 1784 adopted 2/23/09)
(b) The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to a duly-registered and lawfully-operating
tenant of: (1) the Highland Park Shopping Village PD-1; or (2) the shops of Highland Park [Lot 1R; Block 170/2
of Corrigan Oak Lawn Addition, and Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 of Block 170/2 of Highland Park Acreage]; and
who has also obtained the necessary license(s) and/or permit(s) for the sale of alcohol and/or alcoholic beverages
from both the State of Texas and the Town. (Ordinance 1874 adopted 10/24/11)
State law reference–Sales near church, school or hospital, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code, sec. 109.33.
Sec. 4.03.002 Sale, manufacture, etc., prohibited in residential districts
Except as otherwise permitted by the Town zoning code, It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture,
distill, brew, import, transport, store, distribute or sell any beer or wine in any residential-zoned district. (1971
Code, sec. 2 1/4-6; Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Authority of municipality to prohibit sale in residential areas, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code; secs. 109.31,
109.32.
Secs. 4.03.003–4.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. License
Sec. 4.03.031 Required
It shall be unlawful for a person, firm, corporation or association of persons to engage in such business within
the corporate limits of the Town for which a permit or license is required under the provisions of the Texas
Alcoholic Beverage Code, without having first paid the Town a license fee and then having received a receipt for
such transaction. (1971 Code, sec. 2 1/4-1)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 171/505
Sec. 4.03.032 Evidence of compliance with State law and issuance of County license
It shall be a condition precedent to the issue of any license by the Town, as provided for in section 4.03.031 of
this article, that the applicant shall furnish appropriate evidence to show that all provisions of the Texas
Alcoholic Beverage Code and any amendment thereto have been fully met, and that the applicant has been
issued a license to engage in such business by the Tax Collector of the County. (1971 Code, sec. 2 1/4-2)
Sec. 4.03.033 Amount of fee; proof of classification; term
(a) The fees shall be 50% of the State fee under the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, title 3, Licenses and
Permits, subtitle A, Permits, chapter 11, Provisions Generally Applicable to Permits, subchapter A, General
Provisions, as amended, for each permit required under section 4.03.031 of this article.
(b) The permit issued under the provisions of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code shall be prima facie proof
of classification of the occupation upon which the tax is levied and shall be the sole basis of determination of the
amount of the license fee. All licenses provided for herein shall terminate upon the expiration of one year from
date of issuance, and no license shall be issued for more than one year. All licenses now in effect shall be valid
until their expiration.
(Ordinance 1592, sec. 1, adopted 7/12/04)
State law references–Local fee authorized on alcoholic beverage permits, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code, sec. 11.38; local fee
authorized on alcoholic beverage licenses, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code, sec. 61.36.
Sec. 4.03.034 Collection of fee; issuance; transfer
The license fees provided by this article shall be collected by the Town Director of Finance and shall be paid by
every person, firm, corporation or association of persons engaging in such business for which a permit or license
is required under the provisions of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, and the Director of Finance shall issue
to the applicant the proper license, which shall state on its face for what it is issued, the date when it will expire,
and by whom and where such business is to be conducted, and shall describe the place where same is to be kept
and state what type of business is to be permitted under the license. No license is transferable. (1971 Code, sec.
2 1/4-4)
Sec. 4.03.035 Penalty
Any person, firm, association, club or corporation which shall sell or distribute or which shall attempt to sell or
distribute liquor within the corporate limits of the Town without first having paid the license fee levied herein
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof may be fined as provided in section
1.01.009 of this code. (1971 Code, sec. 2 1/4-7)
ARTICLE 4.04 PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.04.001 Title
This article may be known as the solicitation ordinance of the Town. (1971 Code, sec. 13-1)
Sec. 4.04.002 Purpose
The purpose and intent of this article is to protect against criminal activity, including fraud and burglary,
minimize the unwelcome disturbance of citizens and the disruption of privacy, and otherwise preserve the public
health, safety and welfare by regulating, controlling and licensing both door-to-door solicitors and peddlers, in
addition to peddling or soliciting in a public place. (1971 Code, sec. 13-2)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 172/505
Sec. 4.04.003 Definitions
The following words, terms, and phrases, and their derivations, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Charitable. Includes the word “patriotic,” “philanthropic,” “social service,” “health,” “welfare,” “benevolent,”
“educational,” “civic,” “cultural” or “fraternal,” either actual or purported.
Contributions. Includes the word “alms,” “money,” “subscription” or “property” or any donations under the
guise of a loan of money or property.
Department. The Department of Public Safety.
Director. The Director of Public Safety.
Peddle or peddling. Includes all activities ordinarily performed by a peddler as indicated under the definition of
“peddler” in this section.
Peddler. Any person who goes upon the premises of any private residence in the Town, not having been invited
by the occupant thereof, or in any public place, carrying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise or personal
property of any nature and offering the same for sale. This definition also includes any person who solicits
orders and as a separate transaction makes deliveries to purchasers as part of a scheme to evade the provisions of
this article.
Person. A natural person or any firm, corporation, association, club, society or other organization.
Public place. Any public street, alley, traffic island, parkway, or public sidewalk situated within the corporate
limits of the Town.
Solicit or solicitation. Includes all activities ordinarily performed by a solicitor as indicated under the definition
of “solicitor” in this section.
Solicitor. Any person who goes upon the premises of any private residence in the Town, not having been invited
by the occupant thereof, or in any public place, for the purpose of taking or attempting to take orders for the sale
of goods, merchandise, wares, or other personal property of any nature for future delivery, or for services to be
performed in the future. This definition also includes any person who, without invitation, goes upon private
property to request contribution of funds or anything of value, or sell goods or services for political, charitable,
religious, or other noncommercial purposes.
(1971 Code, sec. 13-3)
Sec. 4.04.004 Restrictions on time and place of operation
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, whether licensed or unlicensed, while conducting the business of a
peddler or solicitor, to enter upon any residential premises in the Town where the owner, occupant or person
legally in charge of the premises has posted, at the entry to the premises, or at the entry to the principal building
on the premises, a sign bearing the words “no peddlers,” “no solicitors,” or words of similar import.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person, while conducting the activities of a peddler or solicitor, whether
licensed or unlicensed, to enter upon any private property, knock on doors or otherwise disturb persons in their
residences thirty (30) minutes after sunset of any day until 9:00 a.m. the following morning.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person, while conducting activities of a peddler or solicitor, to perform said
activities on any public street, alley, or traffic island.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 173/505
(d) It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle or to solicit to occupants of motor vehicles in a manner which
obstructs or hinders the free flow of motor vehicle traffic on a public street or alley.
(e) It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle or to solicit to a pedestrian or other users of a public place in
a manner which restricts the pedestrian's or user's movements without consent, so as to interfere with his or her
liberty.
(1971 Code, sec. 13-15)
State law reference–Solicitation of business by pedestrian, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 552.007.
Secs. 4.04.005–4.04.030 Reserved
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 4.04.031 Required; exemptions
It shall be unlawful for any person eighteen (18) years of age or older to engage in peddling or solicitation
activities within the Town without first obtaining a permit issued by the Department of Public Safety; provided,
however, that the following are exempted from the provisions of this section:
(1) Any solicitation made upon premises owned or occupied by an organization upon whose behalf
the solicitation is made;
(2) Any communication by an organization soliciting contributions solely from persons who are
members of the organization at the time of such solicitation;
(3) Any solicitation in the form of a collection at a regular meeting, assembly or service of a
charitable person; or
(4) Any solicitation for the relief of any individual specified by name at the time of the solicitation
where the solicitor represents in each case that the entire amount collected shall be turned over to the
named beneficiary.
(1971 Code, sec. 13-4)
Sec. 4.04.032 Sponsoring juvenile peddlers
(a) No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall be permitted to engage in peddling except as provided in
this section.
(b) A permit shall be obtained by a sponsoring person, company or organization for the conduct of any
peddling or solicitation activities involving, in whole or in part, a sales force of one or more persons under
eighteen (18) years of age.
(c) The sponsor shall be responsible for supervising and controlling the conduct of all persons, including
juveniles, peddling under the sponsor's permit.
(d) The sponsor shall provide to each individual in its sales force a badge or other easily readable form of
identification which identifies the name of the sponsor and the name of the individual. The sponsor shall require
all individuals in its sales force to wear such identification so that it is clearly visible at all times when the
individuals are peddling or soliciting.
(e) The sponsor shall comply with all State and federal laws governing the sponsor's employ of individuals
under eighteen (18) years of age.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 174/505
(1971 Code, sec. 13-5)
Sec. 4.04.033 Application
Every person subject to the provisions of this article shall file with the Director of Public Safety an application in
writing on a form to be furnished by the Department, which shall provide the following information:
(1) Proof of age, address and identification of the applicant, to be provided through the applicant's
driver's license, articles of incorporation (for sponsors), or other legally recognized form of
identification;
(2) A brief description of the business or activity to be conducted;
(3) The hours and location for which the right to peddle or solicit is desired;
(4) If employed, the name, address and telephone number of the employer; or if acting as an agent,
the name, address and telephone number of the principal who is being represented, with credentials in
written form establishing the relationship and the authority of the employee or agent to act for the
employer or principal, as the case may be;
(5) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a felony, misdemeanor or
ordinance violation (other than traffic violations), the nature of the offense or violation, the penalty or
punishment imposed, the date when and place where such offense occurred, and other pertinent
details thereof;
(6) Proof of possession of any license or permit which, under federal, State or local laws or
regulations, the applicant is required to have in order to conduct the proposed business, or which,
under any such law or regulation, would exempt the applicant from the licensing requirements of this
article; and
(7) Two (2) photographs of the applicant which shall have been taken within sixty (60) days
immediately prior to the date of filing of the application. The photographs shall measure 2" by 2" and
show the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner.
(1971 Code, sec. 13-6)
Sec. 4.04.034 Fee
At the time the application is filed with the Department, the applicant shall pay, per each solicitor or peddler, a
nonrefundable permit fee to the Town to cover the cost of processing the application and investigating the facts
stated therein. Said permit fee shall be established by resolution of the Town Council. (1971 Code, sec. 13-7)
Sec. 4.04.035 Bond
All solicitors requiring cash deposits or taking orders for cash on delivery purchases (COD) or who require a
contract of agreement to finance the sale of any goods, services, or merchandise for future delivery, or for
services to be performed in the future, shall furnish to the Department a bond in the amount of five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00) by the solicitor as principal, and by a surety company authorized and licensed to do business
in the State. (1971 Code, sec. 13-8)
Sec. 4.04.036 Issuance; records
(a) Upon receipt of an application, the Director of Public Safety, or authorized representative, shall review the
application as deemed necessary to ensure the protection of the public health, safety and general welfare.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 175/505
(b) If the Director finds the application to be satisfactory, the Director shall endorse his approval on the
application and shall, upon payment of the prescribed fee, deliver the required permit to the applicant.
(c) The permit shall show the name, address and photograph of the permittee, the class of permit issued, the
kind of goods or services to be sold or delivered, the date of issuance, and the length of time that the permit shall
be in effect. The permit shall also show the permit number and identifying description of any vehicle to be used
in carrying on the business for which the permit is issued.
(d) A record of all permits issued shall be maintained by the Department for a period of two (2) years.
(1971 Code, sec. 13-9)
Sec. 4.04.037 Denial
(a) Upon the Director of Public Safety's review of the application, the Director may refuse to issue a permit to
the applicant under this article for any of the following reasons:
(1) The location and time of solicitation or peddling would endanger the safety and welfare of the
solicitors, peddlers or their customers;
(2) An investigation reveals that the applicant falsified information on the application;
(3) The applicant has been convicted of a felony, misdemeanor or ordinance violation involving a
sex offense, trafficking in controlled substances, or any violent acts against persons or property, such
conviction being entered within the five (5) years preceding the date of application;
(4) The applicant is a person against whom a judgment based upon, or conviction for, fraud, deceit
or misrepresentation has been entered within the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of
application;
(5) There is no proof as to the authority of the applicant to serve as an agent to the principal; or
(6) The applicant has been denied a permit under this article within the immediate past year, unless
the applicant can and does show to the satisfaction of the Director that the reasons for such earlier
denial no longer exist.
(b) The Director's disapproval and the reasons for disapproval shall be noted on the application, and the
applicant shall be notified that his application is disapproved and that no permit will be issued. Notice shall be
mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application form, or at the applicant's last known address.
(1971 Code, sec. 13-10)
Sec. 4.04.038 Expiration
All permits issued under the provisions of this article shall expire one year from the date of issuance, unless an
earlier expiration date is noted on the permit. (1971 Code, sec. 13-11)
Sec. 4.04.039 Identification badges
At the same time the permit is issued, the Director shall issue to each permittee a badge, which shall be worn by
the permittee in such a way as to be conspicuous at all times while the permittee is soliciting or peddling in the
Town. (1971 Code, sec. 13-12)
Sec. 4.04.040 Exhibition
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 176/505
Every person required to obtain a permit under the provisions of this article shall exhibit the permit when
requested to do so by any prospective customer or Department employee. (1971 Code, sec. 13-13)
Sec. 4.04.041 Use of permit or badge by other person
It shall be unlawful for any person other than the permittee to use or wear any permit or badge issued under the
provisions of this article. (1971 Code, sec. 13-14)
Sec. 4.04.042 Grounds for revocation
Any permit issued under this article may be revoked or suspended by the Director of Public Safety, after notice
and hearing, for any of the following reasons:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for a permit;
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made by the permittee in the course of conducting
solicitation or peddling activities;
(3) Conducting peddling or solicitation activities contrary to the provisions contained in the permit;
(4) Conviction for any crime involving moral turpitude; or
(5) Conducting peddling or solicitation activities in such a manner as to create a public nuisance,
constitute a breach of the peace or endanger the health, safety or general welfare of the public.
(1971 Code, sec. 13-16)
Sec. 4.04.043 Notice of revocation
Notice of a hearing for revocation of a permit issued under this article shall be provided in writing and shall set
forth specifically the grounds for the proposed revocation and the time and place of the hearing. Notice shall be
mailed, postage prepaid, to the permittee at the address shown on the permit application or at the last known
address of the permittee. (1971 Code, sec. 13-17)
Sec. 4.04.044 Appeals
(a) Any person aggrieved by the action or decision of the Director of Public Safety to deny, suspend or revoke
a permit applied for under the provisions of this article shall have the right to appeal such action or decision to
the Town Administrator within fifteen (15) days after the notice of the action or decision has been mailed to the
person's address as shown on the permit application form, or to his last known address.
(b) An appeal shall be taken by filing with the Director a written statement setting forth the grounds for the
appeal.
(c) The Director shall transmit the written statement to the Town Administrator within ten (10) days of its
receipt, and the Town Administrator shall set a time and place for a hearing on the appeal.
(d) A hearing shall be set not later than twenty (20) days from the date of receipt of the appellant's written
statement.
(e) Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given to the appellant in the same manner as provided
for the mailing of notice of action or decision.
(f) The decision of the Town Administrator on the appeal shall be final and binding on all parties concerned.
(1971 Code, sec. 13-18)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 177/505
Sec. 4.04.045 Claims of exemption
Any person claiming to be legally exempt from the regulations set forth in this article, or from the payment of a
permit fee, shall cite to the Director of Public Safety the statute or other legal authority under which exemption
is claimed and shall present to the Director proof of qualification for such exemption. (1971 Code, sec. 13-19)
ARTICLE 4.05 PERSONAL PROPERTY SALES
Sec. 4.05.001 Definitions
Auction. A public sale of public property to the highest bidder. Its essence is competitive bidding. One who sells
at fixed prices is not conducting an auction sale.
Person. An individual, firm, association, corporation, partnership or other form of sole or joint enterprise.
Personal property. Any and all tangible personal property of every kind and description which is owned, utilized
and maintained by an individual or members of his or her residence and acquired in the normal course of living
in or maintaining a residence. It does not include merchandise which was purchased for resale or obtained on
consignment.
Personal property sale. Includes all general sales, open to the public, conducted from or on residential premises
in any residential zone, as defined by the zoning ordinance, for the purpose of disposing of personal property,
including but not limited to sales entitled “garage sale,” “moving sale” and “estate sale.” This definition shall not
include a situation where no more than five (5) specific items are held out for sale and all advertisement of such
sale specifically names those items to be sold.
Residential district. An area, premises or zone as defined by the zoning ordinance and zoning district map of the
Town.
Resident owner. The person residing in a residential zoning district in the Town, as defined by the zoning
ordinance of the Town, who holds fee title to such premises, or a valid lessee or tenant of such premises who
holds the same under a valid rental agreement for the purpose of maintaining a residence at such location.
(1971 Code, sec. 10-61)
Sec. 4.05.002 Penalty
Any person or entity violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a separate
misdemeanor offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed or continued, and
upon conviction thereof may be fined as provided in section 1.01.009 of this code. (1971 Code, sec. 10-62)
Sec. 4.05.003 Sales restricted to personal property
It shall be unlawful for an individual to sell or offer for sale from his or her residence, under authority granted by
this article, property other than personal property. (1971 Code, sec. 10-63)
Sec. 4.05.004 Frequency of sales
No more than two (2) personal property sales shall be conducted at a residence, in a residential zone district,
during any calendar year. In the event that members of more than one (1) residence join in a property sale at one
(1) residence, then each such resident shall be considered for the purposes of this article to have conducted a
personal property sale at their respective residence during that calendar year. (1971 Code, sec. 10-64)
Sec. 4.05.005 Hours and duration
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 178/505
Personal property sales shall be limited in time to the hours between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. of two (2)
consecutive days. (1971 Code, sec. 10-65)
Sec. 4.05.006 Display of property
Personal property offered for sale may be displayed within the residence, in a garage or carport, and in a side or
rear yard, but only in such areas. No personal property offered for sale in a residential zoning district shall be
displayed in the front areas of any such premises or in any public right-of-way. However, a vehicle offered for
sale may be displayed on a permanently constructed driveway within such front or side yards. (1971 Code, sec.
10-66)
Sec. 4.05.007 Signs
(a) One sign permitted. Only the following specified sign may be displayed in relation to a pending personal
property sale: A resident owner may post a sign of not more than three (3) square feet in size on his or her
premises during the sale hours, advertising the sale of such personal property. A person commits an offense if he
or she displays a sign advertising the sale of such personal property except as specifically provided in the
preceding sentence. The existence of a sign not in conformance with the provisions of this subsection shall be
prima facie evidence that the resident owner has violated the provisions of this subsection. Any other signs at
any locations remote from the sale property are not permitted.
(b) Time limitation. No sign shall be exhibited except during the hours and on the days of the sale.
(1971 Code, sec. 10-67)
Sec. 4.05.008 Conduct on premises; impeding traffic
The owner or tenant of the premises on which such sale or activity is conducted shall be jointly and severally
responsible for the maintenance of good order and decorum on the premises during all hours of such sale or
activity. No such individual shall permit any loud or boisterous conduct on said premises nor permit vehicles to
impede the passage of traffic on all roads or streets in the area of such premises. All such individuals shall obey
the reasonable orders of any member of the Town Department of Public Safety or its duly authorized
representative in order to maintain the public health, safety and welfare. (1971 Code, sec. 10-68)
Sec. 4.05.009 Parking
All parking of vehicles shall be conducted in compliance with all applicable laws and ordinances. Further, the
Town Department of Public Safety may enforce temporary controls to alleviate any special hazards and/or
congestion created by any personal property sale in a residential zoned district of the Town. (1971 Code, sec. 10-
69)
Sec. 4.05.010 Auctions
(a) No public auctions are permitted at any premises located in a residential zoned district of the Town.
(b) This section shall not apply when the Town Council orders that the Town conduct a public auction,
pursuant to Local Government Code, section 253.008, as amended, and said auction is to take place at premises
located in a residential zoned district of the Town.
(1971 Code, sec. 10-70)
Sec. 4.05.011 Right of entry of enforcement officers
A Town Department of Public Safety Officer or any other official designated by any Town ordinance shall have
the right of entry to any premises showing evidence of a personal property sale for the purpose of enforcement
or inspection. (1971 Code, sec. 10-71)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 179/505
Sec. 4.05.012 Exemptions
The provisions of this article shall not apply to or affect the following:
(1) Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction.
(2) Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials.
(3) Any sale conducted by any merchant or mercantile or other business establishment from or at a
place of business wherein such sale would be permitted by the zoning regulations of the Town.
(1971 Code, sec. 10-72)
CHAPTER 5
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
ARTICLE 5.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 5.01.001 Arson reward
(a) The Town hereby offers a standing reward of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the furnishing of
information which leads to the arrest and conviction of anyone guilty of arson within the corporate limits of the
Town.
(b) Any such reward, when paid, shall be payable out of the general fund of the Town.
(1971 Code, sec. 7-1)
State law reference–Arson, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 28.02.
Sec. 5.01.002 Dispensing motor fuel from mobile service unit
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the Town to dispense from any mobile
service unit, vehicle tank truck, or other mobile device any flammable liquid used as motor fuel, as an act of
retail sale, into the fuel tank of any motor vehicle parked on any off-street parking facility or into the fuel tank of
any motor vehicle parked on any public street.
(b) Every violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punishable as
provided in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(1971 Code, sec. 7-2)
State law reference–Flammable liquids, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, ch. 753.
ARTICLE 5.02 FIRE MARSHAL
Sec. 5.02.001 Duty to investigate fires
The Fire Marshal shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring within the Town
by which property has been destroyed or damaged, and shall especially make investigation as to whether such
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 180/505
fire was the result of carelessness or design. Such investigation shall be begun within twenty-four (24) hours, not
including Sunday, of the occurrence of such fire. (1971 Code, sec. 7-17)
Sec. 5.02.002 Taking of testimony; administration of oaths
(a) The Fire Marshal, when in his opinion further investigation is necessary, shall take or cause to be taken the
testimony, on oath, of all persons supposed to be cognizant of any facts or to have means of knowledge in
relation to the matter under investigation, and shall cause the same to be reduced to writing.
(b) The Fire Marshal is hereby authorized and empowered to administer oaths and affirmations to any persons
appearing as witnesses before him.
(1971 Code, sec. 7-18)
Sec. 5.02.003 Authority to summon witnesses and require production of documents
The Fire Marshal shall have the power to summon witnesses before him to testify in relation to any matter which
is, by the provisions of this article, a subject of inquiry and investigation, and may require the production of any
book, paper or document deemed pertinent thereto. (1971 Code, sec. 7-19)
Sec. 5.02.004 Investigations may be private; sequestering witnesses
All investigations held by or under the direction of the Fire Marshal may, in his discretion, be private, and
persons other than those required to be present may be excluded from the place where such investigation is held,
and witnesses may be kept separate and apart from each other and not allowed to communicate with each other
until they have been examined. (1971 Code, sec. 7-20)
Sec. 5.02.005 Duty when evidence indicates crime
If the Fire Marshal is of the opinion that there is evidence sufficient to charge any person with the crime of
arson, or with the attempt to commit the crime of arson, or of conspiracy to defraud, or criminal conduct in
connection with any fire, he shall cause such person to be lawfully arrested and charged with such offense or
either of them, and shall furnish to the proper prosecuting attorney all such evidence, together with the names of
witnesses and all of the information obtained by him, including a copy of all pertinent and material testimony
taken in the case. (1971 Code, sec. 7-21)
Sec. 5.02.006 Misconduct of witnesses
Any witness who refuses to be sworn, or who refuses to appear or testify, or who disobeys any lawful order of
the Fire Marshal, or who fails or refuses to produce any book, paper or document touching any matter under
examination, or who is guilty of any contemptuous conduct during any of the proceedings of the Fire Marshal in
the matter under investigation or inquiry, after being summoned to give testimony in relation to any matter under
investigation, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and it shall be the duty of the Fire Marshal to cause all
such offenders to be prosecuted. (1971 Code, sec. 7-22)
Sec. 5.02.007 Inspection of premises; removal or repair of dangerous conditions
The Fire Marshal, upon complaint of any person having an interest in any building or property adjacent, and
without any complaint, shall have a right at all reasonable hours, for the purpose of examination, to enter into
and upon all buildings and premises within the Town, and it shall be his duty, monthly or more often, to enter
upon and make or cause to be entered and made a thorough examination of all mercantile, manufacturing and
public buildings, together with the premises belonging thereto. Whenever he shall find any building or other
structure which, for want of repair, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or for any cause, is especially
liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger other buildings or property, or so occupied that fire would
endanger persons or property therein, and whenever he shall find an improper or dangerous arrangement of
stoves, ranges, furnaces or other heating appliances of any kind whatsoever, including chimneys, flues and pipes
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 181/505
with which the same may be connected, or a dangerous arrangement of lighting devices or systems, or a
dangerous or unlawful storage of explosives, compounds, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, dangerous chemicals,
vegetable products, ashes, or combustible, inflammable and refuse materials or other conditions which may be
dangerous in character or liable to cause or promote fire or create conditions dangerous to the Firemen or
occupants, he shall order the same to be removed or remedied, and such order shall be forthwith complied with
by the owner or occupant of such building or premises. If such owner or occupant deems himself aggrieved by
such order, he may, within five (5) days, appeal to the Town Administrator, who shall investigate the cause of the
complaint and, unless by his authority the order is revoked, such order shall remain in force and be forthwith
complied with by the owner or occupant. Any owner or occupant who fails or refuses to comply with such order
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Every day's maintenance of any of the conditions covered by such
order shall be a distinct and separate offense. (1971 Code, sec. 7-23)
Sec. 5.02.008 Right of entry on premises where fire has occurred
The Fire Marshal shall have the authority at all times of day or night, when necessary in the performance of the
duties imposed upon him by the provisions of this article, to enter upon and examine any building or premises
where any fire has occurred, and other buildings and premises adjoining or near the same, which authority shall
be exercised only with reason and good discretion. (1971 Code, sec. 7-24)
Sec. 5.02.009 Records of fires
The Fire Marshal shall keep in his office a record of all fires, together with all facts, statistics and circumstances,
including the origin of the fires and the amount of the loss, which may be determined by the investigation
required by this article. (1971 Code, sec. 7-25)
ARTICLE 5.03 VOLUNTEER RESERVE FIRE UNIT
Sec. 5.03.001 Established; composition
There is hereby created and established in the Town a separate unit of the Department of Public Safety's Fire
Department which will be known as the Volunteer Reserve Fire Unit, consisting of no more than six (6)
voluntary Firefighter members, who will be nonsalaried. (1971 Code, sec. 2-113)
Sec. 5.03.002 Authority of Fire Chief
The Town's Chief of the Fire Department shall have authority over this Volunteer Reserve Fire Unit subject to
the orders and directions of the Director of Public Safety of the Town, the Town Administrator and the Town
Council. (1971 Code, sec. 2-114)
Sec. 5.03.003 Application for membership; qualifications of applicants
An applicant for membership in this Volunteer Reserve Fire Unit must file with the Town's Chief of the Fire
Department a written application on a form prescribed by the Town. The applicant must be at least twenty (20)
years of age, be of good character, have temperate habits, and meet all the physical requirements of an officer of
the Town Department of Public Safety as well as have the physical ability to perform all the duties of a
Firefighter. (1971 Code, sec. 2-115)
Sec. 5.03.004 Appointment and discharge of members; full-time members of Public Safety Department
ineligible for membership
Appointment of members to the Volunteer Reserve Fire Unit shall be made by the Town's Chief of the Fire
Department for a term of one year; provided that any member may be discharged by the Town at any time
without or with cause, and without a hearing. Regular full-time members of the Town Department of Public
Safety shall not be eligible for membership in this unit. (1971 Code, sec. 2-116)
Sec. 5.03.005 Training requirements; attendance at fire drills
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 182/505
Each member of the Volunteer Reserve Fire Unit must achieve within one (1) year of acceptance the level of fire
protection personnel standards and education as well as the training required by the Town Department of Public
Safety. In addition, each member of the unit must attend each month a minimum of one (1) two-hour fire drill at
the Town Department of Public Safety. (1971 Code, sec. 2-117)
Sec. 5.03.006 Membership does not constitute membership in Fire Department; compensation and
benefits; uniforms and equipment
Membership in the Volunteer Reserve Fire Unit shall not constitute membership in the Town's regularly
constituted Fire Department or its Department of Public Safety; nor shall any member of this unit be entitled to
any compensation, pension or any other right or privilege of a member of the Town's regularly constituted Fire
Department or Department of Public Safety, with the exception of workman's compensation coverage. The
Town's Chief of the Fire Department may, in his discretion, provide uniforms and equipment for each member of
this unit. (1971 Code, sec. 2-118)
Sec. 5.03.007 Execution of agreement with Town; release of Town from liability
Each member of the Volunteer Reserve Fire Unit, before commencing any volunteer fire duties for the Town,
must execute and deliver to the Town's Chief of the Fire Department an agreement, provided by the Town,
known as “Agreement to Serve as a Volunteer Reserve Firefighter for the Town of Highland Park, Texas,” which
shall provide, among other things, that the Town will be released by the volunteer member from all liability for
any injury or death which occurred in the line of duty. (1971 Code, sec. 2-119)
Sec. 5.03.008 Service assignments; minimum service
Each member of the Volunteer Reserve Fire Unit, in order to be eligible, shall serve in this unit on an assignment
prescribed by the Town's Chief of the Fire Department, but in no event shall a member serve in the unit less than
two (2) shifts each month totaling at least forty-eight (48) hours. However, in no event shall any member of this
unit be on twenty-four-hour call, but will only be called to serve at the discretion of the Town's Chief of the Fire
Department. (1971 Code, sec. 2-120)
ARTICLE 5.04 FIRE PREVENTION CODE
Sec. 5.04.001 Title
This article shall be known as the Town of Highland Park Fire Prevention Code and may be cited as such.
Sec. 5.04.002 Purpose
The purpose of this article is to provide regulations governing fires, to provide precautions against fires and
other matters relating to the subject of fires within the Town and to provide regulations governing conditions
hazardous to life and property by fire, explosion, or the release of hazardous materials.
Sec. 5.04.003 Adopted
The International Fire Code 2015 edition is hereby adopted and made a part of this article for all purposes as
fully as if set out at length herein, subject to the following amendments thereto, to wit:
Sec. 5.04.004 Amendments
The sections of the International Fire Code 2015 edition that are amended, added, or deleted are as follows:
(1) Amend Section 101.1 to read as follows:
“101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of Highland Park, Texas,
hereinafter referred to as “this Code.””
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 183/505
(2) Amend Section 102.1, #3 to read as follows:
“102.1, #3 Scope. Existing structures, facilities and conditions when required in Chapter 11 or
in specific sections of this Code.”
(3) Amend Section 102.4 to read as follows:
“102.4 Application of other codes. The design and construction of new structures shall comply
with this Code, and other codes as applicable. Repairs, alterations, and additions to existing
structures shall comply with this Code and the International Building Code. This Code shall
apply to new and existing one- and two-family dwellings. The provisions of this Code apply to
buildings built under the International Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building
Code (IBC).”
(4) Amend Section 102.7 to read as follows:
“102.7 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this Code shall
be those that are listed in Chapter 80 and such codes and standards, when specifically adopted
by the Town, shall be considered part of the requirements of this Code to the prescribed extent
of each such reference. Where differences occur between the provisions of this Code and the
referenced standards, the provisions of this Code shall apply. Whenever amendments have been
adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be
considered to reference the amendments as well. Any reference to NFPA 70 or the ICC
Electrical Code shall mean the electrical code as adopted. The latest or the most recent standard
shall be used in this Code.”
(5) Amend Section 103.3 to read as follows:
“103.3 Deputies. In accordance with the prescribed procedures of this jurisdiction and with the
concurrence of the appointing authority, the Director of Public Safety shall have the authority to
appoint a deputy Fire Code Official, other related technical officers, inspectors and other
employees authorized to enforce provisions of this Code.”
(6) Add Section 104.10.2 to read as follows:
“104.10.2 Hazardous materials. The Fire Code Official is authorized to investigate the cause,
origin, and circumstances of any unauthorized releases of hazardous materials.”
(7) Add Section 104.10.2.1 to read as follows:
“104.10.2.1 Cost recovery. The Fire Code Official is authorized to recover from party(s)
responsible for any unauthorized release of hazardous material all costs incurred by the Town
for mitigation and, rendering the release harmless to people and property, including personnel
and equipment costs, securing the scene of any unauthorized release of hazardous materials,
removal of hazardous materials released, and cleanup of hazardous materials.”
(8) Amend Section 105.1.1 to read as follows:
“105.1.1 Permit required. Permits required by this Code shall be obtained from the Town's
Building Inspection Department. Permit fees, as established by Town Council resolution, shall
be paid prior to issuance of the permit. Issued permits shall be kept on the premises designated
therein at all times and shall be readily available for inspection by the Fire Code Official. A
permit must be obtained prior to the use of any permit or the installation of any construction.”
(9) Amend Section 105.3.3 to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 184/505
“105.3.3 Occupancy Prohibited before Approval. The building or structure shall not be
occupied prior to the Fire Code Official issuing a permit when required and conducting
associated inspections indicating the applicable provisions of this Code have been met.”
(10) Add Section 105.7.14 to read as follows:
“105.7.14 Smoke control or exhaust systems. Construction permits are required for smoke
control or exhaust systems as specified in section 909 and section 910 respectively.
Maintenance performed in accordance with this Code is not considered a modification and does
not require a permit.”
(11) Amend Section 105.7.19 to read as follows:
“105.7.19 Electronic access control system. Construction permits are required for the
installation or modification of an electronic access control system, as specified in Chapter 10. A
separate construction permit is required for the installation or modification of a fire alarm
system that may be connected to the access control system. Maintenance performed in
accordance with this Code is not considered a modification and does not require a permit.”
(12) Delete Section 108. Board of Appeals, and hold in reserve.
(13) Amend Section 109.4 to read as follows:
“109.4 Violation; penalties. The penalty for violation of this Code is set out in the Code of
Ordinances of the Town of Highland Park section 1.01.009.”
(14) Amend Section 111.4 to read as follows:
“111.4 Failure to comply. Any person who continues work contrary to a stop work order
commits a violation of this Code. It is an exception to this offense that the person was directed
to perform said work by a Fire Code Official.”
(15) Amend the definitions of ambulatory care facility, fire watch, fireworks, and repair garage
[sic] in section 202 to read as follows:
“Ambulatory Health Care Facility. Buildings or portions thereof used to provide medical,
surgical, psychiatric, nursing, or similar care on a less than 24-hour basis to persons who are
rendered incapable of self-preservation by the services provided.
This group may include but not be limited to the following:
- Dialysis centers
- Procedures involving sedation
- Sedation dentistry
- Surgery centers
- Colonic centers
- Psychiatric centers”
“Fire Watch. A temporary measure intended to ensure continuous and systematic surveillance
of a building or portion thereof by one or more qualified individuals or standby personnel when
required by the Fire Code Official, for the purposes of identifying and controlling fire hazards,
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 185/505
detecting early signs of unwanted fire, raising an alarm of fire and notifying the Fire
Department.”
“Fireworks. Any composition or device for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible
effect for entertainment purposes by combustion, deflagration, detonation, or activated by
ignition with a match; flame; heat producing device; electricity; spark; mechanical contact or
separation; or combination of substances; that meets the definition of 1.4G fireworks or 1.3G
fireworks as set forth herein.”
(16) Add definitions of defend in place, sleeping rooms, and upgraded or replaced fire alarm
system in section 202 to read as follows:
“Addressable Fire Detection System. Any system capable of providing identification of each
individual alarm-initiating device. The identification shall be in plain English and as descriptive
as possible to specifically identify the location of the device in alarm. The system shall have
alarm verification.”
“Analog Intelligent Addressable Fire Detection System. Any system capable of calculating a
change in value by directly measurable quantities (voltage, resistance, etc.) at the sensing point.
The physical analog may be conducted at the sensing point or at the main control panel. The
system shall be capable of compensating for long-term changes in sensor response while
maintaining a constant sensitivity. The compensation shall have a preset point at which a
detector maintenance signal shall be transmitted to the control panel. The sensor shall remain
capable of detecting and transmitting an alarm while in the maintenance mode.”
“Atrium. An opening connecting three or more stories . . . {Remainder of section unchanged}.”
“Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be the Director of Public Safety of the Town of Highland Park,
Texas or the Director's authorized representatives.”
“Town shall mean the Town of Highland Park, Texas.”
“Corporate Counsel shall be held to mean the Town Attorney for the Town of Highland Park.”
“Defend In Place. A method of emergency response that engages building components and
trained staff to provide occupant safety during an emergency. Emergency response involves
remaining in place, relocating within the building, or both, without evacuating the building.”
“Development Services Manager shall be held to mean the Development Services Manager for
the Town of Highland Park.”
“Fire Code Official is the Director of Public Safety, Fire Marshal or other designated authority
charged by the applicable governing body with the duties of administration and enforcement of
the Code, or a duly authorized representative.”
“Fleet Vehicle shall be held to mean a motor vehicle which is one of a group of motor vehicles,
owned or operated as a unit and used in the ongoing course of business.”
“High Rise Building. A building having floors used for human occupancy located more than 55
feet above the lowest level of Fire Department access.”
“Jurisdiction includes the corporate limits of the Town of Highland Park, Texas.”
“Police Chief shall mean the Director of Public Safety for the Town of Highland Park, Texas.”
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 186/505
“Repair Garage. This occupancy shall also include garages involved in minor repair,
modification and servicing of motor vehicles for items such as lube changes, inspections,
windshield repair or replacement, shocks, minor part replacement and other such minor
repairs.”
“Self-Service Storage Facility. Real property designed and used for the purpose of renting or
leasing individual storage spaces to customers for the purpose of storing and removing personal
property on a self-service basis.”
“Sleeping Rooms. A bedroom, bonus room or other habitable room that, although not
necessarily designed or intended for sleeping, typically contains furnishings such as couches or
reclining chairs where occupants may sleep.”
“Standby Personnel. Qualified fire service personnel, approved by the fire chief. When utilized,
the number required shall be as directed by the fire chief. Charges for utilization shall be as
normally calculated by the jurisdiction.”
“Upgraded or Replaced Fire Alarm System. A fire alarm system that is upgraded or replaced
includes, but is not limited to the following:
* Replacing one single board or fire alarm control unit component with a newer model
* Installing a new fire alarm control unit in addition to or in place of an existing one
* Conversion from a horn system to an emergency voice/alarm communication system
* Conversion from a conventional system to one that utilizes addressable or analog
devices
The following are not considered an upgrade or replacement:
* Firmware updates
* Software updates
* Replacing boards of the same model with chips utilizing the same or newer firmware”
(17) Add Section 305.6 to read as follows:
“305.6 Fire pits. All fire pits shall be constructed in a manner consistent with good engineering
and construction practices. Fire pits must not be installed within 10 feet of an adjoining
property line, 15 feet from a residence or 10 feet from any combustible material. The maximum
permissible diameter of a fire pit is 3 feet, unless approved by the Fire Code Official.”
(18) Amend Section 307.1.1 Prohibited open burning. Open burning shall be prohibited when
atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous.
Exception: Prescribed burning for the purpose of reducing the impact of wildland fire when
authorized by the Fire Code Official.
(19) Amend Section 307.2 to read as follows:
“307.2 Permit Required. A permit shall be obtained from the code official in accordance with
section 105.6 prior to kindling a fire for recognized silvicultural or range or wildlife
management practices, prevention or control of disease or pests, or open burning. Application
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 187/505
for such approval shall only be presented by and permits issued to the owner of the land upon
which the fire is to be kindled.
Examples of State or local law, or regulations referenced elsewhere in this section may include
but not be limited to the following:
1. Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) guidelines and/or restrictions.
2. State, county or local temporary or permanent bans on open burning.
3. Local written policies as established by the Fire Code Official.”
(20) Amend Section 307.3 to read as follows
307.3 Extinguishment Authority. The Fire Code Official is authorized to order the
extinguishment of any fire that creates or adds to a hazardous or objectionable situation,
regardless of whether a permit has been issued or not.
(21) Amend Section 307.4 to read as follows
307.4 Location. The location for open burning shall not be less than 300 feet (91 440 mm) from
any structure, and provisions shall be made to prevent the fire from spreading to within 300 feet
(91 440 mm) of any structure.
Exceptions: {No change.}
(22) Amend Exceptions in section 307.4.2 to read as follows:
“Exceptions:
1. Portable outdoor fireplaces used at one- and two-family dwellings.
2. Where buildings, balconies and decks are protected by an approved automatic
sprinkler system.”
(23) Add Sections 307.4.4 and 307.4.5 to read as follows:
“307.4.4 Permanent Outdoor Fire pit. Permanently installed outdoor fire pits for recreational
fire purposes shall not be installed within 10 feet of a structure or combustible material.
Exception: Permanently installed outdoor fireplaces constructed in accordance with the
International Building Code.
307.4.5 Trench Burns. Trench burns shall be conducted in air curtain trenches and in
accordance with section 307.2.”
(24) Amend Section 307.5 to read as follows:
307.5 Attendance. Open burning, trench burns, bonfires, recreational fires, and use of portable
outdoor fireplaces must be constantly attended until the... {Remainder of section unchanged}
(25) Amend Section 308.1.4 to read as follows:
“308.1.4 Open-flame cooking devices. Open-flame cooking devices, charcoal grills and other
similar devices used for cooking shall not be located or used on combustible balconies, decks,
or within 10 feet (3048 mm) of combustible construction.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 188/505
Exceptions:
1. One- and two-family dwellings, except that LP-gas containers are limited to a water
capacity not greater than 50 pounds (22.68 kg) [nominal 20 pound (9.08 kg) LP-gas
capacity] with an aggregate LP-gas capacity not to exceed 100 lbs (5 containers).
2. Where buildings, balconies and decks are protected by an approved automatic
sprinkler system that provides full coverage of the balcony or deck area, and
3. A labeled gas cut-off for the gas appliance supply line, with non-removable handle, is
located inside the residential unit within six feet of the doorway to the balcony or deck,
and is able to be operated by any person without additional tools, knowledge, or devices,
and
4. A minimum of five feet of clearance is maintained between any open flame and the
ceiling above {remainder of text unchanged}”
(26) Amend Exception number 3 in section 308.1.6.2 to read as follows:
“Exceptions:
3. Torches or flame-producing devices in accordance with section 308.4.”
(27) Amend Section 308.1.6.3 to read as follows:
“308.1.6.3 Sky Lanterns and Luminaries. A person shall not place, release, or cause to be
released unmanned free-floating devices containing an open flame or other heat source, such as,
but not limited to, a sky lantern or luminaria.”
(28) Amend Section 311.5 to read as follows:
“311.5 Placards. The Fire Code Official is authorized to require marking of any vacant or
abandoned buildings or structures determined to be unsafe pursuant to section 110 of this Code
relating to structural or interior hazards, and shall be marked as required by section 311.5.1
through 311.5.5.”
(29) Amend Section 401.3.2 to read as follows:
“401.3.2. Alarm Activations. Upon activation of a fire alarm signal, employees or staff shall
immediately notify the Fire Department. Employees or staff shall go to the lowest level of exit
discharge within the building and be prepared to evacuate the building as needed.”
(30) Amend Section 403.5 to read as follows:
“403.5 Group E Occupancies. An approved fire safety and evacuation plan in accordance with
section 404 shall be prepared and maintained for Group E occupancies and for buildings
containing both a Group E occupancy and an atrium. A diagram depicting two evacuation
routes shall be posted in a conspicuous location in each classroom. Group E occupancies shall
also comply with sections 403.5.1 through 403.5.3.”
(31) Amend Section 404.2.2; add Number 4.10 to read as follows:
“4.10 Fire extinguishing system controls.”
(32) Amend Section 405.4 to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 189/505
“405.4 Time. The Fire Code Official may require an evacuation drill at any time. Drills shall be
held at unexpected times and under varying conditions to simulate the unusual conditions that
occur in case of fire.”
(33) Amend Section 501.4 to read as follows:
“501.4 Timing of installation. When fire apparatus access roads or a water supply for fire
protection is required to be installed for any structure or development, they shall be installed,
tested, and approved prior to the time of which construction has progressed beyond completion
of the foundation of any structure.”
(34) Add the following sentence to the end of the first paragraph in section 503.1.1:
“503.1.1. Except for one- or two-family dwellings, the path of measurement shall be along a
minimum of a ten feet (10') wide unobstructed pathway around the external walls of the
structure.”
(35) Add Section 503.1.4 to read as follows:
“503.1.4 Fire Lane Timing. Prior to the issuance of a building permit, fire apparatus access
roads (fire lanes) required by this section shall be designated on a site plan and a minimum of
two (2) sets of said plans shall be submitted to the fire marshal for approval. No structure shall
be allowed to progress beyond the foundation until the required fire apparatus access roads (fire
lanes) are serviceable and acceptable.”
(36) Add Section 503.1.5 to read as follows:
“503.1.5 Existing Fire Lanes. Any fire lane that has been established prior to passage of the
ordinance from which this article is derived and designated by the Fire Marshal or that has been
established by a separate ordinance shall be a fire lane for all intents and purposes and shall be
maintained as required by this Code.”
(37) Add Section 503.1.6 to read as follows:
“Section 503.1.6. Maintenance Generally. The Fire Code Official shall report any negligent
surface conditions, markings, or signs to the owner or person in control of property upon which
a fire lane exists and shall issue instructions for repair. It shall be unlawful for the owner or
person in control of property upon which a fire lane has been designated or exists to fail to
maintain the surface of the fire lane in good condition, free of potholes and other unapproved
obstructions. It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in control of property on which a fire
lane has been designated or exists to fail to maintain any marking of the fire lane as required by
this Code in a condition which is not clearly legible.”
(38) Amend Section 503.2.1 to read as follows:
“503.2.1 Dimensions. Fire apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed width of not less
than 24 feet (7315mm), except for approved security gates in accordance with section 503.6,
and an unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than 14 feet (4267 mm).
Exception: Vertical clearance may be reduced provided such reduction does not impair access
by fire apparatus and approved signs are installed and maintained indicating the established
vertical clearance when approved.”
(39) Amend Section 503.2.2 to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 190/505
“503.2.2 Authority. The Fire Code Official shall have the authority to require an increase in the
minimum access widths and vertical clearances where they are inadequate for fire or rescue
operations.”
(40) Amend Section 503.2.3 to read as follows:
“503.2.3 Surface. Fire apparatus access roads shall be designed and maintained to support
imposed loads of 80,000 lbs. for fire apparatus and shall be surfaced so as to provide allweather
driving capabilities.”
(41) Amend Section 503.2.4 to read as follows:
“503.2.4 Turning Radius. The turning radius of a Fire Department access road shall be a
minimum inside turning radius of twenty-five feet (25') and a minimum outside turning radius
of fifty feet (50').”
(42) Amend Section 503.3 to read as follows:
“503.3 Marking. Striping, signs, or other markings, when approved by the Fire Code Official,
shall be provided for fire apparatus access roads to identify such roads or prohibit the
obstruction thereof. Striping, signs and other markings shall be maintained in a clean and
legible condition at all times and be replaced or repaired when necessary to provide adequate
visibility.
(1) Striping - Fire apparatus access roads shall be continuously marked by painted lines
of red traffic paint six inches (6") in width to show the boundaries of the lane. The words
“NO PARKING FIRE LANE” or “FIRE LANE NO PARKING” shall appear in four inch
(4") white letters at 25 feet intervals on the red border markings along both sides of the
fire lanes. Where a curb is available, the striping shall be on the vertical face of the curb.
(2) Signs - Signs shall read “NO PARKING FIRE LANE” or “FIRE LANE NO
PARKING” and shall be twelve inches (12") wide and eighteen inches (18") high. Signs
shall be painted on a white background with letters and borders in red, using not less than
two-inch (2") lettering. Signs shall be permanently affixed to a stationary post and the
bottom of the sign shall be six feet, six inches (6'6") above finished grade. Signs shall be
spaced not more than fifty feet (50') apart along both sides of the fire lane. Signs may be
installed on permanent buildings or walls or as approved by the Fire Chief.”
(43) Amend Section 503.4 to read as follows:
“503.4 Obstruction of fire apparatus access roads. Fire apparatus access roads shall not be
obstructed in any manner, including the parking of vehicles. The minimum widths and
clearances established in section 503.2.1 and any area marked as a fire lane as described in
section 503.3 shall be maintained at all times. The operator of a premises shall maintain, free of
obstruction, all fire lanes on his premises. No person may mark, post or otherwise identify a
non-fire lane private vehicular passageway as a fire lane or in such a manner as tends to create
confusion as to whether the passageway is a fire lane. Any unauthorized vehicle on a fire lane
is:
(1) Subject to removal by the operator of the premises, with the expense of removal and
storage to be borne by the registered owner of the vehicle,
(2) Subject to citation, as well as removal, by the Fire Marshal or a police officer, and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 191/505
(3) Prima facie evidence that the person in whose name the vehicle is registered is
guilty of a violation of the parking provisions of this section.”
(44) Amend Section 505.1 to read as follows:
“505.1 Address identification. New and existing buildings shall be provided with approved
address identification. The address identification shall be legible and placed in a position that is
visible from the street or road fronting the property. Address identification characters shall
contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numbers or alphabetical
letters. Numbers shall not be spelled out. Each character shall be not less than six inches (152.4
mm) high with a minimum stroke width of one-half inch (12.7 mm). Where required by the Fire
Code Official, address numbers shall be provided in additional approved locations to facilitate
emergency response. Where access is by means of a private road, buildings do not immediately
front a street, and/or the building cannot be viewed from the public way, a monument, pole or
other sign with approved six-inch (152.4 mm) height building numerals or addresses and fourinch
(101.6 mm) height suite/apartment numerals of a color contrasting with the background of
the building or other approved means shall be used to identify the structure. Numerals or
addresses shall be posted on a minimum twenty-inch (508 mm) by thirty-inch (762 mm) (20" x
30") background on border. Address identification shall be maintained.
Exception: R-3 Single-Family occupancies shall have approved numerals of a minimum three
and one-half inches (88.9 mm) in height and a color contrasting with the background clearly
visible and legible from the street fronting the property and rear alleyway where such alleyway
exists.”
(45) Amend Section 507.4 to read as follows:
“507.4 Water supply test date and information. The water supply test used for hydraulic
calculation of fire protection systems shall be conducted in accordance with NFPA 291
“Recommended Practice for Fire Flow Testing and Marking of Hydrants” and within one year
of sprinkler plan submittal. The Fire Code Official shall be notified prior to the water supply
test. Water supply tests shall be witnessed by the Fire Code Official, as required. The exact
location of the static/residual hydrant and the flow hydrant shall be indicated on the design
drawings. All fire protection plan submittals shall be accompanied by a hard copy of the water
flow test report, or as approved by the Fire Code Official. The report must indicate the
dominant water tank level at the time of the test and the maximum and minimum operating
levels of the tank, as well, or identify applicable water supply fluctuation. The licensed
contractor must then design the fire protection system based on this fluctuation information, as
per the applicable referenced NFPA standard. Reference section 903.3.5 for additional design
requirements.
Exception: Licensed contractors may elect to use the routinely updated water supply test
information generated by the Town's licensed water supply test contractor, and made available
by the Fire Code Official for contractors to reference.”
(46) Amend Section 507.5.4 to read as follows:
“507.5.4 Obstruction. Unobstructed access to fire hydrants shall be maintained at all times.
Posts, fences, vehicles, growth, trash, storage and other materials or objects shall not be placed
or kept near fire hydrants, Fire Department inlet connections or fire protection system control
valves in a manner that would prevent such equipment or fire hydrants from being immediately
discernible. The Fire Department shall not be deterred or hindered from gaining immediate
access to fire protection equipment or fire hydrants.”
(47) Add Section 507.5.7 to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 192/505
“507.5.7 Fire Department Connection. The Fire Department connection for a sprinkler and/or a
standpipe connection shall be within twenty-five feet (25') of a dedicated street or fire apparatus
access road or approved by the Fire Code Official.”
(48) Add Section 509.1.2 to read as follows:
“509.1.2 Sign Requirements. Unless more stringent requirements apply, lettering for signs
required by this section shall have a minimum height of two inches (2") (50.8 mm) when
located inside a building and four inches (4") (101.6 mm) when located outside, or as approved
by the Fire Code Official. The letters shall be of a color that contrasts with the background.”
(49) Amend Section 603.3.2.1 to read as follows:
“603.3.2.1 Quantity limits. One or more fuel oil storage tanks containing Class II or III
combustible liquid shall be permitted in a building. The aggregate capacity of all such tanks
shall not exceed 660 gallons (2498 L).
Exception: The aggregate capacity limit shall be permitted to be increased to 3,000 gallons (11
356 L) in accordance with all requirements of Chapter 57.”
(50) Add Section 603.3.2.1.1.1 to read as follows:
“The storage of flammable or combustible liquids in aboveground tanks is prohibited in
residential areas.”
(51) Amend Section 603.3.2.2 to read as follows:
“603.3.2.2 Restricted use and connection. Tanks installed in accordance with section 603.3.2
shall be used only to supply fuel oil to fuel-burning equipment installed in accordance with
section 603.3.2.4. Connections between tanks and equipment supplied by such tanks shall be
made using closed piping systems.”
(52) Amend Section 604 to read as follows:
[604.1]
“604.1.1 Stationary Generators. Stationary emergency and standby power generators
required by this code shall be listed in accordance with UL 2200.
604.1.2 Installation. Emergency power systems and standby power systems shall be
installed in accordance with the International Building Code, NFPA 70, NFPA 110 and
NFPA 111. Existing installations shall be maintained in accordance with the original
approval, except as specified in Chapter 11.
604.1.3 through 604.1.8 {No change.}
604.1.9 Critical Operations Power Systems (COPS). For Critical Operations Power
Systems necessary to maintain continuous power supply to facilities or parts of facilities
that require continuous operation for the reasons of public safety, emergency
management, national security, or business continuity, see NFPA 70.
604.2 Where Required. Emergency and standby power systems shall be provided where
required by sections 604.2.1 through 604.2.24 or elsewhere identified in this code or any other
referenced code.
604.2.1 through 604.2.3 {No change.}
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 193/505
604.2.4 Emergency Voice/Alarm Communications Systems. Emergency power shall be
provided for emergency voice/alarm communications systems in the following
occupancies, or as specified elsewhere in this code, as required in section 907.5.2.2.5. The
system shall be capable of powering the required load for a duration of not less than 24
hours, as required in NFPA 72.
Covered and Open Malls, section 907.2.20 and 914.2.3
Group A Occupancies, sections 907.2.1 and 907.5.2.2.4.
Special Amusement Buildings, section 907.2.12.3
High-rise Buildings, section 907.2.13
Atriums, section 907.2.14
Deep Underground Buildings, section 907.2.19
604.2.5 through 604.2.11 {No change.}
604.2.12 Means of Egress Illumination. Emergency power shall be provided for means of
egress illumination in accordance with sections 1008.3 and 1104.5.1. (90 minutes)
604.2.13 Membrane Structures. Emergency power shall be provided for exit signs in
temporary tents and membrane structures in accordance with section 3103.12.6.1. (90
minutes) Standby power shall be provided for auxiliary inflation systems in permanent
membrane structures in accordance with section 2702 of the International Building Code.
(4 hours) Auxiliary inflation systems shall be provided in temporary air-supported and airinflated
membrane structures in accordance with section 3103.10.4.
604.2.14 {No change.}
604.2.15 Smoke Control Systems. Standby power shall be provided for smoke control
systems in the following occupancies, or as specified elsewhere in this code, as required
in section 909.11:
Covered Mall Building, International Building Code, section 402.7
Atriums, International Building Code, section 404.7
Underground Buildings, International Building Code, section 405.8
Group I-3, International Building Code, section 408.4.2
Stages, International Building Code, section 410.3.7.2
Special Amusement Buildings (as applicable to Group As), International Building
Code, section 411.1
Smoke Protected Seating, section 1029.6.2.1
604.2.17 Covered and Open Mall Buildings. Emergency power shall be provided in
accordance with section 907.2.20 and 914.2.3.
604.2.18 Airport Traffic-Control Towers. A standby power system shall be provided in
airport traffic-control towers more than 65 feet in height. Power shall be provided to the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 194/505
following equipment:
1. Pressurization equipment, mechanical equipment and lighting.
2. Elevator operating equipment.
3. Fire alarm and smoke detection systems.
604.2.19 Smokeproof Enclosures and Stair Pressurization Alternative. Standby power
shall be provided for smokeproof enclosures, stair pressurization alternative and
associated automatic fire detection systems as required by the International Building
Code, section 909.20.6.2.
604.2.20 Elevator Pressurization. Standby power shall be provided for elevator
pressurization system as required by the International Building Code, section 909.21.5.
604.2.21 Elimination of Smoke Dampers in Shaft Penetrations. Standby power shall be
provided when eliminating the smoke dampers in ducts penetrating shafts in accordance
with the International Building Code, section 717.5.3, exception 2.3.
604.2.22 Common Exhaust Systems for Clothes Dryers. Standby power shall be provided
for common exhaust systems for clothes dryers located in multi-story structures in
accordance with the International Mechanical Code, section 504.10, Item 7.
604.2.23 Hydrogen Cutoff Rooms. Standby power shall be provided for mechanical
ventilation and gas detection systems of Hydrogen Cutoff Rooms in accordance with the
International Building Code, section 421.8.
604.2.24 Means of Egress Illumination in Existing Buildings. Emergency power shall be
provided for means of egress illumination in accordance with section 1104.5 when
required by the Fire Code Official. (90 minutes in I-2, 60 minutes elsewhere.)
604.3 through 604.7 {No change.}
604.8 Energy Time Duration. Unless a time limit is specified by the Fire Code Official, in this
chapter or elsewhere in this code, or in any other referenced code or standard, the emergency
and standby power system shall be supplied with enough fuel or energy storage capacity for not
less than 2-hour full-demand operation of the system.
Exception: Where the system is supplied with natural gas from a utility provider and is
approved.”
(53) Amend section 609.2 to read as follows:
“609.2 Where Required. A Type I hood shall be installed at or above all commercial cooking
appliances and domestic cooking appliances used for commercial purposes that produce grease
vapors, including but not limited to cooking equipment used in fixed, mobile, or temporary
concessions, such as trucks, buses, trailers, pavilions, or any form of roofed enclosure, as
required by the Fire Code Official.
Exceptions:
1. Tents, as provided for in Chapter 31.
2. {No change.}
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 195/505
Additionally, fuel gas and power provided for such cooking appliances shall be interlocked with
the extinguishing system, as required by section 904.12.2. Fuel gas containers and piping/hose
shall be properly maintained in good working order and in accordance with all applicable
regulations.”
(54) Amend Section 704.1 to read as follows:
“704.1 Enclosure. Interior vertical shafts, including but not limited to stairways, elevator hoistways,
service and utility shafts, that connect two or more stories of a building shall be enclosed
or protected in accordance with the codes in effect at the time of construction but, regardless of
when constructed, not less than as required in Chapter 11. New floor openings in existing
buildings shall comply with the International Building Code.”
(55) Amend Section 807.3 to read as follows:
“807.3 Combustible Decorative Materials. In occupancies in Groups A, E, I, and R-1, and
dormitories in Group R-2, curtains, draperies, fabric hangings and other similar combustible
decorative materials suspended from walls or ceilings shall comply with section 807.4 and shall
not exceed 10 percent of the specific wall or ceiling area to which they are attached.”
(56) Amend Section 807.5.2.2 and 807.5.2.3 to read as follows:
“807.5.2.2 Artwork in Corridors. Artwork and teaching materials shall be limited on the walls
of corridors to not more than 20 percent of the wall area. Such materials shall not be continuous
from floor to ceiling or wall to wall. Curtains, draperies, wall hangings, and other decorative
material suspended from the walls or ceilings shall meet the flame propagation performance
criteria of NFPA 701 in accordance with section 807 or be noncombustible.
Exception: Corridors protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system installed in
accordance with section 903.3.1.1 shall be limited to 50 percent of the wall area.
807.5.2.3 Artwork in Classrooms. Artwork and teaching materials shall be limited on walls of
classrooms to not more than 50 percent of the specific wall area to which they are attached.
Curtains, draperies, wall hangings and other decorative material suspended from the walls or
ceilings shall meet the flame propagation performance criteria of NFPA 701 in accordance with
section 807 or be noncombustible.”
(57) Amend Section 901.6.1.1 inspection, testing, and maintenance to read as follows:
“901.6.1.1 Standpipe Testing. Building owners/managers must maintain and test standpipe
systems as per NFPA 25 requirements. The following additional requirements shall be applied
to the testing that is required every 5 years:
1. The piping between the Fire Department Connection (FDC) and the standpipe shall
be hydrostatically tested for all FDCs on any type of standpipe system. Hydrostatic testing
shall also be conducted in accordance with NFPA 25 requirements for the different types
of standpipe systems.
2. For any manual (dry or wet) standpipe system not having an automatic water supply
capable of flowing water through the standpipe, the tester shall connect hose from a fire
hydrant or portable pumping system (as approved by the Fire Code Official) to each FDC,
and flow water through the standpipe system to the roof outlet to verify that each inlet
connection functions properly. There are no required pressure criteria at the outlet. Verify
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 196/505
that check valves function properly and that there are no closed control valves on the
system.
3. Any pressure relief, reducing, or control valves shall be tested in accordance with the
requirements of NFPA 25. All hose valves shall be exercised.
4. If the FDC is not already provided with approved caps, the contractor shall install
such caps for all FDCs as required by the Fire Code Official.
5. Upon successful completion of standpipe test, place a blue tag (as per Texas
Administrative Code, Fire Sprinkler Rules for Inspection, Test and Maintenance Service
(ITM) Tag) at the bottom of each standpipe riser in the building. The tag shall be checkmarked
as “Fifth Year” for Type of ITM, and the note on the back of the tag shall read “5
Year Standpipe Test” at a minimum.
6. The procedures required by Texas Administrative Code Fire Sprinkler Rules with
regard to Yellow Tags and Red Tags or any deficiencies noted during the testing,
including the required notification of the local Authority Having Jurisdiction (Fire Code
Official) shall be followed.
7. Additionally, records of the testing shall be maintained by the owner and contractor,
if applicable, as required by the State Rules mentioned above and NFPA 25.
8. Standpipe system tests where water will be flowed external to the building shall not
be conducted during freezing conditions or during the day prior to expected night time
freezing conditions.
9. Contact the Fire Code Official for requests to remove existing fire hose from Class II
and III standpipe systems where employees are not trained in the utilization of this
firefighting equipment. All standpipe hose valves must remain in place and be provided
with an approved cap and chain when approval is given to remove hose by the Fire Code
Official.”
(58) Add Section 901.6.3 to read as follows:
“901.6.3 False Alarms and Nuisance Alarms. False alarms and nuisance alarms shall not be
given, signaled or transmitted or caused or permitted to be given, signaled or transmitted in any
manner.”
(59) Amend Section 901.7 to read as follows:
“901.7 Systems Out of Service. Where a required fire protection system is out of service or in
the event of an excessive number of activations, the Fire Department and the Fire Code Official
shall be notified immediately and, where required by the Fire Code Official, the building shall
either be evacuated or an approved fire watch shall be provided for all occupants left
unprotected by the shut down until the fire protection system has been returned to service.
{Remainder of section unchanged}”
(60) Add Section 901.8.2 to read as follows:
“901.8.2 Removal of Occupant-use Hose Lines. The Fire Code Official is authorized to permit
the removal of occupant-use hose lines and hose valves where all of the following conditions
exist:
1. The hose line(s) would not be utilized by trained personnel or the Fire Department.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 197/505
2. If the occupant-use hose lines are removed, but the hose valves are required to
remain as per the Fire Code Official, such shall be compatible with local Fire Department
fittings.”
(61) Amend Section 901.10 to read as follows:
“901.10 Termination or change of monitoring service. For fire alarm systems required to be
monitored by this code, notice shall be made to the Fire Code Official, Town Alarm
Coordinator or their designee whenever:
1. Alarm monitoring services are terminated.
2. A change in the alarm monitoring provider occurs.
3. The building is being vacated, temporarily or permanently, for any reason.
Notice shall be made in writing or by an accepted form of electronic communication by the
building owner and alarm service provider prior to any listed occurrence.”
(62) Amend Section 903.1 to read as follows:
“903.1.1 Alternative Protection. Alternative automatic fire-extinguishing systems complying
with section 904 shall be permitted in addition to automatic sprinkler protection where
recognized by the applicable standard or as approved by the Fire Code Official.”
“903.1.2 No Registration Certificate Required. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
Code, so long as section 6003.003 of the Texas Insurance Code remains effective, fire
protection sprinkler system contractors are not required to obtain registration certificates from
the Town, but may be required to provide the Fire Code Official with proof of any registration
certificate that is required by the State of Texas or the United States.”
(63) Add Section 903.1.2 to read as follows:
“903.1.2 Residential Sprinkler Systems. Unless specifically allowed by this Code or the
International Building Code, residential sprinkler systems installed in accordance with NFPA
13D or 13R shall not be recognized for the purposes of exceptions or reductions, commonly
referred to as “trade-offs,” permitted by other requirements of this Code. In addition, all
residential sprinkler systems installed in accordance with NFPA 13D or 13R must include attic
sprinkler protection to be recognized for the purposes of such trade-offs permitted by other
requirements of this Code.”
(64) Amend Section 903.2 by adding the following paragraph to read as follows:
“Automatic Sprinklers shall not be installed in elevator machine rooms, elevator machine
spaces, and elevator hoistways, other than pits where such sprinklers would not necessitate
shunt trip requirements under any circumstances. Storage shall not be allowed within the
elevator machine room. Signage shall be provided at the entry doors to the elevator machine
room indicating “ELEVATOR MACHINERY - NO STORAGE ALLOWED.”
(65) Delete the telecom area exception in section 903.2.
(66) Amend Section 903.2.1.1 to read as follows:
“903.2.1.1 Group A-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout a fire area
containing Group A-1 Occupancies.”
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 198/505
(67) Amend Section 903.2.1.2 to read as follows:
“903.2.1.2 Group A-2. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout a fire area
containing Group A-2 Occupancies.”
(68) Amend Section 903.2.1.3 to read as follow:
“903.2.1.3 Group A-3. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout a fire area
containing Group A-3 Occupancies.”
(69) Amend Section 903.2.1.4 to read as follows:
“903.2.1.4 Group A-4. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout a fire area
containing Group A-4 Occupancies.”
(70) Amend Section 903.2.2 to read as follows:
“903.2.2 Group B ambulatory health care facilities. An automatic sprinkler system shall be
provided throughout a fire area containing Group B ambulatory health care facility occupancy.”
(71) Amend Section 903.2.3 to read as follows:
“903.2.3 Group E. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all Group E
Occupancies.”
(72) Amend Section 903.2.4 to read as follows:
“903.2.4 Group F-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings
containing Group F-1 Occupancies.”
(73) Amend Section 903.2.7 to read as follows:
“903.2.7 Group M. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout buildings
containing Group M Occupancies.”
(74) Amend Section 903.2.8 to read as follows:
“903.2.8 Group R. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with section 903.3.1.1
shall be provided throughout all buildings with a Group R fire area.”
(75) Amend Section 903.2.9 to read as follows:
“903.2.9 Group S-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings
containing Group S-1 Occupancies.”
(76) Amend Section 903.2.9.1 to read as follows:
“903.2.9.1 Repair Garages. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all
buildings used as repair garages in accordance with the International Building Code.”
(77) Amend Section 903.2.9.2 to read as follows:
“903.2.9.2 Bulk Storage of Tires. Buildings and structures with areas for the storage of tires
shall be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with section
903.3.1.1.”
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 199/505
(78) Add Section 903.2.9.3 to read as follows:
“903.2.9.3 Self-service Storage Facility. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed
throughout all self-service storage facilities.”
(79) Amend Section 903.2.10 to read as follows:
“903.2.10 Group S-2. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout buildings
classified as enclosed parking garages in accordance with section 406.6 of the International
Building Code or where located beneath other groups.”
(80) Amend Section 903.2.10.1 Commercial parking garages to read as follows:
“903.2.10.1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout buildings used for
storage of commercial trucks or buses.”
(81) Amend Section 903.2.11.1 to read as follows:
“903.2.11.1. Stories without openings. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed in every
story or basement of all buildings without openings.”
(82) Amend Section 903.2.11.3 to read as follows:
“903.2.11.3 Buildings 35 feet or more in height. An automatic sprinkler system shall be
installed throughout buildings that have one or more stories other than penthouses in
compliance with section 1510 of the International Building Code, located 35 feet (10,668 mm)
or more above the lowest level of Fire Department vehicle access, measured to the finished
floor.
Exception: Open parking structures in compliance with section 406.5 of the International
Building Code, having no other occupancies above the subject garage.”
(83) Amend Section 903.2.11.7 to read as follows:
“903.2.11.7 High-Piled Combustible Storage. For any building with a clear height exceeding 12
feet (4572 mm), see Chapter 32 to determine if those provisions apply.”
(84) Add Section 903.2.11.8 to read as follows:
“903.2.11.8 Spray Booths and Rooms. New and existing spray booths and spraying rooms shall
be protected by an approved automatic fire-extinguishing system.”
(85) Amend Section 903.2.11.9 to read as follows:
“903.2.11.9 Sprinkler System for New Construction. An automatic sprinkler system shall be
installed throughout all buildings. For the purpose of this provision, firewalls shall not define
separate buildings. Detached Group U occupancies 300 square feet or larger are required to be
furnished with an automatic fire sprinkler system.
Exceptions:
1. Covered walkways or open canopies above fuel dispensing pumps, bus stops or other
similar structures intended only for the temporary protection of persons from inclement
weather, but not including patios attached to buildings.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 200/505
2. Temporary buildings housing construction materials and offices not exceeding 500
square feet for 180 days. Additional time may be granted by the Fire Code Official or
Development Services Manager on a case by case basis.
3. Open parking structures in compliance with section 406.3 of the International
Building Code.
4. Guard houses for commercial and residential development.
5. Gazebos and ramadas for residential and public use.
6. Independent restroom buildings associated with golf courses, construction sites,
parks and similar uses.”
(86) Amend Section 903.2.11.10 to read as follows:
“903.2.11.10 Existing Buildings. The owner of any building shall be required to install an
automatic sprinkler system at such time as the owner(s) constructs an addition or enlargement
to the building if the total square footage of such an addition, when combined with the total
square footage of all previous additions and enlargements to the building, exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of the original floor area, regardless of fire area, area separation walls, or fire walls. An
automatic sprinkler system is required to be installed in existing commercial and multi-family
residential buildings when the alteration exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the taxable replacement
value, as determined by the code official. The sprinkler system will only be required in the
proposed addition, except when interior demolition and/or remodeling occurs in the original
structure adjacent to the proposed addition, and the existing frame structure is exposed,
therefore providing access for installation of such automatic sprinkler system. Based upon the
extent of the work, the code official will have the final determination as to require the sprinkler
system to be installed in the altered and/or remodeled original structure.”
(87) Amend Section 903.3.1.1.1 to read as follows:
“903.3.1.1.1 Exempt locations. When approved by the Fire Code Official, automatic sprinklers
shall not be required in the following rooms or areas where such . . . {bulk of section
unchanged} . . . because it is damp, of fire-resistance-rated construction or contains electrical
equipment.
1. Any room where the application of water, or flame and water, constitutes a serious
life or fire hazard.
2. Any room or space where sprinklers are considered undesirable because of the nature
of the contents, when approved by the code official.
3. Generator and transformer rooms, under the direct control of a public utility,
separated from the remainder of the building by walls and floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling
assemblies having a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours.”
(88) Add Section 903.3.1.2.3 to read as follows:
[F] “Section 903.3.1.2.3 Attics and Attached Garages. Sprinkler protection is required in attic
spaces of such buildings two or more stories in height, in accordance with NFPA 13 and/or
NFPA 13R requirements, and attached garages.”
(89) Amend Section 903.3.1.3 to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 201/505
“903.3.1.3 NFPA 13D Sprinkler Systems. Automatic sprinkler systems installed in one- and
two-family dwellings; Group R-3; Group R-4 Condition 1 and townhouses shall be permitted to
be installed throughout in accordance with NFPA 13D.”
(90) Add Section 903.3.1.4 to read as follows:
[F] “903.3.1.4 Freeze protection. Freeze protection systems for automatic fire sprinkler systems
shall be in accordance with the requirements of the applicable referenced NFPA standard and
this section.
903.3.1.4.1 Attics. Only dry-pipe, preaction, or listed antifreeze automatic fire sprinkler
systems shall be allowed to protect attic spaces.
Exception: Wet-pipe fire sprinkler systems shall be allowed to protect non-ventilated
attic spaces where:
1. The attic sprinklers are supplied by a separate floor control valve assembly to
allow ease of draining the attic system without impairing sprinklers throughout the
rest of the building, and
2. Adequate heat shall be provided for freeze protection as per the applicable
referenced NFPA standard, and
3. The attic space is a part of the building's thermal, or heat, envelope, such that
insulation is provided at the roof deck, rather than at the ceiling level.
903.3.1.4.2 Heat Trace/Insulation. Heat trace/insulation shall only be allowed where
approved by the Fire Code Official for small sections of large diameter water-filled pipe.”
(91) Add Section 903.3.1.5 to read as follows:
“903.3.1.5 Installation. Automatic sprinklers and standpipe systems shall be installed with the
following:
1. A single underground supply and point for the Fire Department Connection (FDC)
shall be provided for all buildings.
2. All inspectors test ball drips, and main drains shall be piped directly to the outside of
the building.
3. Fire pumps shall be equipped with a properly sized test header.
4. Underground piping shall have a 10-foot minimum separation from all other utilities
and placed in a separate trench. Underground piping within five feet of the building may
be combined with other utilities for the entrance to the building.
5. Porches and balconies shall be fire-sprinkled on all Group R-2 and R-3 occupancies.
6. A minimum of four feet of pipe between the check valve and inside the wall of the
FDC.”
(92) Add a second paragraph to Section 903.3.5 to read as follows:
“Water supply as required for such systems shall be provided in conformance with the supply
requirements of the respective standards; however, every water-based fire protection system
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 202/505
shall be designed with a 10 psi safety factor. Reference section 507.4 for additional design
requirements.”
(93) Amend Section 903.3.5.1 to read as follows:
“903.3.5.1. Connections for Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems. Automatic fire sprinkler
systems in residential structures with more than two individual units and all nonresidential
structures shall have a separate connection to the potable water supply. Installation plans for the
underground supply main shall be submitted for review and approval. The underground supply
main shall be installed in accordance with this Code, National Fire Protection Association
Standard 24, and State Fire Marshal's Office guidelines. The size of the connection shall be
reviewed and approved by the Fire Code Official prior to installation. The water supply for two
individual units and a single-family residence can be installed, in accordance with this section.
The minimum size of a water line supplying a one- and two-family residence is 1-1/4 inch
diameter. The potable water supply shall be protected against backflow in accordance with the
requirements of this section and the International Plumbing Code.”
(94) Delete Section 903.3.5.1.1.
(95) Delete Section 903.3.5.1.2.
(96) Add Section 903.3.7 to read as follows:
“903.3.7 Fire Department Connection Attachment. All Fire Department connection outlets
installed for the automatic sprinkler systems that are 1-1/2 inches in diameter shall be installed
with iron pipe threading (IPT). Outlets that are 2-1/2 inches in diameter shall be American
National Fire Hose Connection Screw Threads (NH). When a reducer is added to a system from
a 2-1/2 inch to 1-1/2 inch outlet, the 2-1/2 inch diameter outlet must have NH screw threads and
the 1-1/2 inch diameter outlet shall have IPT threading.”
(97) Amend Section 903.4 to read as follows:
“903.4 Sprinkler system monitoring and alarms. All valves controlling the water supply for
automatic sprinkler systems, pumps, tanks, water levels and temperatures, critical air pressures,
and water flow switches on all sprinkler systems shall be electrically supervised by a listed fire
alarm control unit.
Exceptions:
1. Jockey-pump control valves that are sealed or locked in the open position.
2. Control valves to commercial kitchen hoods, paint spray booths or dip tanks that are
sealed or locked in the open position.
3. Valves controlling the fuel supply to fire pump engines that are sealed or locked in
the open position.
4. Trim valves to pressure switches in dry, pre-action and deluge sprinkler systems that
are sealed or locked in the open position.”
(98) Add a second paragraph to section 903.4, after the Exceptions, to read as follows:
“Sprinkler and standpipe system water-flow detectors shall be provided for each floor tap to the
sprinkler system and shall cause an alarm upon detection of water flow for more than 45
seconds. All control valves in the sprinkler and standpipe systems except for Fire Department
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 203/505
hose connection valves shall be electrically supervised to initiate a supervisory signal at the
central station upon tampering.”
(99) Add a second paragraph to section 903.4.2, to read as follows:
“The alarm device required on the exterior of the building shall be a weatherproof horn/strobe
notification appliance with a minimum 75 candela strobe rating, installed as close as practical to
the Fire Department connection.”
(100) Replace Section 903.6.3 with section 2404 Spray booths and rooms; Fire Protection:
“2404.4 Fire Protection. Spray booths and spray rooms shall be protected by an approved
automatic fire-extinguishing system complying with Chapter 9. Protection shall also extend to
exhaust plenums, exhaust ducts and both sides of dry filters when such filters are used.”
(101) Amend Section 905.2 to read as follows:
“905.2 Installation Standard. Standpipe systems shall be installed in accordance with this
section and NFPA 14. Manual dry standpipe systems shall be supervised with a minimum of 10
psig and a maximum of 40 psig air pressure with a high/low alarm.”
(102) Amend Section 905.3.1 to read as follows:
“905.3.1 Height. Class III standpipe systems shall be installed throughout buildings where the
floor level of the highest story is located more than 30 feet (9144 mm) or 2 stories above the
lowest level of the Fire Department vehicle access, or where the floor level of the lowest story
is located 30 feet (9144 mm) or 2 stories below the highest level of Fire Department vehicle
access {remainder unchanged}.”
(103) Delete exceptions 1 and 2 from section 905.3.2.
(104) Add Section 905.3.9 to read as follows:
“905.3.9 Buildings Exceeding 10,000 square feet. In buildings exceeding 10,000 square feet in
area per story and where any portion of the building's interior area is more than 200 feet (60960
mm) of travel, vertically and horizontally, from the nearest point of Fire Department vehicle
access, Class I automatic wet or manual wet standpipes shall be provided.
Exceptions:
1. Automatic dry and semi-automatic dry standpipes are allowed as provided for in
NFPA 14.
2. R-2 occupancies of four stories or less in height having no interior corridors.”
(105) Add Section 905.4 to read as follows:
“1. In every required exit stairway, a hose connection shall be provided for each story above
and below grade plane. Hose connections shall be located at an intermediate landing between
stories, unless otherwise approved by the Fire Code Official.
2. {No change.}
3. In every exit passageway, at the entrance from the exit passageway to other areas of a
building.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 204/505
Exception: Where floor areas adjacent to an exit passageway are reachable from an exit
stairway hose connection by a {No change to rest.}
4. {No change.}
5. Where the roof has a slope less than four units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33.3-percent
slope), each standpipe shall be provided with a two-way hose connection located to serve the
roof or at the highest landing of an exit stairway with stair access to the roof provided in
accordance with section 1011.12.
6. {No change.}
7. When required by this Chapter, standpipe connections shall be placed adjacent to all
required exits to the structure and at two hundred feet (200') intervals along major corridors
thereafter, or as otherwise approved by the Fire Code Official. “
(106) Add a second paragraph after the exceptions in section 905.9 to read as follows:
“Sprinkler and standpipe system water-flow detectors shall be provided for each floor tap to the
sprinkler system and shall cause an alarm upon detection of water flow for more than 45
seconds. All control valves in the sprinkler and standpipe systems except for Fire Department
hose connection valves shall be electrically supervised to initiate a supervisory signal at the
central station upon tampering.”
(107) Delete exception to line number 1 in section 906.1.
(108) Amend Section 907.2.1 to read as follows:
“907.2.1 Group A. A manual fire alarm system that activates the occupant notification system
in accordance with section 907.5 shall be installed in Group A occupancies having an occupant
load of 300 or more persons or more than 100 persons above or below the lowest level of exit
discharge. Group A occupancies not separated from one another in accordance with section
707.3.10 of the International Building Code shall be considered as a single occupancy for the
purposes of applying this section. Portions of Group E occupancies occupied for assembly
purposes shall be provided with a fire alarm system as required for the Group E occupancy.
Activation of fire alarm notification appliances shall
1. Cause illumination of the means of egress with light of not less than 1 footcandle (11
lux) at the walking surface level, and
2. Stop any conflicting or confusing sounds and visual distractions.”
(109) Amend Section 907.2.3 to read as follows:
“907.2.3 Group E. A manual fire alarm system that initiates the occupant notification signal
utilizing an emergency voice/alarm communication system meeting the requirements of section
907.5.2.2 and installed in accordance with section 907.6 shall be installed in Group E
educational occupancies. When automatic sprinkler systems or smoke detectors are installed,
such systems or detectors shall be connected to the building fire alarm system. An approved
smoke detection system shall be installed in Group E day care occupancies. Unless separated by
a minimum of 100' open space, all buildings, whether portable buildings or the main building,
will be considered one building for alarm occupant load consideration and interconnection of
alarm systems.”
(110) Add exception 1.1 to section 907.2.3 to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 205/505
“Exceptions:
1. A manual fire alarm system is not required in Group E educational and day care
occupancies with an occupant load of less than 50 when provided with an approved
automatic sprinkler system.
1.1. Residential In-Home day care with not more than 12 children may use
interconnected single station detectors in all habitable rooms. (For care of more than
five children 2 1/2 or less years of age, see section 907.2.6.)”
(111) Amend Section 907.2.11.2 to read as follows:
“907.2.11.2 Groups R-2, R-3, R-4, and I-1. All smoke alarms, new, replacement, or added shall,
without regard to any change in total square footage of the structure, be installed and
maintained regardless of occupant load, and:
1. Be located on the ceiling or wall outside of each separate sleeping area in the
immediate vicinity of bedrooms.
2. Provide detection and audible alarm notification in all sleeping rooms.
3. Comply with 2015 IRC R314 and R315.
4. Provide detection and audible alarm notification within 15 feet of every interior
stairwell on each floor.
5. Consist of alarm devices that are individually identified at the on-site alarm
annunciator and the monitoring station, using descriptors that include the correct building
floor and room name as reflected on the builder's plans as provided to the alarm
contractor.
6. Include, at a minimum, one UL 2034 listed carbon monoxide alarm per floor, which
can be in a common hallway or near sleeping rooms.
7. Include a visual alarm notification appliance that complies with NFPA 72 and is
clearly visible from the public street that is closest to the front of the building.
(112) Add a second paragraph following the Exception in section 907.2.11.3 to read as follows:
“In an R-3 structure, the household fire alarm system shall be monitored by an approved
supervising station and be maintained in accordance with NFPA 72.”
(113) Amend Section 907.2.13 to read as follows:
“907.2.13 High-rise Buildings. Buildings with a floor used for human occupancy located more
than 55 feet (16 764 mm) above the lowest level of Fire Department vehicle access shall be
provided with an automatic smoke detection system in accordance with section 907.2.13.1, a
Fire Department communication system in accordance with section 907.2.13.2, and an
emergency voice/alarm communication system in accordance with section 907.5.2.2.”
(114) Amend Section 907.2.13 exception 3 to read as follows:
“3. Open air portions of buildings with occupancy in Group A-5 in accordance with section
303.1 of the International Building Code, when used for open air seating; however, this
exception does not apply to accessory uses including but not limited to sky boxes, restaurants
and similarly enclosed areas.”
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 206/505
(115) Add Section 907.4.2.7 to read as follows:
“907.4.2.7 Type. Manual alarm initiating devices shall be an approved double action type.”
(116) Add Section 907.6.1.1 to read as follows:
“907.6.1.1 Wiring Installation. All fire alarm systems shall be installed in such a manner that a
failure of any single initiating device or single open in an initiating circuit conductor will not
interfere with the normal operation of other such devices. All signaling line circuits (SLC) shall
be installed in such a way that a single open will not interfere with the operation of any
addressable devices (Class A). Outgoing and return SLC conductors shall be installed in
accordance with NFPA 72 requirements for Class A circuits and shall have a minimum of four
feet separation horizontal and one foot vertical between supply and return circuit conductors.
The initiating device circuit (IDC) from a signaling line circuit interface device may be wired
Class B, provided the distance from the interface device to the initiating device is ten feet or
less.”
(117) Delete all exceptions in section 907.6.3.
(118) Add a sentence to Section 907.6.6 at the end of the paragraph to read as follows:
“See 907.6.3 for the required information transmitted to the supervising station.”
(119) Amend Section 909.22 to read as follows:
“909.22 Stairway or Ramp Pressurization Alternative. Where the building is equipped
throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with section 903.3.1.1 and the
stair pressurization alternative is chosen for compliance with Building Code requirements for a
smokeproof enclosure, interior exit stairways or ramps shall be pressurized to a minimum of
0.10 inches of water (25 Pa) and a maximum of 0.35 inches of water (87 Pa) in the shaft
relative to the building measured with all interior exit stairway and ramp doors closed under
maximum anticipated conditions of stack effect and wind effect. Such systems shall comply
with section 909, including the installation of a separate fire-fighter's smoke control panel as
per section 909.16, and a Smoke Control Permit shall be required from the Fire Department as
per section 105.7.
[F] 909.22.1 Ventilating Equipment. The activation of ventilating equipment for the stair
or ramp pressurization system shall be by smoke detectors installed at each floor level at
an approved location at the entrance to the smokeproof enclosure. When the closing
device for the stairway or ramp shaft and vestibule doors is activated by smoke detection
or power failure, the mechanical equipment shall activate and operate at the required
performance levels. Smoke detectors shall be installed in accordance with section 907.3.
909.22.1.1 Ventilation Systems. Smokeproof enclosure ventilation systems shall be
independent of other building ventilation systems. The equipment, control wiring,
power wiring and ductwork shall comply with one of the following:
1. Equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall be located
exterior to the building and directly connected to the smokeproof enclosure or
connected to the smokeproof enclosure by ductwork enclosed by not less than 2-
hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with section 707 of the Building Code
or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with section 711 of the
Building Code, or both.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 207/505
2. Equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall be located
within the smokeproof enclosure with intake or exhaust directly from and to the
outside or through ductwork enclosed by not less than 2-hour barriers constructed
in accordance with section 707 of the Building Code or horizontal assemblies
constructed in accordance with section 711 of the Building Code, or both.
3. Equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall be located
within the building if separated from the remainder of the building, including other
mechanical equipment, by not less than 2-hour fire barriers constructed in
accordance with section 707 of the Building Code or horizontal assemblies
constructed in accordance with section 711 of the Building Code, or both.
Exceptions:
1. Control wiring and power wiring utilizing a 2-hour rated cable or cable
system.
2. Where encased with not less than 2 inches (51 mm) of concrete.
3. Control wiring and power wiring protected by a listed electrical circuit
protective systems with a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours.
909.21.1.2 Standby Power. Mechanical vestibule and stairway and ramp shaft
ventilation systems and automatic fire detection systems shall be provided with
standby power in accordance with section 2702 of the Building Code.
909.22.1.3 Acceptance and Testing. Before the mechanical equipment is approved,
the system shall be tested in the presence of the Fire Code Official to confirm that
the system is operating in compliance with these requirements.”
(120) Amend exceptions 2 and 3 of section 910.2 to read as follows:
2. Only manual smoke and heat removal shall be required in areas of buildings equipped with
early suppression fast-response (ESFR) sprinklers. Automatic smoke and heat removal is
prohibited.
4. Only manual smoke and heat removal shall be required in areas of buildings equipped with
control mode special application sprinklers with a response time index of 50(m*S)1/2 or less
that are listed to control a fire in stored commodities with 12 or fewer sprinklers. Automatic
smoke and heat removal is prohibited.
(121) Add Sections 910.2.3 and 910.2.4 to read as follows:
“910.2.3 Group H. Buildings and portions thereof used as Group H occupancy as follows:
1. In occupancies classified as Group H-2 or H-3, any of which are more than 15,000
square feet (1394 m2) in single floor area.
Exceptions:
1. Buildings of noncombustible construction containing only noncombustible
materials.
2. In areas of buildings in Group H used for storing Class 2, 3 and 4 liquid and
solid oxidizers, Class 1 and unclassified detonable organic peroxides, Class 3 and 4
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 208/505
unstable (reactive) materials, or Class 2 or 3 water-reactive materials as required for
a high- hazard commodity classification.
Exception: Buildings of noncombustible construction containing only
noncombustible materials.
910.2.4 Exit Access Travel Distance Increase. Buildings and portions thereof used as Group F-1
or S-1 occupancy where the maximum exit access travel distance is increased in accordance
with section 1017.2.”
(122) Add a second paragraph in section 910.3.2.2 to read as follows:
“The automatic operating mechanism of the smoke and heat vents shall operate at a temperature
rating at least 100 degrees F (approximately 38 degrees Celsius) greater than the temperature
rating of the sprinklers installed.”
(123) Add Section 910.3.4 to read as follows:
“910.3.4 Vent Operation. Smoke and heat vents shall be capable of being operated by approved
automatic and manual means. Automatic operation of smoke and heat vents shall conform to
the provisions of sections 910.3.2.1 through 910.3.2.3.
910.3.4.1 Sprinklered Buildings. Where installed in buildings equipped with an approved
automatic sprinkler system, smoke and heat vents shall be designed to operate
automatically. The automatic operating mechanism of the smoke and heat vents shall
operate at a temperature rating at least 100 degrees F (approximately 38 degrees Celsius)
greater than the temperature rating of the sprinklers installed.
Exception: Manual only systems per section 910.2.
910.3.4.2 Nonsprinklered Buildings. Where installed in buildings not equipped with an
approved automatic sprinkler system, smoke and heat vents shall operate automatically by
actuation of a heat-responsive device rated at between 100°F (56°C) and 220°F (122°C)
above ambient.
Exception: Listed gravity-operated drop out vents.”
(124) Amend Section 910.4.3.1 to read as follows:
“910.4.3.1 Makeup Air. Makeup air openings shall be provided within 6 feet (1829 mm) of the
floor level. Operation of makeup air openings shall be automatic. The minimum gross area of
makeup air inlets shall be 8 square feet per 1,000 cubic feet per minute (0.74 m2 per 0.4719
m3/s) of smoke exhaust.”
(125) Amend Section 910.4.4 to read as follows:
“910.4.4 Activation. The mechanical smoke removal system shall be activated automatically by
the automatic sprinkler system or by an approved fire detection system. Individual manual
controls shall also be provided.
Exception: Manual only systems per section 910.2.”
(126) Add Section 912.2.3 to read as follows:
“912.2.3 Hydrant Distance. An approved fire hydrant shall be located within 100 feet of the
Fire Department connection as the fire hose lays along an unobstructed path.”
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 209/505
(127) Add a second paragraph to section 913.2.1 to read as follows:
“When located on the ground level at an exterior wall, the fire pump room shall be provided
with an exterior Fire Department access door that is not less than 3 feet in width and 6 feet - 8
inches in height, regardless of any interior doors that are provided. A key box shall be provided
at this door, as required by section 506.1.
Exception: When it is necessary to locate the fire pump room on other levels or not at an
exterior wall, the corridor leading to the fire pump room access from the exterior of the building
shall be provided with equivalent fire resistance as that required for the pump room, or as
approved by the Fire Code Official. Access keys shall be provided in the key box as required by
section 506.1.”
(128) Add a second paragraph to section 913.4 to read as follows:
“The fire-pump system shall also be supervised for “loss of power,” “phase reversal” and
“pump running” conditions by supervisory signal on distinct circuits.”
(129) Amend Section 914.3.1.2 to read as follows:
“914.3.1.2 Water Supply to required Fire Pumps. In buildings that are more than 120 feet (128
m) in height, required fire pumps shall be supplied by connections to no fewer than two water
mains located in different streets. Separate supply piping shall be provided between each
connection to the water main and the pumps. Each connection and the supply piping between
the connection and the pumps shall be sized to supply the flow and pressure required for the
pumps to operate.”
{No change to exception.}
(130) Amend Section 1006.2.2.6 to read as follows:
“1006.2.2.6 Electrical Rooms. For electrical rooms, special exiting requirements may apply.
Reference the Electrical Code as adopted.”
(131) Add the following Exception to section 1009.1 to read as follows:
“Exceptions: {previous exceptions unchanged}
4. Buildings regulated under State law and built in accordance with State registered
plans, including any variances or waivers granted by the State, shall be deemed to be in
compliance with the requirements of section 1009.”
(132) Amend exceptions 3 and 4 of section 1010.1.9.4 Bolt Locks to read as follows:
“Exceptions:
3. Where a pair of doors serves an occupant load of less than 50 persons in a Group B,
F, M or S occupancy. {Remainder unchanged}
4. Where a pair of doors serves a Group A, B, F, M or S occupancy.” {Remainder
unchanged}
(133) Amend number 1 of section 1015.8 Window Openings to read as follows:
1. “Operable windows where the top of the sill of the opening is located more than 55 (16
764 mm) above the finished grade or other surface below and that are provided with window
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 210/505
fall prevention devices that comply with ASTM F 2006.”
(134) Add Section 1016.3 to read as follows:
“1016.3 Roof Vent Increase. In buildings that are one story in height, equipped with automatic
heat and smoke roof vents complying with section 910 and equipped throughout with an
automatic sprinkler system in accordance with section 903.3.1.1, the maximum exit access
travel distance shall be 400 feet (122 m) for occupancies in Group F-1 or S-1.”
(135) Add Exception 6 to section 1020.1 to read as follows:
“Exception 6. In Group B office buildings, corridor walls and ceilings need not be of fireresistive
construction within office spaces of a single tenant when the space is equipped with an
approved automatic fire alarm system with corridor smoke detection. The actuation of any
detector shall activate alarms audible in all areas served by the corridor. The smoke-detection
system shall be connected to the building's fire alarm system where such a system is provided.”
(136) Add Exception 6 to section 1020.1 to read as follows:
“Exception 6. In group B occupancies, corridor walls and ceilings need not be of fire-resistive
construction within a single tenant space when the space is equipped with approved automatic
smoke-detection within the corridor. The actuation of any detector shall activate selfannunciating
alarms audible in all areas within the corridor. Smoke detectors shall be connected
to an approved automatic fire alarm system where such system is provided.”
(137) Amend Section 1025.1 to read as follows:
“1025.1 General. Approved luminous egress path markers delineating the exit path shall be
provided in buildings of Groups A, B, E, I, M and R-1 having occupied floors located more
than 55 feet (16764 mm) above the lowest level of Fire Department vehicle access in
accordance with sections 1025.1 through 1025.5.” {Remainder unchanged.}
(138) Amend Section 1031.2 to read as follows:
“1031.2 Reliability. Required exit accesses, exits or exit discharges shall be continuously
maintained free from obstructions or impediments to full instant use in the case of fire or other
emergency. Security devices affecting means of egress shall be subject to approval of the Fire
Code Official. An exit or exit passageway shall not be used for any purpose that interferes with
a means of egress.”
(139) Add a sentence to the end of section 1103.3 to read as follows:
“Provide emergency signage as required by section 607.3.”
(140) Amend Section 1103.5.1 to read as follows:
“1103.5.1 Spray Booths and Rooms. Existing spray booths and spray rooms shall be protected
by an approved automatic fire-extinguishing system in accordance with section 2404.”
(141) Add Sections 1103.7.8 and 1103.7.8.1 to read as follows:
“1103.7.8 Fire Alarm System Design Standards. Where an existing fire alarm system is
upgraded or replaced, the devices shall be addressable. Fire alarm systems utilizing more than
20 smoke and/or heat detectors shall have analog initiating devices.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 211/505
Exception: Existing systems need not comply unless the total building, or fire alarm
system, remodel or expansion exceeds 30% of the building. When cumulative building, or
fire alarm system, remodel or expansion initiated after the date of original fire alarm panel
installation exceeds 50% of the building, or fire alarm system, the fire alarm system must
comply within 18 months of permit application.
1103.7.8.1 Communication requirements. Refer to section 907.6.6 for applicable
requirements.”
(142) Amend Section 1104.3 to read as follows:
“1104.3 Egress Path Markings. Existing high-rise buildings of Group A, B, E, I, M and R-1
occupancies shall be provided with luminous egress path markings in accordance with section
1025.
Exception: Open, unenclosed stairwells in historic buildings designated as historic under a State
or local historic preservation program.”
(143) Delete Section 1501.2.
(144) Add definition of Repair Garage to section 2302.1 to read as follows:
“Repair Garage. This occupancy shall also include garages involved in minor repair,
modification and servicing of motor vehicles for items such as lube changes, inspections,
windshield repair or replacement, shocks, minor part replacement and other such minor
repairs.”
(145) Add second paragraph to the definition of High Pile Combustible Storage in section 2302 to
read as follows:
“Any building classified as a Group S Occupancy or Speculative Building exceeding 6,000
square feet that has a clear height in excess of 14 feet, making it possible to be used for storage
in excess of 12 feet, shall be considered to be high-piled storage. When a specific product
cannot be identified, a fire protection system and life safety features shall be installed as for
Class IV commodities, to the maximum pile height.”
(146) Amend Section 2304.1 to read as follows:
“2304.1 Supervision of Dispensing. The dispensing of fuel at motor fuel-dispensing facilities
shall be in accordance with the following:
1. Conducted by a qualified attendant; and/or,
2. Shall be under the supervision of a qualified attendant; and/or
3. Shall be an unattended self-service facility in accordance with section 2304.3.
At any time the qualified attendant of Item 1 or 2 above is not present, such operations shall be
considered as an unattended self-service facility and shall also comply with section 2304.3.”
(147) Amend “Footnote j” in Table 2306.2 to read as follows:
“Table 2306.2, Footnote j. Where areas of buildings are equipped with early suppression fastresponse
(ESFR) sprinklers, manual smoke and heat vents or manually activated engineered
mechanical smoke exhaust systems shall be required within these areas.”
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 212/505
(148) Delete Section 2401.2.
(149) Add Section 2704.1.5 to read as follows:
“2704.1.5 Hazardous materials storage is prohibited in residential occupancies.
Exception. Quantities are permitted for the maintenance of pertinent equipment of systems for
such uses and shall be in accordance with Chapter 27.”
(150) Amend “Footnote j” in Table 3206.2 to read as follows:
j. “Where storage areas are protected by either early suppression fast response (ESFR)
sprinkler systems or control mode special application sprinklers with a response time index of
50 (m • s) 1/2 or less that are listed to control a fire in the stored commodities with 12 or fewer
sprinklers, installed in accordance with NFPA 13, manual smoke and heat vents or manually
activated engineered mechanical smoke exhaust systems shall be required within these areas.”
(151) Add a sentence to section 3310.1 at the end of the paragraph to read as follows:
“When fire apparatus access roads are required to be installed for any structure or development,
they shall be approved prior to the time at which construction has progressed beyond
completion of the foundation of any structure.”
(152) Add Section 3404.2.9.6.1 to read as follows:
“The storage of flammable or combustible liquids in aboveground tanks is prohibited in
residential areas.”
(153) Amend Section 5704.2.11.4 to read as follows:
“5704.2.11.4 Leak Prevention. Leak prevention for underground tanks shall comply with
sections 5704.2.11.4.1 through 5704.2.11.4.2. An approved method of secondary containment
shall be provided for underground tank and piping systems.”
(154) Amend Section 5704.2.11.4.2 to read as follows:
“5704.2.11.4.2 Leak Detection. Underground storage tank systems shall be provided with an
approved method of leak detection from any component of the system that is designed and
installed in accordance with NFPA 30.”
(155) Amend Section 6101.1 to read as follows:
“6101.1 Scope. Storage, handling and transportation of liquefied petroleum gas (LP-gas) and
the installation of LP-gas equipment pertinent to systems for such uses shall comply with this
chapter, NFPA 58, and subject to the approval of the Fire Code Official. Properties of LP-gases
shall be determined in accordance with the Appendix B of NFPA 58.”
(156) Amend Section 6103.2.1.6 to read as follows:
“6103.2.1.6 Use with Self-Contained Torch Assemblies. Portable LP-gas containers are allowed
to be used to supply approved self-contained torch assemblies or similar applications. Such
containers shall not exceed a water capacity of two and one half pounds (1 kg). Each device
shall be separated from other containers by a distance of not less than 20 feet.”
(157) Add Exception 2 to section 6104.2 to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 213/505
Exceptions:
1. {previous exception unchanged}
2. Except as permitted in 308 and 3804.3.2, LP-gas containers are not permitted in
residential areas.”
Add section 6104.3.3 to read as follows:
“6104.3.3 Spas, Pool Heaters and Other Listed Devices. Where natural gas service is not
available, an LP-Gas container is allowed to be used to supply spa and pool heaters or
other listed devices. Such container shall not exceed 250-gallon water capacity per lot.
See Table 6104.3 for location of containers.
Exception: Lots where LP can be off loaded wholly on the property where the tank is
located; owner may install 500 gallon above ground or 1,000 gallon underground
approved container.”
(158) Amend Section 5601.1.3 to read as follows:
“5601.1.3 Fireworks. The possession, manufacture, storage, sale, handling, and use of fireworks
are prohibited.
Exceptions:
1. Only when approved for fireworks displays, storage, and handling of fireworks as
allowed in section 5604 and 5608.
2. The use of fireworks for approved fireworks displays as allowed in section 5608.”
(159) Add Section 5601.1.3.1 to read as follows:
“5601.1.3.1 Ignition. Aerial shells shall be ignited by lighting the tips of fusses by an electrical
ignition source except when manual ignition is approved by the Fire Marshal. Operators shall
not place any part of their bodies over the throat of the mortar.”
(160) Amend Section 5703.6 to read as follows:
“5703.6 Piping Systems. Piping systems, and their component parts, for flammable and
combustible liquids shall be in accordance with sections 5703.6.1 through 5703.6.11. An
approved method of secondary containment shall be provided for underground tank and piping
systems.”
(161) Amend Section 5704.2.9.5 and add section 5704.2.9.5.3 to read as follows:
“5704.2.9.5 Above-ground Tanks Inside of Buildings: Above-ground tanks inside of buildings
shall comply with section 5704.2.9.5.1 through 5704.2.9.5.3.
5704.2.9.5.1 {No change.}
5704.2.9.5.2 {No change.}
5704.2.9.5.3 Combustible Liquid Storage Tanks Inside of Buildings. The maximum
aggregate allowable quantity limit shall be 3,000 gallons (11 356 L) of Class II or III
combustible liquid for storage in protected aboveground tanks complying with section
5704.2.9.7 when all of the following conditions are met:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 214/505
1. The entire 3,000 gallon (11 356 L) quantity shall be stored in protected aboveground
tanks;
2. The 3,000 gallon (11 356 L) capacity shall be permitted to be stored in a single
tank or multiple smaller tanks;
3. The tanks shall be located in a room protected by an automatic sprinkler system
complying with section 903.3.1.1; and
4. Tanks shall be connected to fuel-burning equipment, including generators,
utilizing an approved closed piping system.
The quantity of combustible liquid stored in tanks complying with this section shall
not be counted towards the maximum allowable quantity set forth in Table
5003.1.1(1), and such tanks shall not be required to be located in a control area.
Such tanks shall not be located more than two stories below grade.”
(162) Amend Section 5704.2.11.4 to read as follows:
“5704.2.11.4 Leak Prevention. Leak prevention for underground tanks shall comply with
sections 5704.2.11.4.1 through 5704.2.11.4.3. An approved method of secondary containment
shall be provided for underground tank and piping systems.”
(163) Amend Section 5704.2.11.4.2 to read as follows:
“5704.2.11.4.2 Leak Detection. Underground storage tank systems shall be provided with an
approved method of leak detection from any component of the system that is designed and
installed in accordance with NFPA 30 and as specified in section 5704.2.11.4.3.”
(164) Add Section 5704.2.11.4.3 to read as follows:
“5704.2.11.4.3 Observation Wells. Approved sampling tubes of a minimum 4 inches in
diameter shall be installed in the backfill material of each underground flammable or
combustible liquid storage tank. The tubes shall extend from a point 12 inches below the
average grade of the excavation to ground level and shall be provided with suitable surface
access caps. Each tank site shall provide a sampling tube at the corners of the excavation with a
minimum of 4 tubes. Sampling tubes shall be placed in the product line excavation within 10
feet of the tank excavation and one every 50 feet routed along product lines towards the
dispensers, a minimum of two are required.”
(165) Add Section 6103.2.1.8 to read as follows:
“6103.2.1.8 Jewelry Repair, Dental Labs and Similar Occupancies. Where natural gas service is
not available, portable LP-Gas containers are allowed to be used to supply approved torch
assemblies or similar appliances. Such containers shall not exceed 20-pound (9.0 kg) water
capacity. Aggregate capacity shall not exceed 60-pound (27.2 kg) water capacity. Each device
shall be separated from other containers by a distance of not less than 20 feet.”
(166) Add Exception 2 to read as follows:
“Exceptions:
1. {previous exception unchanged}
2. Except as permitted in sections 308 and 6104.3.2, LP-gas containers are not
permitted in residential areas.”
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 215/505
(167) Add Section 6104.3.2 to read as follows:
“6104.3.2 Spas, Pool Heaters, and Other Listed Devices. Where natural gas service is not
available, an LP-gas container is allowed to be used to supply spa and pool heaters or other
listed devices. Such container shall not exceed 250-gallon water capacity per lot. See Table
6104.3 for location of containers.
Exception: Lots where LP-gas can be off-loaded wholly on the property where the tank is
located may install up to 500 gallon above ground or 1,000 gallon underground approved
containers.”
(168) Amend Sections 6107.4 and 6109.13 to read as follows:
“6107.4 Protecting Containers from Vehicles. Where exposed to vehicular damage due to
proximity to alleys, driveways or parking areas, LP-gas containers, regulators and piping shall
be protected in accordance with section 312.
6109.13 Protection of Containers. LP-gas containers shall be stored within a suitable enclosure
or otherwise protected against tampering. Vehicle impact protection shall be provided as
required by section 6107.4.”
(169) Footnote a. in Appendix B, Table B105.2 to read as follows:
a. “The reduced fire-flow shall be not less than 1,500 gallons per minute.”
(170) Amend Section 10.2.1 in Chapter 80, NFPA 13 D, 2016 edition to read as follows:
1. Amend section 10.2.1 to read as follows:
a. 10.2.1 Number of Design Sprinklers. The number of design sprinklers under flat,
smooth, horizontal ceilings shall include all sprinklers within a compartment, up to a
maximum of two sprinklers that require the greatest hydraulic demand: {Numbers 1-5
remain unchanged}.
When the compartment exceeds two sprinkler heads for coverage in accordance with
this standard, the total amount of heads to be designed shall not exceed four
sprinklers.”
(Ordinance 2004 adopted 7/25/16)
Sec. 5.04.005 Permitting weeds, rubbish, etc., to remain on lots; storage of old lumber
(a) No owner or the person having care, custody or control of a lot or premises, whether vacant or improved,
shall permit any fallen timber, brush, logs, decayed vegetable matter, grass, weeds, or rubbish of any kind to
remain upon such lot or premises so that such material if ignited would constitute a danger to the lot or premises
or to any adjoining property.
(b) Any person storing or keeping old lumber upon or in any premises shall pile such lumber in a neat and
orderly pile not to exceed four feet in height and four feet from the adjoining buildings and property line. Said
person shall keep such pile(s) of lumber free from rubbish, grass, weeds, or other waste materials.
Sec. 5.04.006 Enforcement
The office of Town Fire Marshal is hereby established to enforce the provisions of this article. The Fire Marshal
shall be appointed by the Town Administrator; his appointment shall continue during good behavior and
satisfactory service as determined by the Town Administrator.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 216/505
Sec. 5.04.007 Availability of copies
Copies of said Town of Highland Park Fire Prevention Code, together with all amendments to the same, shall be
kept on file in the offices of the Town Administrator and of the Town Fire Marshal.
(Ordinance 1891 adopted 8/13/12)
CHAPTER 6
HEALTH AND SANITATION
ARTICLE 6.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 6.02 UNSANITARY OR UNSIGHTLY CONDITIONS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY†
Sec. 6.02.001 Stagnant water
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person who shall own or occupy any lot in the Town to permit or allow holes
or places on such lot where water may accumulate and become stagnant, or to permit same to remain thereon.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person who shall own or occupy any lot in the Town to permit or allow the
accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or to permit the same to remain thereon.
(1971 Code, sec. 10-18)
State law reference–Municipal power concerning stagnant water and other unsanitary conditions, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code,
secs. 342.001, 342.005 et seq.
Sec. 6.02.002 Accumulations of downed timber, rubbish, etc.
It shall be unlawful for any person who shall own or occupy any house, building, establishment, lot or yard in
the Town to permit or allow any downed timber or brush, tin cans, old clothes, sacks, or any trash or rubbish,
carrion, filth or other impure or unwholesome matter to accumulate or remain thereon. (1971 Code, sec. 10-19)
State law reference–Municipal power concerning filth, carrion and other unwholesome matter, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code,
secs. 342.003, 342.005 et seq.
Sec. 6.02.003 Accumulations of weeds or other objectionable matter
It shall be unlawful for any person who shall own or occupy any lot in the Town to allow weeds, brush or any
other unsightly, objectionable or insanitary matter to accumulate or grow on such lot. (1971 Code, sec. 10-20)
State law reference–Authority of municipality to regulate weeds, grass, etc., V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 342.004 et seq.
Sec. 6.02.004 Notice to remove or correct condition
(a) Whenever any condition described in this article is found to exist upon any lot or premises in the Town,
the Mayor, the Health Officer or the Town Administrator shall notify the owner of such lot or premises to
remove or remedy the condition within ten (10) days after the date of such notice. (1971 Code, sec. 10-21)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 217/505
(b) Notification must be given:
(1) Personally to the owner in writing;
(2) By letter addressed to the owner at the owner's address as recorded in the appraisal district
records of the appraisal district in which the property is located; or
(3) If personal service cannot be obtained:
(A) By publication at least once;
(B) By posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which
the violation relates; or
(C) By posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the
property to which the violation relates.
(c) If the Town mails a notice to a property owner in accordance with subsection (b), and the United States
Postal Service returns the notice as “refused” or “unclaimed,” the validity of the notice is not affected, and the
notice is considered as delivered.
(d) In a notice provided under this section, the Town may inform the owner by regular mail and a posting on
the property, or by personally delivering the notice, that if the owner commits another violation of the same kind
or nature that poses a danger to the public health and safety on or before the first anniversary of the date of the
notice, the Town without further notice may correct the violation at the owner's expense and assess the expense
against the property. If a violation covered by a notice under this subsection occurs within the one-year period,
and the Town has not been informed in writing by the owner of an ownership change, then the Town without
notice may take any action permitted and assess its expenses as provided by this article.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Methods for notification, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 342.006.
Sec. 6.02.005 Removal or correction of condition by Town
In the event the owner of any lot or premises fails to remove or remedy any condition described in this article
within ten (10) days after notice has been given as provided in section 6.02.004, the Town may do whatever is
necessary to remove or remedy the condition, or cause the same to be done, and charge the expenses incurred
thereby to the owner of such lot or premises, and such expenses shall be assessed against the real estate upon
which the work was done. The doing of such work and the charging and assessing of the expenses thereof
against the owner shall not relieve the owner or occupant of any such prosecution for violation of this article.
(1971 Code, sec. 10-22)
Sec. 6.02.006 Lien for expenses incurred by Town
The Mayor or Health Officer shall file a statement of expenses incurred under section 6.02.005, giving the
amount of such expenses and the date on which the work was done or improvements made, with the County
Clerk, and the Town shall have a privileged lien on such lot or real estate upon which the work was done or
improvements made to secure the expenditures so made in accordance with V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code,
chapter 342, which lien shall be second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements. The amount of such
expenses shall bear ten (10) percent interest from the date such statement is filed. For any such expenditures and
interest, suit may be instituted and recovery and foreclosure of such lien may be had in the name of the Town,
and the statement of expenses so made, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie proof of the amount
expended for such work or improvements. (1971 Code, sec. 10-23)
Sec. 6.02.007 Immediate abatement of dangerous weeds
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 218/505
The Town may abate, without notice, the nuisance of weeds in excess of forty-eight (48) inches in height which
are an immediate danger to the health, life or safety of any person. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Abatement of dangerous weeds, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 342.008.
ARTICLE 6.03 FOOD SANITATION*
Sec. 6.03.001 Title
This article shall be known as the Town food sanitation ordinance, and will be referred to in this code as “the
food ordinance.” (1971 Code, sec. 8-1)
Sec. 6.03.002 Adoption of State rules
The State Department of Health's Rules on Food Service Sanitation, 1978 edition, shall be and same is hereby
made a part of this article by reference, the same as if copied herein and made a part hereof; one (1) copy shall
be on file in the office of the Town Administrator and also one (1) copy in the office of the Town Health
Inspector. (1971 Code, sec. 8-2)
Sec. 6.03.003 Definitions
In addition to the definitions for the State Department of Health's Rules on Food Service Sanitation, 1978
edition, the following words and phrases, for the purpose of this article, shall have the following meanings:
Food service establishment. Any place where food is prepared and intended for individual portion service, and
includes the site at which individual portions are provided. The term includes any such place whether or not
there is a charge for the food. The term as used within this article shall also refer to retail food stores.
Person in charge. The individual present in a food service establishment who is the apparent supervisor of the
food service establishment at the time of inspection. If no individual is the apparent supervisor, then any
employee present is the person in charge.
Retail food store. Any establishment where food and food products are offered for sale to the ultimate consumer
and intended for off-premises consumption. Such food or food product may be expected to vary in degree of
preparation and may often need further preparation or processing after it has been purchased. In this article, the
term will be included when referring to food service establishments.
(1971 Code, sec. 8-3)
Sec. 6.03.004 Regulatory Authority
The Regulatory Authority is the Town or its designate, the Dallas Countywide Health Department, or authorities
having jurisdiction over food establishments as defined by the State. However, in all cases where references are
made to licenses, permits or hearings, the location will be the Town Hall. (1971 Code, sec. 8-4; Ordinance
adopting Code)
Sec. 6.03.005 Permit required; fee; term; posting
(a) Any person or firm desiring to operate a food service establishment and/or retail food store shall make
written application to the Town for a permit provided by the Town's Regulatory Authority. Prior to approval of
the application, the Regulatory Authority shall inspect the proposed food service establishment or retail food
store, and if such inspection reveals that the applicant's establishment or store complies with the requirements of
this article, the Town shall issue a permit.
(b) No person or firm shall operate a food service establishment or retail food store without having a valid
permit issued to such person or firm by the Town. Only a person or firm who complies with the requirements of
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 219/505
this article shall be entitled to receive or retain such annual permits. The annual permit fee shall be established
by Council resolution, which shall be due and payable on or before the first day of January of each year
beginning January 1, 1989. Permits are not transferable. A valid permit shall be posted in every food service
establishment and retail food store and shall be conspicuously displayed at all times.
(1971 Code, sec. 8-5)
Sec. 6.03.006 Right of entry of enforcement officers; frequency of inspections
Representatives of the Regulatory Authority, after proper identification, shall be permitted to enter any food
service establishment at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance
with this article, and such inspections shall be performed once every four (4) months or as often as necessary for
enforcement of this article. (1971 Code, sec. 8-6)
Sec. 6.03.007 Inspection reports
Whenever an inspection of a food service establishment, retail food store or commissary is made, the findings
shall be recorded on the inspection report form as set forth in section 301.73.011(f) of the State Department of
Health's Rules on Food Service Sanitation. The inspection report form shall summarize the requirements of this
article and shall set forth a weighted point value for each requirement. Inspectional remarks shall be written to
reference, by section number, the section violated and shall state the corrections to be made. A copy of the
completed inspection report form shall be furnished to the person in charge of the establishment on the
conclusion of the inspection. The form shall specify a reasonable period of time for the correction of any
violations found, and correction of the violations shall be accomplished within the period specified. The
completed inspection report form is a public document that, according to law, shall be available for public
disclosure to any person who requests it. (1971 Code, sec. 8-7)
Sec. 6.03.008 Submission of construction, remodeling or conversion plans
No food service establishment shall be constructed, extensively remodeled or converted, involving an
expenditure in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), without the review and approval of the Regulatory
Authority. Properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling or conversion shall be
submitted to the Regulatory Authority for review and approval before construction, remodeling or conversion
begins. The Regulatory Authority shall inspect the food service establishment prior to the start of operations to
determine compliance with the approved plans and specifications and with the requirements of this article. (1971
Code, sec. 8-8)
Sec. 6.03.009 Suspension of permit, license or certificate
(a) The Regulatory Authority may, without warning, notice or hearing, suspend any permit, license or
certificate to operate a food service establishment if the holder of the permit violates the requirements of this
article in a manner which the Regulatory Authority finds to be an immediate health hazard to the patrons of said
establishment or the community. The Regulatory Authority may require an immediate cessation of food service
operations by serving a written notice to that effect upon the permit holder or the person in charge of the
premises. If the holder of the permit, license, or certificate desires an immediate hearing on the required
cessation of food service operations he may appeal to the Town Administrator or his designee, who will conduct
such hearing on the next business day after the appeal has been filed. At such hearing, the Town Administrator
or his designee may:
(1) Uphold the decision of the Regulatory Authority;
(2) Delay enforcing the decision of the Regulatory Authority pending a formal hearing as
hereinafter described; or
(3) Take such other action as he deems appropriate under the facts of said case.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 220/505
(b) If the holder of the permit, license or certificate desires to appeal the decision of the Town Administrator,
he may follow the following procedure: An opportunity for a hearing before the Town Council will be provided
if a written request for hearing is filed with the Town Administrator by the holder of the permit, license or
certificate within ten (10) days after the decision of the Town Administrator or his designee. If a written request
is received within the ten-day period, the holder of the permit, license or certificate shall be afforded an
opportunity for a hearing within twenty (20) days of the receipt of the request. If no written request for hearing is
filed within ten (10) days, the suspension is sustained.
(c) The Regulatory Authority may end the suspension at any time if reasons for the suspension no longer
exist.
(1971 Code, sec. 8-9)
Sec. 6.03.010 Revocation of permit, license or certificate
The Regulatory Authority may revoke a permit, license or certificate for serious or repeated violations of any of
the requirements of this article or for interference with the Regulatory Authority in the performance of duty.
Prior to revocation, the Regulatory Authority shall notify, in writing, the holder of the permit, license or
certificate, or the person in charge, of the specific reason(s) for which the permit, license or certificate is to be
revoked and that revocation will become final at the end of ten (10) days following service of such notice unless
a written request for hearing is filed with the Regulatory Authority by the holder of the permit, and the
opportunity for a hearing will be afforded within the following twenty (20) days. Whenever a revocation of a
permit, license or certificate has become final, the holder of the revoked permit, license or certificate may make
written application for a new permit, license or certificate. (1971 Code, sec. 8-10)
Sec. 6.03.011 Notices
A notice provided for in this article is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit, or the
person in charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known
address of the holder of the permit. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the Regulatory Authority.
(1971 Code, sec. 8-11)
Sec. 6.03.012 Hearings
The hearings provided for in this article shall be conducted by the Town Administrator or his designee at a time
and place designated by him. Based upon the record of such hearing, the Town Administrator or his designee
shall make a finding and shall sustain, modify or rescind any official notice or order considered in the hearing. A
written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the permit holder by the Town Administrator. An
opportunity for appeal to the Town Council will be provided if a written request for hearing is filed with the
Town Administrator by the holder of the permit, license or certificate within ten (10) days after the decision of
the Town Administrator or his designee. If a written request is received within the ten-day period, the holder of
the permit, license or certificate shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing before the Town Council within
twenty (20) days of the receipt of the request. If no appeal is filed within ten (10) days, the decision of the Town
Administrator is final. (1971 Code, sec. 8-12)
ARTICLE 6.04 SMOKING*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 6.04.001–6.04.030 Reserved
Division 2. Smoking in Public Buildings
Sec. 6.04.031 Definitions
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 221/505
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Bar. An area which is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by patrons on the premises
and in which the serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of such beverages. Although a restaurant
may contain a bar, the term “bar” shall not include the restaurant dining area.
Business. Any sole proprietorship, joint venture, corporation or other business entity formed for profit-making
purposes, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold as well as professional corporations
and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural or other professional services are
delivered.
Child care facility. Any licensed nursery, day-care center, preschool, or other facility engaged in the practice of
providing care for children.
Health care facility. Any office or institution providing individual care or treatment of diseases, whether
physical, mental or emotional, or other medical, physiological or psychological conditions.
Person. Any individual, partnership, cooperative association, private corporation, personal representative,
receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other legal entity.
Public building. The indoor and outdoor areas of any facility owned or operated by the Town, not generally
accessible by the public, including but not limited to:
(1) The Town Hall and Library facilities, 4700 Drexel Drive;
(2) The Department of Public Safety facilities, 4700–4710 Drexel Drive;
(3) The Gillon Pump Station facility, 3400 Gillon Avenue;
(4) The Town Service Center facility, 5005 Holland Avenue; and
(5) The Town Swimming Pool facility, 3801 Lexington Avenue.
Public place. Any enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, not including
the offices or work areas not entered by the public in the normal course of business or use of the premises. A
private residence is not a public place.
Restaurant. Any enclosed area used as a coffee shop, cafeteria, sandwich stand, private and public school
cafeteria, and any other eating establishment which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or
employees.
Retail store. Any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other business entity where goods
or services are sold or offered for sale.
Retail tobacco store. Any retail store utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in
which the sale of other products is merely incidental.
Service line. Any indoor line at which one or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind,
whether or not such service involves the exchange of money.
Smoking. The inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying of any lighted cigar, cigarette, or other combustible
tobacco product in any manner or in any form.
Sports arena. Any enclosed or unenclosed sports pavilion, gymnasium, health spa, swimming pool, and other
similar public place where members of the general public assemble either to engage in physical exercise,
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 222/505
participate in athletic competition, or witness sports events.
Theater. Any indoor facility primarily used for the exhibition of any motion picture, stage drama, musical
recital, dance, lecture or other similar performance. A private residence is not a “theater.”
(Ordinance 1685, sec. 2, adopted 3/26/07)
Sec. 6.04.032 Smoking prohibited
Except as otherwise provided, smoking shall be prohibited in the following places:
(1) Elevators.
(2) Public forms of transportation, including, but not limited to, buses, vans and taxicabs.
(3) Public buildings and public restrooms.
(4) Service lines.
(5) Retail stores.
(6) Public areas of galleries, libraries and museums.
(7) Theaters.
(8) Sports arenas.
(9) Polling places.
(10) Child care facilities.
(11) Waiting rooms, hallways, wards, and rooms of health care facilities, including, but not limited
to: hospitals; clinics; physical therapy, mental health and drug and alcohol treatment facilities; and
doctors' and dentists' offices.
(12) Lobbies, hallways, and other common areas (excluding underground parking facilities) in
apartment buildings, condominiums, senior citizen residences, nursing homes, and other multipleunit
residential facilities.
(13) Lobbies, hallways, and other common areas (excluding underground parking facilities) in
multiple-unit commercial facilities.
(14) Any school or educational institution operated by a business or nonprofit entity for the
purpose of providing academic classroom instruction, trade, craft, computer or other technical
training, or instruction in dancing, artistic, musical or other cultural activities.
(15) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, any owner, operator, manager, or other
person who controls any establishment or facility may declare that entire establishment or facility as
a nonsmoking establishment or facility.
(Ordinance 1685, sec. 3, adopted 3/26/07)
Sec. 6.04.033 Smoking in restaurants
(a) Smoking is prohibited in indoor restaurants, except as set forth in subsection (b) below.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 223/505
(b) The prohibition set forth above shall not apply to any room or bar of a restaurant which is separately
enclosed, provided that said room or bar provides a mechanical ventilation system that is separate and apart from
the mechanical ventilation system for the remainder of the building.
(Ordinance 1685, sec. 4, adopted 3/26/07)
Sec. 6.04.034 Smoking-optional areas
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this division to the contrary, the following areas shall not be subject to
the smoking restrictions of this division:
(1) Private residences.
(2) Bars.
(3) Retail tobacco stores.
(4) Private clubs and recreation facilities.
(5) Private conference and meeting rooms in a hotel or motel while these places are being used
exclusively for private functions, provided that in said room there is a mechanical ventilation system
that is separate and apart from the mechanical ventilation system for the remainder of the building.
(6) A maximum of forty percent (40%) of hotel and motel rooms, provided that said rooms have a
mechanical ventilation system that is separate and apart from the mechanical ventilation system for
the remainder of the building. Each hotel and motel shall designate not less than sixty percent (60%)
of their hotel or motel rooms as nonsmoking rooms. The hotel or motel rooms designated as
nonsmoking rooms will have signs posted indicating that smoking is prohibited in such rooms and
ashtrays removed.
(Ordinance 1685, sec. 5, adopted 3/26/07)
Sec. 6.04.035 Signs
(a) Any person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls the use of any premises subject to this
division has the responsibility to post properly and to maintain signs required by this division.
(b) “Smoking” or “No Smoking” signs, whichever are appropriate, or the international “No Smoking” symbol
(a picture of a burning cigarette inside a red circle with a red bar across it) shall be clearly and conspicuously
posted by the owner, operator, manager, employer or other person in control in every place where smoking is
controlled by this division.
(c) Any owner, manager, operator or employer of any establishment controlled by this division shall, upon
either observing or being advised of a violation of section 6.04.032, have the obligation to inform the violator of
the appropriate requirements of this law and then request immediate compliance.
(Ordinance 1685, sec. 6, adopted 3/26/07)
Sec. 6.04.036 Enforcement
The Town shall require, while an establishment is undergoing otherwise mandated inspections, that the owner,
manager, operator or other person having control of such establishment demonstrate that all requirements of this
division have been met. (Ordinance 1685, sec. 7, adopted 3/26/07)
Sec. 6.04.037 Violations and penalties
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 224/505
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls the use of any
premises subject to regulation under this division to fail to comply with any of its provisions.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any area where smoking is prohibited under this division.
(c) Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and
upon conviction thereof may be fined as provided in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(d) Each day a violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ordinance 1685, sec. 8, adopted 3/26/07)
ARTICLE 6.05 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES*
Sec. 6.05.001 Definitions
Department of Public Safety. The Department of Public Safety of the Town.
Department of Public Safety Dispatcher. That individual hired and employed by the Town, assigned to the
Department of Public Safety, who is responsible for the dispatching of Town equipment on emergency medical
calls.
Emergency. Any circumstance that calls for immediate action and in which the element of time in transporting
the sick, wounded or injured for medical treatment is essential to the health or life of the person. Such
circumstances include, but are not limited to, accidents generally, traffic accidents, acts of violence resulting in
personal injury and sudden illness.
Emergency medical service request. Any call for emergency medical service that is made by telephone or other
means of communication in circumstances which are, or have been represented to be, an emergency and
requiring immediate medical service.
Emergency medical service run. The emergency medical service response by an emergency medical services
vehicle to the place where the emergency exists, or from the place of such emergency to a hospital, medical
clinic or medical office or other appropriate destination for the patient.
Emergency medical services vehicle. Any vehicle as defined under the Emergency Medical Services Act,
V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, chapter 773.
Mobile intensive care unit, also called MICU. A vehicle that is especially designed for transporting the sick or
injured and carries sufficient equipment and supplies to provide cardiac monitoring, defibrillation, cardioversion,
drug therapy and two-way radio as defined by V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, chapter 773.
Person. Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or body politic or corporate.
(1971 Code, sec. 6-1)
Sec. 6.05.002 Penalty
Any person or entity violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and
upon conviction thereof may be fined as provided in section 1.01.009 of this code. (1971 Code, sec. 6-6)
Sec. 6.05.003 State permit required
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 225/505
No person, firm or corporation shall operate or cause to be operated in the Town any emergency medical
services vehicle, public or private, or any other vehicle commonly used for the transportation or conveyance of
the sick or injured, without first securing a permit therefor from the Department of State Health Services. (1971
Code, sec. 6-2)
Sec. 6.05.004 Services provided by Department of Public Safety
(a) The Department of Public Safety shall provide emergency medical services within the Town or, when
requested by the proper authorities, within the city limits of the City of University Park or the City of Dallas.
(b) A fee shall be charged per trip for the transportation by a Town MICU of a person or persons to a hospital
providing emergency medical aid and located within the city limits of the City of Dallas in response to a call
received by the Department of Public Safety for emergency medical service. In all cases, whether one (1) person
or more than one (1) person is transported in the same MICU, the per-trip charge applies to each individual.
(c) The fee for such service shall be set by the Town Council, duly authorized to do so, by means of
resolution.
(d) The person receiving emergency medical service from the Department of Public Safety and any person
contracting for the service shall be responsible for payment of the fee.
(1971 Code, sec. 6-3)
Sec. 6.05.005 False statement of emergency
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully inform the Department of Public Safety Dispatcher or any other
Town employee that emergency medical service is needed at a location or address when such person or persons
know that such emergency does not exist. (1971 Code, sec. 6-4)
Sec. 6.05.006 Notification of route
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an emergency medical services vehicle within the Town without
first notifying the Department of Public Safety Dispatcher of the route over which the emergency medical
service run will be made. (1971 Code, sec. 6-5)
CHAPTER 7
MUNICIPAL COURT
ARTICLE 7.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 7.02 FEES
Sec. 7.02.001 Special expense fees
(a) Fee for issuance and service of warrant of arrest. Pursuant to the authority granted in article 45.06 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure of Texas, the Town's Municipal Court shall collect a fee, special expenses, of fifty
dollars ($50.00) for the issuance and service of a warrant of arrest for an offense under subsection 38.1, Penal
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 226/505
Code of Texas, or under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, section 543.009, and the special expenses described by
article 17.04 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure dealing with the requisites of a personal bond and a
special expense for the issuance and service of a warrant of arrest, after due notice.
(b) Fee when dismissal of case required by State. Pursuant to the authority granted in article 45.06 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure of Texas, as amended, effective September 1, 1987, the Town's Municipal Court shall
collect a special expense fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for services performed by the Town's Municipal Court in
cases in which State law requires the case to be dismissed because of actions involving compliance with
provisions of V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, section 543.111 et seq., by or on behalf of the defendants, which
were subsequent to the date of the alleged offense.
(c) Fee for deferred adjudication rulings in juvenile cases. The Town's Municipal Court shall collect a special
expense fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for services performed by the Town's Municipal Court in all juvenile cases
where this court grants a juvenile deferred adjudication.
(1971 Code, sec. 11-6)
State law references–Municipal court fines, costs and special expenses, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 45.203; costs paid by defendants,
Tex. Code Crim. Proc. ch. 102; court costs on conviction, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 102.021; additional court costs on
conviction in municipal court, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 102.121.
Sec. 7.02.002 Building security fund
(a) Established; designated uses. A Municipal Court building security fund is hereby established to be used as
provided in Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, article 102.017. (1971 Code, sec. 11-7; Ordinance adopting
Code)
(b) Amount of fee. A defendant convicted in a trial for a misdemeanor offense in the Municipal Court of the
Town shall pay a three dollar ($3.00) security fee as costs of court.
(c) Applicability of fee. A person, defined as an individual, corporation or association, is considered convicted
if:
(1) A sentence is imposed on the person;
(2) The person receives community supervision, including deferred adjudication; or
(3) The court defers final disposition of the person's case.
(d) Collection and disposition of fee. The Clerk of the Municipal Court shall collect the costs and pay them to
the Director of Fiscal and Human Resources, who discharges the duties delegated to the Town Treasurer, for
deposit in a fund to be known as the Municipal Court building security fund.
(1971 Code, sec. 11-7)
State law reference–Authority to establish municipal court building security fund, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 102.017.
Sec. 7.02.003 Technology fund
(a) Established.
(1) There is hereby created and established a Municipal Court technology fund, pursuant to article
102.0172 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
(2) The fund may be maintained in an interest-bearing account and may be maintained in the
general revenue account of the Town.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 227/505
(b) Fee.
(1) The fee shall be in the amount of four dollars ($4.00).
(2) The fee shall be assessed and collected from the defendant upon conviction for a misdemeanor
offense in the Municipal Court as a cost of court. A defendant is considered convicted if:
(A) A sentence is imposed on the person;
(B) The person is placed on community supervision including deferred adjudication
community supervision; or
(C) The court defers final disposition of the person's case.
(3) The fee shall be collected on conviction for an offense committed on or after September 1,
1999.
(4) The Clerk of the Court shall collect the fee and pay the fee to the Director of Fiscal and Human
Resources of the Town, who shall deposit the fee into the Municipal Court technology fund.
(c) Designated uses; administration.
(1971 Code, sec. 11-8)
(1) The fund shall be used only to finance the purchase of technological enhancements as provided
in article 102.0172 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. (1971 Code, sec. 11-8; Ordinance adopting
Code)
(2) The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the Town Council. (1971 Code, sec.
11-8)
CHAPTER 8
OFFENSES AND NUISANCES
ARTICLE 8.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 8.01.001 Abandoned refrigerators and other airtight containers
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave or permit to remain outside of any dwelling, building or other
structure, or within any unoccupied or abandoned building, dwelling or other structure under his control, in a
place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator, deep freeze, oven or
other container which has an airtight door or lid, snaplock or other locking device which may not be released
from the inside. (1971 Code, sec. 10-2)
State law reference–Regulation of abandoned refrigerators, freezers, and similar containers, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec.
756.011 et seq.
Sec. 8.01.002 Damaging trees or other plants
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 228/505
It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, injure, mutilate, break or destroy any shrub, plant or tree in the Town,
in or upon any property not belonging to such person, without the permission of the owner thereof. (1971 Code,
sec. 10-4)
Sec. 8.01.003 Firearms and facsimile firearms
(a) Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms, words, and the derivations thereof shall
have the meanings given herein:
Airgun. Any gun that discharges a pellet, BB, or paintball by means of compressed air, gas propellant, or a
spring.
Facsimile firearm. Any device that is a replica firearm and that so closely appears to be a firearm in size, shape,
color, or design that it:
(1) Can only be differentiated from a firearm through close inspection; or
(2) Is likely to be reasonably perceived as a real firearm.
Firearm. Any device designed, made, or adapted to expel a projectile through a barrel by using the energy
generated by an explosion or burning substance or any device readily convertible to that use.
(b) Offenses.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot, explode, or discharge any firearm, airgun, bow and
arrow, crossbow, or slingshot within the corporate limits of the Town.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to display or brandish a facsimile firearm in a public place
within the corporate limits of the Town.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person under seventeen (17) years of age to possess a facsimile
firearm in a public place within the corporate limits of the Town.
(4) It shall be unlawful for any person to use or exhibit a facsimile firearm, airgun, bow and arrow,
cross bow, or slingshot in any manner that causes alarm or reaction of any type by an officer or
official of a public safety agency or an agency organized to deal with emergencies.
(c) Defenses. It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the person was engaged in any of the
following:
(1) The protection of persons or property as authorized by chapter 9 of the Texas Penal Code;
(2) The enforcement of any State, federal, or local law by a legally authorized Peace Officer;
(3) An event, performance, demonstration or ceremony authorized through the Town permitting
process, or sponsored and conducted by a subdivision of the federal, State or local government or a
school district wherein the firearm or facsimile firearm is essential to the activity.
(Ordinance 1989 adopted 1/11/16)
State law references–Authority of municipality regarding firearms and explosives, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 229.001;
disorderly conduct, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 42.01; weapons, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, ch. 46.
Sec. 8.01.004 Unnecessary noise
(a) The making, causing, or permitting to be made of any unnecessary noise within the corporate limits of the
Town, and in any section thereof, in such a manner as to disturb the peace and comfort of the people in that
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 229/505
vicinity, by the honking of a horn, ringing of a bell, sounding of a gong, blowing of a whistle, operation of a
radio receiving set, or racing of a gasoline engine, or by any means of any instrument, machinery, or device, or
in connection with the operation or repair of an automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle, is hereby declared to
be a nuisance and to be unlawful.
(b) The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not be construed as to prevent the giving of any kind
of sound as a warning of danger, if the giving of same is necessary or required by law.
(1971 Code, sec. 10-10)
State law reference–Disorderly conduct, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 42.01.
Sec. 8.01.005 Offensive noises or odors; construction activities prohibited during certain hours and days
(a) A person commits an offense if he creates any noise or odor which is unreasonably offensive to persons of
ordinary sensibilities who occupy surrounding property. The owner or person in control of property where
unreasonable noise or odor is generated commits an offense if he fails to cause such unreasonable noise or odor
to be abated. (1971 Code, sec. 5-23.1)
(b) Loading, unloading and handling of construction materials, and the use of any tools or equipment used in
construction, drilling, or demolition work shall be permitted only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.,
Monday through Saturday, except by special permission given by the Building Department. The same
construction activities shall be prohibited to occur on the holidays of: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, the
Fourth of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Eve, and Christmas Day. The owner or person in
control of such property commits the offense if he fails to prohibit such construction during the prohibited hours
or days. (Ordinance 1904 adopted 1/14/13)
(c) Emergency work done in case of storms, sewer stoppages, water main breaks, municipal and utility
construction, as well as security requirements, are exempted from all of the restrictions. (1971 Code, sec. 5-23.1)
Sec. 8.01.006 Assemblages of persons obstructing streets, sidewalks or building entrances
(a) It shall be unlawful for any group or assemblage of persons, or any two (2) or more persons, whose
standing, remaining or congregating upon any public street or sidewalk in the Town shall obstruct, prevent or
interfere with the free or unobstructed use of such street or sidewalk by other persons, to fail or refuse to move
on or to disperse upon being ordered to do so by any Police Officer of the Town or any other Peace Officer.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person or group or assemblage of persons, whose standing, remaining or
congregating upon any entrance, alcove or steps leading from a public street or sidewalk to the entrance or exit
of any public or private building or structure in the Town shall obstruct, prevent or interfere with the free or
unobstructed use of such entrance or exit or of the street or sidewalk adjacent thereto by other persons, to fail or
refuse to move on or to disperse upon being ordered to do so by any Police Officer of the Town or any other
Peace Officer.
(1971 Code, sec. 14-3)
State law reference–Obstruction of highway or other passageway, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 42.03.
Sec. 8.01.007 Playing ball in street or alley
It shall be unlawful for any person to play at a game of ball or practice at passing a ball upon any street or alley
in the Town. (1971 Code, sec. 14-4)
Sec. 8.01.008 Damaging or defacing street signs
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 230/505
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface or injure any of the street signs of the Town by throwing any rocks,
stones or other hard substance against same, or by scratching or defacing or damaging same in any manner or
injuring in any manner the posts on which such signs are erected. (1971 Code, sec. 14-5)
Sec. 8.01.009 Defacing sidewalks
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface any sidewalk in the Town by placing thereon any marks or signs, by
stencils or otherwise, of any nature or character. (1971 Code, sec. 14-6)
Sec. 8.01.010 Mixing or dropping concrete or mortar on pavement
It shall be unlawful for any person to mix concrete or mortar or any mixture or substance containing cement on
any existing pavement on public property or to leave or cause to be left any excess concrete or mortar or any
mixture or substance containing cement on any existing pavement on public property, or to allow same to leak or
fall from any container or receptacle onto pavement on public property. If any concrete, mortar or any mixture or
substance containing cement is accidentally dropped or placed upon any pavement on public property within the
Town, the person responsible shall immediately remove same before such substance hardens or sets on such
pavement. (1971 Code, sec. 14-7)
Sec. 8.01.011 Drainage of roof water under sidewalks
Wherever water from roofs of adjacent buildings is drained or conducted under sidewalks from downspout
drains to the street gutters through aqueducts or concrete troughs, these openings in the sidewalk shall be fitted
with strong metal covers, which shall be securely held in place with screws or other fasteners which will not rust
or corrode. Such cover shall be set flush with the surface of the sidewalk and securely bolted, fastened or so
constructed that it cannot slip, shift, or become out of alignment with the surface of the sidewalk. (1971 Code,
sec. 14-8)
Sec. 8.01.012 Unlawful to obstruct or encumber public property with inanimate things or materials
In addition to the unlawful conduct cited in section 8.01.006 above, and where such obstruction or encumbrance
is not first permitted by the Town, it shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct or encumber any street, alley,
sidewalk, park or public right-of-way of the Town with inanimate things or materials whatsoever including, but
not limited to, landscape material and/or construction material such as fences, gates, trash dumpsters, sand,
gravel, dirt, cement, stones, appliances, wires, boxes, or rubbish. (Ordinance 1701 adopted 6/25/07)
ARTICLE 8.02 MINORS
Sec. 8.02.001 Failure to supervise a child
(a) For purposes of this section, a person acts with criminal negligence, or is criminally negligent, with respect
to circumstances surrounding his conduct or the result of his conduct, when he ought to be aware of a substantial
and unjustifiable risk that the circumstances exist or the result will occur. The risk must be of such a nature and
degree that the failure to perceive it constitutes a gross deviation from the standard of care that an ordinary
person would exercise under all the circumstances as viewed from the actor's standpoint.
(b) A person commits the offense of failure to supervise a child if such person is the parent of a child under
eighteen (18) years of age, or such person is the lawful guardian of a child under eighteen (18) years of age, and:
(1) Such person, with criminal negligence, allows such person's residential property, commercial
property or rented premises to be used for a gathering of individuals under the age of twenty-one (21)
years of age, and where, at such gathering, alcohol or other illegal controlled substances are served,
consumed, ingested or otherwise used by said individuals under the age of twenty-one (21) years of
age.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 231/505
(2) Such person, with criminal negligence, allows said child to be in possession of (i) stolen
property, or (ii) a controlled substance, as that term is defined under State law, and where said child
does not have a legal prescription for said controlled substance.
(c) It is an affirmative defense to an offense under this section if the person took reasonable steps to control
the conduct of the child at the time the person is alleged to have committed the offense of failure to supervise a
child.
(d) Any person or entity violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof may be fined as provided in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(Ordinance 1645, sec. 1, adopted 2/27/06)
ARTICLE 8.03 JUNKED VEHICLES*
Sec. 8.03.001 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them by
this section:
(1971 Code, sec. 10-44)
Antique motor vehicle. Any passenger car or truck that is at least twenty-five (25) years old. (1971 Code, sec.
10-44; Ordinance adopting Code)
Collector. The owner of one or more antique or special interest motor vehicles who collects, purchases, acquires,
trades, or disposes of special interest or antique motor vehicles or parts of them for his own use in order to
restore, preserve, and maintain an antique or special interest vehicle for historic interest. (1971 Code, sec. 10-44)
Junked motor vehicle. Any motor vehicle that is self-propelled and:
(1) Does not have lawfully attached to it:
(A) An unexpired license plate; or
(B) A valid motor vehicle inspection certificate; and
(2) Is:
(A) Wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or
(B) Inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than:
(i) 72 consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or
(ii) 30 consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Person. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind.
Special interest motor vehicle. A motor vehicle of any age which has not been altered or modified from original
manufacturer's specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by hobbyists.
(1971 Code, sec. 10-44)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 232/505
Sec. 8.03.002 Penalty
Any person or entity violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and
upon conviction thereof may be fined as provided in section 1.01.009 of this code. (1971 Code, sec. 10-51)
Sec. 8.03.003 Junked vehicles declared public nuisance
(a) The presence of any junked motor vehicle on any private lot, tract or parcel of land, or portion thereof,
occupied or unoccupied, improved or unimproved, or on any public right-of-way or other public property, within
the Town, shall be deemed a public nuisance.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or maintain such a public nuisance by wrecking, dismantling,
partially dismantling, rendering inoperable, abandoning, or discarding a motor vehicle on a public right-of-way
or other public property or on the real property of another or to permit a junked motor vehicle to be parked, left,
or maintained on his own real property; provided that this section shall not apply to:
(1) A junked motor vehicle in an enclosed building;
(2) A junked motor vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful manner,
when necessary to the operation of the business enterprise;
(3) A junked motor vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained at a location
officially designated and in a manner approved by the Town;
(4) An unlicensed operable or inoperable antique or special interest motor vehicle stored by a
collector on his property; provided that the vehicle and the outdoor storage area are maintained in
such a manner that they do not constitute a health hazard and are screened from public view by
means of a fence, trees, shrubbery, or other appropriate means.
(1971 Code, sec. 10-45)
Sec. 8.03.004 Notice of violation; order to abate
Whenever any such public nuisance exists within the Town on public property, on occupied or unoccupied
premises, or on the public right-of-way adjacent to occupied premises in violation of this article, notice of such
violation shall be given, as applicable, to the owner of such vehicle, or the owner, if such person is in possession
of this premises, or occupant of the premises upon which such vehicle is situated, or to all such persons, as
hereinafter provided. Such notice shall be in writing, shall specify the violation and its location, shall specify the
corrective measures required, shall provide that any owner of such vehicle, or owner or occupant of such
premises, may protest the determination that such vehicle is a public nuisance by filing written notice thereof
with the Town Administrator within ten (10) days, and shall provide that failure to file such protest, within ten
(10) days, shall constitute consent to the removal and impoundment of such vehicle. A copy of the notice shall
be served upon the owner or occupant of the premises and/or the owner of the vehicle, either by personal
service; by mailing a copy, certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of such person; or
by attaching such copy to the vehicle in question. Any notice attached to any vehicle need not name the owner
thereof, or the owner or occupant of the premises where it is situated, and any such notice attached to a vehicle
shall constitute notice to the owner of the vehicle and to the owner and occupant of the premises where such
vehicle is located. (1971 Code, sec. 10-46)
Sec. 8.03.005 Failure to abate; abatement by Town
If the owner or occupant of the premises, or the owner of such vehicle, fails, neglects or refuses to either protest
the notice or to comply with the terms of any notice issued under the provisions of section 8.03.004, within ten
(10) days after service of such notice by personal service, mailing, or attachment to such vehicle, appropriate
Town officials shall abate such public nuisance by removing the junked vehicle from its location and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 233/505
impounding the same. All expenses incurred in the abatement of such nuisance, and costs of preserving such
vehicle prior to final disposition, shall be charged against the owner or owners of the junked vehicle, payable in
the Town, and the Town shall have a privileged lien on such junked vehicle, together with ten-percent interest on
the delinquent amount from the date of impounding such vehicle. (1971 Code, sec. 10-47)
Sec. 8.03.006 Hearing and determination when protest has been filed
Should any person file a protest, in accordance with section 8.03.005 hereof, of the determination that any
vehicle constitutes a public nuisance under the terms of this article, the Town Administrator shall place such
protest on the agenda of the Town Council, give notice to the protestant of the time and place of the next meeting
of the Town Council, and state in such notice that the Town Council will make a determination as to whether the
protestant's vehicle constitutes a public nuisance under the terms of this article, and shall invite the protestant to
appear in person or by an attorney and present the reasons for his protest. If, after hearing the evidence and
making such investigation as the Council deems necessary, the Council shall determine that the vehicle in
question constitutes a public nuisance, the Council may order same removed from the premises, or it may
recommend prosecution in Municipal Court in accordance with the penal provisions hereof. (1971 Code, sec.
10-48)
Sec. 8.03.007 Redemption by owner
The bona fide owner of any such junked vehicle or junked vehicles which have been impounded in accordance
with the provisions of this article may acquire possession of such junked vehicle or junked vehicles by paying
the costs of abatement as shall have been computed in accordance with this article and by paying a reasonable
storage charge based upon the period of time such junked vehicle or vehicles have been impounded. (1971 Code,
sec. 10-49)
Sec. 8.03.008 Disposition of unclaimed vehicles
In the event that possession by the bona fide owner thereof of any junked vehicle or junked vehicles impounded
in accordance with the provisions hereof is not acquired within ninety (90) days from the date of such
impoundment, such junked vehicle or junked vehicles shall be deemed to have been abandoned and may be sold
by the Town. Proceeds from any such sale shall first be applied to reduce or satisfy the storage charges computed
in accordance with section 8.03.007, and any amount of such proceeds then remaining shall be applied to reduce
or satisfy the lien perfected. Such lien shall remain in full force and effect with respect to any portion of the costs
of abatement remaining unsatisfied. (1971 Code, sec. 10-50)
ARTICLE 8.04 DISTRIBUTION OR POSTING OF ADVERTISING MATTER
Sec. 8.04.001 Intent and purpose
The Town Council finds and declares that, to protect the residents of the Town against the nuisance of and
incident to the promiscuous distribution of handbills and circulars, with the resulting detriment and danger to
public health and safety, the public interest, convenience and necessity requires the regulation thereof, and to
that end the purposes of this article are specifically declared to be as follows:
(1) To protect residents of the Town against trespassing upon the private property of such residents
who have not requested nor consented to receive handbills or advertising matter by handbill
distributors;
(2) To protect the residents of the Town against the health and safety menace and the expense
incident to the littering of the streets and public places by the promiscuous and uncontrolled
distribution of advertising matter and commercial and noncommercial handbills; and
(3) To preserve the people's constitutional rights of privacy and to receive and disseminate
information.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 234/505
(1971 Code, sec. 10-101)
Sec. 8.04.002 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Commercial handbill. Any printed or written matter, any sample or device, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper,
booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or literature:
(1) Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity, or thing;
(2) Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment, or other
activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interests thereof by sales;
(3) Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or
event of any kind, for which an admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; but
the terms of this clause shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken up
for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical performance,
exhibition, or event of any kind, when either of the same is held, given or takes place in connection
with the dissemination of information which is not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency,
good morals, public peace, safety and good order, provided that nothing contained in this clause shall
be derived to authorize the holding, giving or taking place of any meeting, theatrical performance,
exhibition, or event of any kind without a license where such license is or may be required by any
law of this State or under any ordinance of this Town; or
(4) Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominantly and
essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes, or for the
private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
Newspaper. Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with
the United States Postal Service in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and
recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and, in addition thereto, shall mean and include
any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four (4) issues per year, and sold to the
public.
Noncommercial handbill. Any printed or written matter, any sample or device, circular, leaflet, pamphlet,
newspaper, magazine, paper, or booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any
matter of literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of a commercial handbill or a newspaper.
Obscene. Material which depicts or describes sexual conduct that is objectionable or offensive to accepted
standards of decency which the average person, applying contemporary community standards, would find, taken
as a whole, appeals to prurient interests, or material which depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way,
sexual conduct specifically defined by the applicable State law, which, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary,
artistic, political, or scientific value.
Person. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
Private premises. Any dwelling, house, building, or other structure designed or used either wholly or in part for
private residential purposes, whether inhabited, uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds,
walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building,
or other structure.
Public place. Any and all streets, boulevards, avenues, lanes, alleys, or other public ways, and any and all public
parks, squares, spaces, plazas, grounds and buildings.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 235/505
(1971 Code, sec. 10-102)
Sec. 8.04.003 Penalty
Any person or entity violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and
upon conviction thereof may be fined as provided in section 1.01.009 of this code. (1971 Code, sec. 10-110)
Sec. 8.04.004 Effect on other ordinances
This article shall not be deemed to repeal, amend or modify any ordinance ever ordained, either prohibiting,
regulating or licensing canvassers, hawkers, peddlers, transient merchants, or any person using the public streets
or places for any private business or enterprise, or for commercial sales, not covered herein. (1971 Code, sec.
10-109)
Sec. 8.04.005 Posting on public property, utility poles, etc.
No person shall post, stick, stamp, paint or otherwise affix, or cause the same to be done by any person, any
notice, placard, bill, card, poster, advertisement or other paper or device calculated to attract the attention of the
public, to or upon any sidewalk, crosswalk, curb or curbstone, flagstone, or any other portion or part of any
public way or public place, or any lamppost, electric light, telegraph, telephone or trolley line pole, or railway
structure, hydrant, shade tree or tree-box, or upon the piers, columns, trusses, girders, railings, gates or other
parts of any public bridge or viaduct, or other public structure or building, or upon any pole, box or fixture of a
fire alarm, except such as may be authorized or required by the laws of the United States or the State and the
ordinances of the Town. (1971 Code, sec. 10-103)
Sec. 8.04.006 Distribution in public places
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any public place within the Town. Provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful for any
person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in any public place to any person willing to accept such handbill. (1971 Code, sec. 10-104)
Sec. 8.04.007 Placing in or upon vehicles
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any commercial or
noncommercial handbill in or upon any automobile or other vehicle. The provisions of this section shall not be
deemed to prohibit the handing, transmitting or distributing of any commercial or noncommercial handbill to the
owner or other occupant of any automobile or other vehicle who is willing to accept the same. (1971 Code, sec.
10-105)
Sec. 8.04.008 Distribution on uninhabited private premises
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any commercial or
noncommercial handbill in or upon any private premises which are uninhabited or vacant. (1971 Code, sec. 10-
106)
Sec. 8.04.009 Distribution contrary to request of occupant or on premises where signs are posted
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any commercial or
noncommercial handbill upon any premises if requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on
said premises, in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof, a sign bearing the words “no trespassing,”
“no peddlers or agents,” “no advertisements,” or any similar notice, indicating in any manner that the occupants
of said premises do not desire to have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any such commercial or
noncommercial handbills left upon such premises. (1971 Code, sec. 10-107)
Sec. 8.04.010 Manner of distribution on private premises
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 236/505
(a) In those instances where section 8.04.009 does not apply, no person shall throw, place, deposit, or
distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises except by:
(1) Handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant, or other person that
is present in or upon such private premises;
(2) Placing or depositing any such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or
sidewalks, streets, or other public places. Mailboxes may not be used when so prohibited by federal
postal law or regulations.
(b) The provisions of this section shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States or to
newspapers; except that newspapers shall be placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent their
being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place or upon private
property.
(1971 Code, sec. 10-107.5)
Sec. 8.04.011 Signs or handbills containing certain matter prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person to post, hand out, distribute or transmit any sign or any handbill:
(1) Which is reasonably likely to incite or to produce imminent lawless action; or
(2) Which is obscene or unlawful.
(1971 Code, sec. 10-108)
CHAPTER 9
PERSONNEL
ARTICLE 9.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 9.02 TEXAS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM†
Sec. 9.02.001 Participation
The Town hereby exercises its option and elects to participate in the Texas Municipal Retirement System as
provided for in sections 851.001–855.605, Government Code, V.T.C.A.
Sec. 9.02.002 Rate of employee contributions
All employees of the Town who are members of the Texas Municipal Retirement System shall make deposits to
the system at the rate of seven (7) percent of their individual earnings.
Sec. 9.02.003 Employer contributions and service credits, effective January 1, 1975
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 237/505
Effective January 1, 1975, for each month of current service thereafter rendered by each of its employees who
are members of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, the Town will contribute to the current service annuity
reserve of each such member, at the time of his retirement, a sum that is two hundred (200) percent of such
member's accumulated deposits for such month of employment; and said sum shall be contributed from the
Town's account in the municipality current accumulation fund.
Sec. 9.02.004 Additional rights, credits and benefits, effective January 1, 1988
(a) Adoption. Pursuant to the provisions of sections 854.202(f), 854.204, 854.405, 854.406, and 854.410 of
subtitle G of title 8, Government Code, herein referred to as the “TMRS Act,” the Town adopts the following
provisions affecting participation of its employees in the Texas Municipal Retirement System (which retirement
system shall herein be referred to as “the system”):
(1) Eligibility for service retirement annuity. Any employee of this Town who is a member of the
system is eligible to retire and receive a service retirement annuity, if the member has at least twentyfive
years of credited service in that system performed for one or more municipalities that have
participation dates after September 1, 1987, or have adopted a like provision under section 854.202(f)
of the TMRS Act.
(2) Payment of annuity to surviving spouse. If a vested member, as that term is defined in section
854.410(c) of the TMRS Act, shall die before becoming eligible for service retirement and leaves
surviving a lawful spouse whom the member has designated as beneficiary entitled to payment of the
member's accumulated contributions in event of the member's death before retirement, the surviving
spouse may, by written notice filed with the system, elect to leave the accumulated deposits on
deposit with the system subject to the terms and conditions of said section 854.410(c). If the
accumulated deposits have not been withdrawn before such time as the member, if living, would have
become entitled to service retirement, the surviving spouse may elect to receive, in lieu of the
accumulated deposits, an annuity payable monthly thereafter during the lifetime of the surviving
spouse in such amount as would have been payable had the member lived and retired at that date
under a joint and survivor annuity (Option 1) payable during the lifetime of the member and
continuing thereafter during the lifetime of the surviving spouse.
(3) Payment of accumulated contributions to surviving spouse. At any time before payment of the
first monthly benefit of an annuity, a surviving spouse to whom subsection (a)(2) of this section
applies may, upon written application filed with the system, receive payment of the accumulated
contributions standing to the account of the member in lieu of any benefits otherwise payable under
this section. In the event such a surviving spouse shall die before payment of the first monthly benefit
of an annuity allowed under this section, the accumulated contributions credited to the account of the
member shall be paid to the estate of such spouse.
(4) Benefits additional to previously adopted provisions. The rights, credits and benefits authorized
in subsections (a)(1) through (3), above, shall be in addition to the plan provisions heretofore adopted
and in force at the effective date of this section pursuant to the TMRS Act.
(5) Occupational disability annuities. Any employee of this Town who is a member of the system
is eligible to retire and receive a standard occupational disability annuity under section 854.408 of the
TMRS Act or an optional occupational disability retirement annuity under section 854.410 of the
TMRS Act upon making application therefor upon such form and in such manner as may be
prescribed by the Board of Trustees of the system, provided that the system's medical board has
certified to said Board of Trustees:
(A) That the member is physically or mentally disabled for further performance of the duties
of the member's employment;
(B) That the disability is likely to be permanent; and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 238/505
(C) That the member should be retired.
Any annuity granted under this subsection shall be subject to the provisions of section 854.409
of the TMRS Act.
(6) Benefits in lieu of previous program. The provisions relating to the occupational disability
program as set forth in subsection (a)(5), above, are in lieu of the disability program heretofore
provided for under sections 854.301 to 854.308 of the TMRS Act.
(b) Effective date. This section shall become effective on the first day of January, 1988, provided that it has
previously been determined by the actuary for the system that all obligations of the Town to the municipality
accumulation fund, including obligations hereby undertaken, can be funded by the Town within its maximum
contribution rate and within its amortization period.
Sec. 9.02.005 Credit for military service, effective November 1989
(a) Pursuant to section 853.502, subchapter F of chapter 853, title 8, V.T.C.A., Government Code, as
amended, the Town hereby elects to allow eligible members in its employment to establish credit in the Texas
Municipal Retirement System for active military service performed as a member of the armed forces or armed
forces reserves of the United States or an auxiliary of the armed forces reserves. Eligible members as used herein
shall be those employees meeting the criteria set forth in sections 853.502(b) and 853.503 of said subchapter F,
and the amount and use of creditable military service shall be as further set forth in section 853.505.
(b) In order to establish credit for military service hereunder, a member may deposit with the Texas Municipal
Retirement System (in that member's individual account in the employees saving fund) an amount equal to the
number of months for which credit is sought, multiplied by fifteen dollars ($15.00). The Town agrees that its
account in the municipality accumulation fund is to be charged at the time of the member's retirement with an
amount equal to the accumulated amount paid by the member for military service credit, multiplied by the
Town's current service matching ratio in effect at the date the member applies for such military service credit.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 9.02.006 Authorization of restricted prior service credit, 1995
(a) On the terms and conditions set out in section 853.305 of subtitle G of title 8, V.T.C.A., Government Code,
as amended (hereinafter referred to as the “TMRS Act”), each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement
System (hereinafter referred to as the “system”) who is now or who hereafter becomes an employee of the Town
shall receive restricted prior service credit for service previously performed as an employee of any incorporated
city or town in the United States or of any council of governments in this state for which the person has not
otherwise received credit service in this system, including combined service credit under chapter 803. The
requirements for retirement eligibility have no monetary value in computing the annuity payments allowable to
the member, and may not be used in other computations, including computation of updated service credits.
(b) A member seeking to establish restricted prior service credit must take the action required under said
section 853.305 while still an employee of the Town.
(Ordinance 1304 adopted 5/1/95)
Sec. 9.02.007 Responsibility for combined normal and prior service contributions
Pursuant to section 855.407(g) of the TMRS Act, as amended, the Town hereby elects to make, and be liable for,
future normal and prior service contributions to its account in the municipal accumulation fund of the system at
such combined rate of the total compensation paid by the Town to employees who are members of the system as
the system's actuary shall annually determine as the rate necessary to fund, within the amortization period
determined as applicable to the Town under the TMRS Act, the costs of all benefits which are or may become
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 239/505
chargeable to or are to be paid out of the Town's account in said accumulation fund, regardless of other
provisions of the TMRS Act limiting the combined rate of Town contributions. (Ordinance 1609, sec. 1, adopted
11/8/04)
Sec. 9.02.008 Increase in retirement annuities, 2008
(a) On terms and conditions set out in section 854.203 of subtitle G of title 8, Government Code, as amended,
the Town hereby elects to allow and to provide for payment of the increases below stated in monthly benefits
payable by the system to retired employees and to beneficiaries of deceased employees of the Town under
current service annuities and prior service annuities arising from service by such employees to the Town. An
annuity increased under this section replaces any annuity or increased annuity previously granted to the same
person.
(b) The amount of the annuity increase under this section is computed as the sum of the prior service and
current service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose service the annuities are
based, multiplied by 50% of the percentage change in the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers, from
December of the year immediately preceding the effective date of the person's retirement to the December that is
13 months before the effective date of this section.
(c) An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the same
proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced.
(d) If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the amount of the
annuity will not be changed hereby.
(e) The amount by which an increase under this section exceeds all previously granted increases to an
annuitant is an obligation of the Town and of its account in the municipality accumulation fund of the system.
(Ordinance 1715, sec. 1, adopted 10/1/07)
Sec. 9.02.009 Eligibility for retirement
(a) Any employee of the Town who is a member of the system is eligible to retire and receive a retirement
annuity if the member has at least twenty (20) years of credited service in the system performed for one (1) or
more municipalities that have adopted a like provision under section 854.202(g) of the TMRS Act.
(b) Prior to adopting this section, the governing body of the Town has:
(1) Prepared an actuarial analysis of member retirement annuities at twenty (20) years of service;
and
(2) Held a public hearing pursuant to the notice provisions of the Texas Open Meetings Act,
chapter 551, Texas Government Code.
(c) The rights hereinabove authorized shall be in addition to the plan provisions heretofore adopted and in
force at the effective date of this section (ordinance adopted October 21, 2002) pursuant to the TMRS Act.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 9.02.010 Updated service credits, effective January 1, 2008
(a) On the terms and conditions set out in sections 853.401 through 853.403 of subtitle G of title 8,
Government Code, as amended, each member of the system who has current service credit or prior service credit
in the system in force and effect on the first day of January of the calendar year preceding such allowance, by
reason of service in the employment of the Town, and on such date had at least 36 months of credited service
with the system, shall be and is hereby allowed “updated service credit” (as that term is defined in subsection (d)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 240/505
of section 853.402 of said title) in an amount that is 100% of the “base updated service credit” of the member
(calculated as provided in subsection (c) of section 853.402 of said title). The updated service credit hereby
allowed shall replace any updated service credit, prior service credit, special prior service credit, or antecedent
service credit previously authorized for part of the same service.
(b) In accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) of section 853.401 of said title, the deposits required to
be made to the system by employees of the several participating departments on account of current service shall
be calculated from and after the date aforesaid on the full amount of such person's earnings as an employee of
the Town.
(Ordinance 1715, sec. 2, adopted 10/1/07)
ARTICLE 9.03 EMPLOYEE ABSENCES
Sec. 9.03.001 Definitions
The following definitions shall be used in the application of this article:
Calendar year. The year beginning January 1.
Continuous full-time service. Full-time service rendered to the Town uninterrupted by means of termination for
any period of time.
Department head. An employee who has responsibility for direction of a department of the Town.
Discretionary leave. The amount of leave that is accrued by each full-time employee on a calendar-year basis,
above the scheduled level of accrued vacation leave.
Employee. One who receives compensation from the Town for the performance of duty.
Employee anniversary date. The month and day of hire for each respective employee for each successive year of
employment.
Fifty-six-hour employee. An employee scheduled to work a rotation system whereby an employee is on duty for
twenty-four (24) consecutive hours, then off duty the following forty-eight (48) consecutive hours. This rotation
averages fifty-six (56) work hours per week over one calendar year. (Applies only to certain designated
uniformed Department of Public Safety employees.)
Forty-hour employee. An employee scheduled to work eight (8) hours per day, five (5) days per calendar week.
Full-time employee. Any employee of the Town other than a part-time or seasonal temporary employee who is
on the Town's payroll and is working and/or is on authorized leave and/or is on major medical sick leave.
Immediate family member. Wife, husband, mother, father, brother, sister, daughter, son, mother-in-law, father-inlaw,
daughter-in-law, son-in-law, granddaughter, grandson, grandmother, grandfather, stepmother, stepfather,
stepdaughter, stepson, sister-in-law and brother-in-law.
Leave. Authorized absence from duty or employment at the Town.
Major medical sick leave. Leave granted in the event a full-time employee experiences a long-term illness or
injury, including maternity leave for pregnant employees.
Paid leave. Authorized absence from duty at the Town during which the employee receives compensation
through the use of accrued paid leave and/or other leave with pay as established in this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 241/505
Part-time employee. Any employee who is on the payroll and is working a regular scheduled work week of less
than forty (40) hours per week. Such employees are not eligible for the benefits provided in this article.
Seasonal temporary employee. Any employee whose job position with the Town is scheduled for less than fiftytwo
(52) weeks in any twelve-month period. Such employees are not eligible for the benefits provided in this
article.
Termination. The cessation of employment between the Town and the employee.
Vacation leave. That portion of accrued leave that must be taken during each calendar year by each full-time
employee, respective to his or her length of service at the Town.
(1971 Code, sec. 2-98)
Sec. 9.03.002 Accrued paid leave
Leave with pay shall be granted by the Town to all full-time employees pursuant to the following provisions:
(1) Vacation leave. All full-time employees shall be granted vacation leave based on the following
schedule:
(A) Forty-hour employee:
(i) Employees who have completed twelve (12) months or more of continuous full-time
service but less than sixty (60) months of continuous full-time service on January 1 shall
be entitled to vacation leave totaling eighty (80) hours for that calendar year.
(ii) Employees who have completed sixty (60) months or more of continuous full-time
service but less than one hundred eighty (180) months of continuous full-time service on
January 1 shall be entitled to vacation leave totaling one hundred twenty (120) hours for
that calendar year.
(iii) Employees who have completed one hundred eighty (180) months or more of
continuous full-time service on January 1 shall be entitled to vacation leave totaling one
hundred sixty (160) hours for that calendar year.
(iv) For employees who have completed less than twelve (12) months of continuous
full-time service on January 1, vacation leave for that calendar year shall be calculated by
multiplying a ratio, as determined by dividing the number of calendar days employed as a
full-time employee during the preceding twelve (12) months by three hundred sixty-five
(365) days, times eighty (80) hours.
(B) Fifty-six-hour employee:
(i) Employees who have completed twelve (12) months or more of continuous full-time
service but less than sixty (60) months of continuous full-time service on January 1 shall
be entitled to vacation leave totaling one hundred twenty (120) hours for that calendar
year.
(ii) Employees who have completed sixty (60) months or more of continuous full-time
service but less than one hundred eighty (180) months of continuous full-time service on
January 1 shall be entitled to vacation leave totaling one hundred sixty-eight (168) hours
for that calendar year.
(iii) Employees who have completed one hundred eighty (180) months or more of
continuous full-time service on January 1 shall be entitled to vacation leave totaling two
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 242/505
hundred sixteen (216) hours for that calendar year.
(iv) For employees who have completed less than twelve (12) months of continuous
full-time service on January 1, vacation leave for that calendar year shall be calculated by
multiplying a ratio, as determined by dividing the number of calendar days employed as a
full-time employee during the preceding twelve (12) months by three hundred sixty-five
(365) days, times one hundred twenty (120) hours.
(C) All full-time employees must schedule vacation leave with their respective department
head and take all vacation leave accrued on each January 1, in that calendar year.
(2) Discretionary leave. All full-time employees shall be granted discretionary leave, which shall
accumulate at the rates stated herein.
Discretionary Leave
Hours Accumulated
Per Pay Period
Total Number of Hours
Per Year
40-hour employee 2.77 72
56-hour employee 3.70 96
(A) Discretionary leave may be used by an employee in case of illness or personal matters, or
it may be carried over into future calendar years.
(B) Discretionary leave taken due to illness shall be granted to an employee only on the
written approval of the employee's department head. Prior to the payment of such
compensation, either the department head or the Town Administrator may require a certificate
of illness or injury which would include a statement as to the ability of the employee to return
to work.
(C) Discretionary leave taken for non-illness reasons shall be taken only on the prior written
approval of the employee's department head.
(3) Major medical sick leave. Any employee who is required, because of illness or disability, to be
confined to his or her home or hospital shall be granted, as part of his or her compensation for
services, major medical sick leave, upon presentation to the Town of a certificate by a licensed
medical physician, in accordance with the following provisions:
(A) Each full-time employee shall accrue major medical sick leave on a calendar-year basis
as based on the following schedule:
Major Medical Sick
Leave Accumulated
Per Pay Period
Total Number of
Hours Per Year
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 243/505
40-hour employee 1.85 48
56-hour employee 2.77 72
(B) Major medical sick leave shall commence only after an employee has used either
discretionary or vacation leave due to illness or injury off the job as based on the following
requirements:
(i) 40-hour employee: Forty (40) consecutive work hours.
(ii) 56-hour employee: Forty-eight (48) consecutive work hours.
(iii) In the event an employee, having qualified for major medical sick leave pay,
returns to work but must again be absent due to the same illness or injury within fifteen
(15) calendar days, there shall be no requalification period identified in subsection (3)(B)
(i) or (ii) above when validated with a certificate from a licensed medical physician.
(C) Upon return to work, the Town may require a certificate by a licensed medical physician
stating the ability of the employee to return to work.
(D) Major medical sick leave shall commence only after an employee has used all other leave
due to a work-related illness or injury.
(1971 Code, sec. 2-99)
Sec. 9.03.003 Other leave with pay
(a) Funeral leave. Each full-time employee shall be eligible for leave, up to twenty-four (24) hours per
calendar year for a forty-hour employee and forty-eight (48) hours per calendar year for a fifty-six-hour
employee, due to the death of an immediate family member of the employee (hereinafter referred to as “funeral
leave”). An employee shall receive funeral leave only upon prior written approval of the employee's department
head. The actual number of hours of funeral leave granted shall be subject to each respective department head's
determination of need. Funeral leave, when granted, shall be deducted from the employee's accrued major
medical sick leave.
(b) Jury and witness duty leave. The Town shall grant any full-time employee paid leave for authorized jury
and witness duty service (herein referred to as “jury and witness duty leave”), to a maximum of forty (40) hours
per calendar year for forty-hour employees and forty-eight (48) hours per calendar year for fifty-six-hour
employees. If an employee serving on jury and witness duty leave on his or her regularly scheduled work day is
released from jury duty by a judge or the central jury room administrator at a time where fifty (50) percent or
more of the employee's regularly scheduled work hours remain, the employee shall report to work at the Town
for the balance of that regular scheduled work day. The employee's department head or the Town Administrator
shall require certification of dismissal date and time upon the employee's return to work.
(1971 Code, sec. 2-100)
(c) Military training leave. The Town shall grant any full-time employee who is a member of a state military
force, or member of any of the reserve components of the armed forces, paid leave (hereinafter referred to as
“military training leave”), on all days during which an employee shall be engaged in authorized training when
ordered or authorized by proper authority. Military training leave shall not exceed 120 hours for 40-hour
employees or 168 hours for 56-hour employees, in any one calendar year. The pay benefit for “military training
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 244/505
leave” shall be the difference between the employee's military pay and the employee's regular base pay in effect
on the date the leave is granted, for leave taken based on regularly scheduled work hours. However, as a
condition to the receipt thereof, a copy of that employee's duty orders or other documentation satisfactory to the
Town must be presented showing the dates of such service. (Ordinance 1696, sec. 1, adopted 5/14/07)
(d) Administrative leave. On a case-by-case basis, and if the Town Administrator determines it to be in the
best interests of the Town, the Town may place an employee on paid leave for administrative purposes
(hereinafter referred to as “administrative leave”), for an indefinite period of time. (1971 Code, sec. 2-100)
Sec. 9.03.004 Holidays
(a) The following shall be designated as holidays for all fulltime employees of the Town, except those
individuals who are (1) employed fulltime in the Town Library Department; and (2) fire protection personnel
employed fulltime in the Town Department of Public Safety.
(1) The first day of January in each year, designated as New Year's Day.
(2) The third Monday in January in each year, designated as Martin Luther King, Jr. Day.
(3) The last Monday in May in each year, designated as Memorial Day.
(4) The fourth day of July in each year, designated as Independence Day.
(5) The first Monday of September in each year, designated as Labor Day.
(6) The fourth Thursday of November in each year, designated as Thanksgiving Day.
(7) The Friday immediately following Thanksgiving Day.
(8) The 24th of December in each year, designated as Christmas Eve Day.
(9) The 25th of December in each year, designated as Christmas Day.
(b) The following shall be designated as holidays for all fulltime employees employed in the Town Library
Department:
(1) The first day of January in each year, designated as New Year's Day.
(2) The Saturday preceding the third Monday in January in each year, designated as Martin Luther
King, Jr. Day.
(3) The Saturday preceding the Sunday designated as Easter Sunday.
(4) The Saturday preceding the last Monday in May in each year, designated as Memorial Day.
(5) The fourth day of July in each year, designated as Independence Day.
(6) The Saturday preceding the first Monday of September in each year, designated as Labor Day.
(7) The fourth Thursday of November in each year, designated as Thanksgiving Day.
(8) The 24th of December in each year, designated as Christmas Eve Day.
(9) The 25th of December in each year, designated as Christmas Day.
(c) The following shall be designated as holidays for all fire protection personnel employed fulltime in the
Town Department of Public Safety:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 245/505
(1) The first day of January in each year, designated as New Year's Day.
(2) The third Monday in January in each year, designated as Martin Luther King, Jr. Day.
(3) The last Monday in May in each year, designated as Memorial Day.
(4) The fourth day of July in each year, designated as Independence Day.
(5) The first Monday of September in each year, designated as Labor Day.
(6) The 11th of September in each year, designated as September 11th Day.
(7) The fourth Thursday of November in each year, designated as Thanksgiving Day.
(8) The 24th of December in each year, designated as Christmas Eve Day.
(9) The 25th of December in each year, designated as Christmas Day.
(d) Should a designated holiday occur on a Saturday or Sunday, the Town Council shall designate the
regularly scheduled work day immediately preceding or following the defined holiday as the observed holiday.
(e) All fulltime employees shall be compensated at his/her base pay rate for time off in observance of the
holidays listed herein.
(f) On the aforesaid holidays, none of the offices and departments of the Town shall be open to conduct Town
business except for the Department of Public Safety. All employees in the Department of Public Safety assigned
to operations (police, fire and emergency medical) and to communications shall accrue holiday leave
(hereinafter referred to as “holiday leave”), regardless of whether or not they are required to work on a
designated holiday, based upon the following:
(1) Forty-hour employee: Eight (8) hours.
(2) Fifty-six-hour employee: Twelve (12) hours.
Any other employee scheduled to work on a designated holiday by their department head shall also accrue
holiday leave equal to the actual number of hours worked, not to exceed one (1) day's accrual as described
above.
(g) In the event that a Town-authorized holiday occurs during an employee vacation leave, time off with pay
on that holiday shall be charged as holiday leave and not as vacation leave. Computation of hours per each
holiday shall be eight (8) hours for a forty-hour employee or twelve (12) hours for a fifty-six-hour employee.
(h) The use of holiday leave shall be granted at a time designated by each employee's department head.
(i) If an employee fails to appear for work on the last regular work day preceding a holiday or the first regular
work day following a holiday, then said employee shall not be eligible for holiday pay unless he/she is on leave.
(Ordinance 1802 adopted 9/1/09)
Sec. 9.03.005 Leave without pay
(a) Leave of absence. An employee may be granted time off from work, without pay, by the Town for any
reason deemed satisfactory to the Town when the granting of such leave is in the mutual interest of the Town and
the employee (hereinafter referred to as “leave of absence”). Leave of absence shall not exceed a period of
ninety (90) calendar days. Leave of absence shall be requested in writing no less than fourteen (14) calendar
days prior to the beginning of the leave and said request shall be approved by the employee's department head
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 246/505
and the Town Administrator. An employee accepting other employment or engaged in business for himself or
herself while on leave of absence shall be terminated by the Town. Should an employee not return to work upon
the expiration date of his or her leave of absence that employee shall be considered to have voluntarily
terminated employment with the Town. Absence from work on leave of absence shall not be considered as time
worked for the purpose of accruing any employee benefits. (1971 Code, sec. 2-102)
(b) Military active-duty leave. An employee entering the United States military service on active duty shall be
granted military leave of absence by the Town without pay for that time actually spent on active duty
(hereinafter referred to as “military active-duty leave”). Military active-duty shall not include an employee's
“military training leave” as defined previously in this article. The reemployment of an employee from “military
active-duty leave” shall be consistent with reemployment rights as set forth in the Uniform Services
Employment and Reemployment Rights Act of 1994 (USERRA), as amended. (Ordinance 1696, sec. 2, adopted
5/14/07)
Sec. 9.03.006 Calculation of leave; unused leave; maternity leave
(a) Paid leave for each employee shall be calculated at the employee's regular base rate of pay in effect on the
date the leave is granted.
(b) Any employee absent from work on authorized leave or major medical sick leave shall be considered as
time worked for the computing of leave.
(c) If an employee has earned vacation leave at January 1 on any calendar year, and has not taken the same
prior to termination in that applicable year, the employee shall be entitled to leave pay for that portion of unused
vacation leave plus that portion of vacation leave accrued from January 1 of the current calendar year, to
termination date, provided that said employee shall have given the Town at least two (2) weeks' written notice of
termination.
(d) Time off from work related to employee pregnancy (hereinafter referred to as “maternity leave”) is treated
as any employee illness with regard to use of leave. Maternity leave must meet the eligibility requirements as
stipulated herein.
(e) Each full-time employee of the Town retiring from employment with the Town under the conditions
established by the provisions of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, as adopted by the Town, shall be paid
for limited unused discretionary and/or major medical sick leave upon retirement as follows:
(1) Forty-hour employee: A maximum number of eligible leave hours equal to twenty and eighttenths
(20.8) hours for each full year of employment with the Town. Eligible leave hours shall be
defined as:
(A) All unused discretionary leave hours; and
(B) Eighteen (18) hours of unused major medical sick leave hours for each full year of
employment with the Town as of January 1, 1985, to a maximum of three hundred ninety (390)
hours.
(2) Fifty-six-hour employee: A maximum number of eligible leave hours equal to twenty-nine and
twelve-hundredths (29.12) hours for each full year of employment with the Town. Eligible leave
hours shall be defined as:
(A) All unused discretionary leave hours; and
(1971 Code, sec. 2-103)
(B) Twenty-four (24) hours of unused major medical leave hours for each full year of
employment with the Town as of January 1, 1985, to a maximum of five hundred forty-six
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 247/505
(546) hours. (1971 Code, sec. 2-103; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 9.03.007 Records
The Town Department of Finance shall be required to keep complete and comprehensive leave records for each
Town employee, and it shall also be responsible for the calculation of:
(1) All leave taken and accrued.
(2) Holidays taken or the date taken as a substitute for the holidays if said employee was required
to work on the holiday.
(1971 Code, sec. 2-104)
ARTICLE 9.04 POLICY ON SEXUAL HARASSMENT
Sec. 9.04.001 General policy
The Town is committed to taking all reasonable steps to prevent all forms of discrimination and harassment in
the workplace. In particular, the Town strives to maintain a work environment that is free of sexual harassment,
sexual exploitation and intimidation. In addition to other forms of discrimination, the Town maintains a strict
policy prohibiting sexual (i.e., gender-based) harassment, which will not be tolerated from any employee or
supervisor at any level. (1971 Code, sec. 2-201)
Sec. 9.04.002 Sexual harassment defined
(a) Sexual harassment is defined as unwanted sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, or visual, verbal, or
physical conduct of a sexual nature or based on a person's gender when:
(1) Submission to such conduct is made a term or condition of employment;
(2) Submission to or rejection of such conduct is used as a basis for employment decisions
affecting an individual; or
(3) Such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with an employee's work
performance or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment.
(b) The following is a partial list of conduct that could be sexual harassment:
(1) Unwanted sexual advances or propositions.
(2) Offering employment benefits in exchange for sexual favors.
(3) Making of threatening reprisals after a negative response to sexual advances.
(4) Visual conduct (e.g., leering, making sexual gestures, or displaying of sexually suggestive
objects, pictures, cartoons, or posters).
(5) Verbal conduct (e.g., making or using derogatory comments, sexually explicit jokes, or
comments about an employee's body or dress).
(6) Verbal abuse of a sexual nature, graphic verbal commentary about an individual's body,
sexually degrading words to describe an individual, or suggestive or obscene letters, notes,
invitations or emails.
(7) Physical conduct (e.g., touching, impeding or blocking movement).
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 248/505
(c) Sexual harassment on the job is unlawful whether it involves coworker harassment or harassment by a
supervisor. All employees found to have been engaged in sexual harassment will be subject to disciplinary
action, including termination.
(1971 Code, sec. 2-202)
Sec. 9.04.003 Intimate relationships
A supervisor engaged in an intimate personal relationship (i.e., sexual relationship) with another employee must
disclose the nature of the relationship to the supervisor's department head. A department head engaged in an
intimate personal relationship (i.e., sexual relationship) with another employee must disclose the nature of the
relationship to the Town Administrator. A supervisor or department head engaged in such relationships is
prohibited from serving in a decision-making role for that other employee. (1971 Code, sec. 2-203)
Sec. 9.04.004 Complaint procedure
(a) Employees who believe they have been sexually harassed on the job or who are aware of the harassment of
others must provide a written or verbal complaint as soon as possible to one of the persons below with whom the
employee feels comfortable. Complaints may be made orally or in writing to:
(1) The employee's immediate supervisor;
(2) The employee's department head;
(3) The Town Administrator; or
(4) The Town Attorney.
(b) The complaint must include details of the incident(s), names of individuals involved, and the names of any
witnesses. Supervisors listed in subsection (a) of this section who receive a harassment complaint must
immediately refer all such complaints to their respective department heads.
(c) All incidents of sexual harassment that are reported, either verbally or in writing, will be investigated. A
department head who receives a complaint will immediately undertake an effective, thorough, and objective
investigation of the harassment allegations or designate a qualified representative to undertake same. When the
Town Administrator receives a complaint, he/she will designate a representative to immediately undertake an
effective, thorough, and objective investigation of the harassment allegations. The investigation will be
completed and a determination regarding the alleged harassment will be made and communicated to the
employee(s) who complained and the accused harasser(s). If a complaint of sexual harassment is substantiated,
appropriate disciplinary action, up to and including termination, will be taken.
(d) Complaints and investigations will be conducted with confidentiality to the greatest extent possible.
Anonymity is not guaranteed.
(1971 Code, sec. 2-204)
Sec. 9.04.005 Employee responsibility
(a) It is the duty of all employees, including supervisory personnel, to be familiar with this policy. Each
employee has a stake in preventing sexual harassment and thus shares responsibility with the Town
Administrator in eliminating sexual harassment in the workplace.
(b) No employee shall, in any way, retaliate, harass or discriminate against a person making a complaint of
sexual harassment or involved as a witness or otherwise with a complaint of sexual harassment.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 249/505
(c) In most cases in which the sexual harassment is committed by a non-employee against a Town employee
in the workplace, the Town Administrator shall take whatever lawful action is necessary against the nonemployee
to bring the sexual harassment to an immediate end.
(d) Employees are not only encouraged to report instances of sexual harassment, they are obligated to report
instances of sexual harassment. Sexual harassment exposes the Town to liability, and part of each employee's job
is to reduce the Town's exposure to liability.
(e) Employees are obligated to cooperate in every investigation of sexual harassment. The obligation includes,
but is not necessarily limited to:
(1) Coming forward with evidence, both favorable and unfavorable, concerning a person accused
of sexual harassment;
(2) Fully and truthfully making a written report under oath upon request; and
(3) Orally answering questions when required to do so by an investigator during the course of an
investigation of sexual harassment.
(f) Employees are also obligated to refrain from making accusations of sexual harassment in bad faith.
(g) Disciplinary action may be taken against any employee who fails to report instances of sexual harassment,
or who fails or refuses to cooperate in the investigation of a complaint of sexual harassment, or who files a
complaint of sexual harassment in bad faith.
(1971 Code, sec. 2-205)
Sec. 9.04.006 Training
All employees and supervisors are required to attend regular sexual harassment training sessions, as scheduled
by their department heads. (1971 Code, sec. 2-206)
Sec. 9.04.007 Employee acknowledgment
All employees must sign an acknowledgment, on the form marked exhibit A, indicating that they have attended
sexual harassment training and have reviewed and fully understand the Town's policy on sexual harassment.
This form will be placed into the employee's personnel file. (1971 Code, sec. 2-207)
Editor's note–The form “exhibit A” referred to in this section is not included herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the
office of the Town Administrator.
CHAPTER 10
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 10.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 10.02 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 250/505
Sec. 10.02.001 Adopted
The subdivision ordinance, Ordinance 831, adopted by the Town on July 3, 1975, as amended, is included at the
end of this chapter as exhibit A. Due to the nature of the subdivision ordinance and the technicalities involved in
adopting or amending it, such ordinance is printed herein as it appeared in appendix B to the 1971 Code of
Ordinances, with only nonsubstantive formatting and style changes. Capitalization, punctuation and numbering
of articles, sections and subsections have been retained as printed in appendix B to the 1971 Code. Subsequent
amendments will be inserted in their proper place and denoted by a history note following the amended
provisions. The absence of a history note indicates the material is unchanged from the original. Obviously
misspelled words have been corrected without notation. Any other material added for purposes of clarification is
enclosed in brackets. (Ordinance adopting Code)
EXHIBIT A
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 831
An ordinance prescribing rules and regulations governing plats, subdivisions of land and building sites, in
conformance with the general plan, within the corporate limits of the town of Highland Park, Texas, containing
certain definitions; providing for a preliminary plat, a final plat and providing for final approval of subdivisions,
prescribing regulations for streets, alleys, utility easements, street surfacing, sanitary sewers and water mains,
public utilities, parks and playgrounds; requiring the submission of street, drainage, water and sewer plans with
the final plat; prescribing fees to be charged; providing penalties for the violation of its provisions hereof;
repealing Ordinance No. 633 and all other ordinances in conflict herewith; and providing a savings clause and
declaring an emergency.
Whereas, under the laws of the State of Texas, hereafter every owner of any tract of land situated within the
corporate limits of the Town of Highland Park, who may hereafter desire to divide the same in two (2) or more
tracts for the purpose of laying out any subdivision of such tract of land or any addition to the Town of Highland
Park, or for laying out a building site or sites, or any lots and streets, alley or parks and other portions intended
for public use, or the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting thereon or adjacent thereto, are required to
submit a plat of such subdivision or addition for review and consideration by the town council of the Town of
Highland Park, and;
Whereas, the general plan of the town has been established by the existing mature development consisting of an
open space system of parkways, a country club and a number of estates related to the major drainageways; all
served and surrounded by an established street and thoroughfare system providing access to existing building
sites arranged in an established varied density pattern, and;
Whereas, the town council of the Town of Highland Park is empowered by law to promulgate and preserve the
general plan of said town and its streets, alleys, open spaces, building sites, and public utility facilities, including
those which have been or may be laid out, together with the general plan for the town and the roads, streets and
public highways within said town;
Now therefore, be it ordained by the town council of the town of Highland Park, Texas:
On and after the passage of this ordinance, any person, firm or corporation seeking approval of any plat, plan or
replat of any subdivision of land or change of any building site within the corporate limits of the Town of
Highland Park shall be required to comply with the requirements of this ordinance before such approval may be
considered, to wit:
Section 1. Purpose.
The purpose of this ordinance is to provide for the orderly, safe and healthful development of the area within the
town in conformance with the general plan and conserve the value of existing buildings and existing
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 251/505
development and to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the community.
Section 2. Jurisdiction.
All plats, changes in existing building lots or existing building sites and subdivision of land within the corporate
limits of the Town of Highland Park shall conform to the general plan for the town and the following rules and
regulations.
Section 3. Definitions.
For the purpose of interpreting this ordinance, certain terms, phrases and words used herein shall have the
meaning hereinafter ascribed to them as follows:
1. Shall–The word “shall” wherever used in this ordinance will be interpreted in its mandatory
sense; the word “may” shall be deemed as permissive.
2. Building site–A lot, tract or parcel of land which complies with the standards of section 18 of
the zoning ordinance of Highland Park and on which a legal building permit may be issued.
3. Council–The town council of the Town of Highland Park (legislative body).
4. Engineer–A person duly authorized under the provisions of the Texas Engineering Registration
Act, as heretofore or hereafter amended, to practice the profession of engineering.
5. Lot–A tract or parcel of land under one ownership having frontage on a public street and either
occupied or to be occupied by a building or building group together with accessory buildings, which
parcel of land is designated as a separate and distinct tract and which meets the provisions of the
zoning ordinance for a building site.
6. Multiple building tract or lot–A building site which has been approved by the town council for
the location of more than one main building such as a shopping center or apartment project approved
as a planned development in accordance with the provisions of the zoning ordinance.
7. Planned development–A development provided for by the zoning ordinance of the Town of
Highland Park wherein certain yards, areas and related standards may be varied and a variety of land
uses associated on a tract, the plan of which is subject to approval by the zoning commission and
town council.
8. Plat, final–The plat of any lot, tract or parcel of land requested to be recorded of record in the
county clerk's office of Dallas County, Texas.
9. Plat, preliminary–The plat of any lot, tract or parcel of land that is not to be recorded of record,
but is only a proposed division of land for review and study by the town.
10. Replatting–The rearrangement of building sites of any part or all of any block or blocks of a
previously platted subdivision, addition, lot or tract and including any alteration in existing building
sites on which residential dwellings exist or have existed.
11. Street–A public way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street, highway,
thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, private or however otherwise
designated.
12. Street Types
a. Collector or Secondary Street. The phrase “collector or secondary street” shall be a street
which is continuous through a residential district and is intended as a connecting street between
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 252/505
residential districts and major thoroughfare or business districts.
b. Cul-de-sac. A street which terminates at one end with a turnaround.
c. Freeway. A highway or toll road designed for movement of large volumes of traffic
between areas and around and across the town and which does not provide access directly to
adjacent land.
d. Local street. The phrase “local street” shall be a street which is intended primarily to serve
traffic within a neighborhood or limited residential district, and which is not continuous through
a residential district.
e. Major street. The phrase “major street” shall be used to designate principal traffic
thoroughfares more or less continuous across the town, which are intended to connect remote
parts of the town or areas adjacent thereto, and act as principal connecting streets with state and
federal highways.
13. Street width–Street width is the dimension of the shortest distance between the lines which
delineate the right-of-way of a street, road or other way.
14. Subdivider–A person, firm, association, corporation, syndicate, trust or any other legal entity
who seeks to create or alter building sites or who causes land to be divided into a subdivision for
himself or others or seeks authorization therefor.
15. Subdivision–The division or alteration of any tract of land situated within the corporate limits
in two (2) or more parts for the purpose of laying out any subdivision of any tract of land or any
addition to the Town of Highland Park, or for laying out or altering an existing building site or any
building sites, streets, alleys or part or other portions intended for public use or for the use of
purchasers or owners of lots fronting thereon or adjacent thereto for the purpose, whether immediate
or future, of creating building sites. Subdivision includes resubdivision or the alteration of established
building sites composed of all or portions of previously established lots or tracts.
16. Surveyor–A licensed state land surveyor or a registered public surveyor as authorized by the
state statutes to practice the profession of surveying.
17. Town–The Town of Highland Park, Texas.
18. Town administrator–The person designated as the chief administrative official of the Town.
19. Town engineer–Director of public works or other appointed administrative person charged with
planning and engineering matters.
20. Zoning ordinance–The regulations adopted pursuant to the laws of the State of Texas by the
Town of Highland Park for the purpose of promoting the health, safety and general welfare of the
community as such regulations exist or may be amended (Ordinance 676 and all amendments
thereto).
Definitions not expressly prescribed herein are to be construed in accordance with the customary usage in
municipal planning and engineering practices.
Section 4. Policy.
1. It shall be unlawful for any owner or agent of any owner of land to lay out, subdivide, plat or replat any
land into lots, blocks or streets or to alter established building sites within the town without the approval of the
town council. It shall be unlawful for any such owner or agent to offer for sale or sell property for building sites,
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 253/505
building tracts or for an urban use thereon which has not been laid out, subdivided, platted or replatted with the
approval of the town council.
2. The town hereby defines its policy to be that the town will withhold its approval of improvements of
whatsoever nature, including the maintenance of streets and the furnishing of any available utilities from all
additions, subdivisions or building sites, the platting of which has not been approved and accepted by the town
council.
3. No building permit shall be issued for the erection of any building in the town on any piece of property
other than an original building site or resubdivided lot in a duly approved and recorded subdivision or an
approved building site in accordance with section 18 of the zoning ordinance without the written approval of the
town council and in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance.
Section 5. Preapplication conference.
Prior to the filing of a preliminary plat, the subdivider shall meet with the town administrator or town engineer
or his designated agent to acquaint himself with the requirements of the town and the relationship of the
proposed subdivision to the zoning ordinance. At such meeting, the density standards, building site requirements
and any street or utility service requirements and the general character of the building or development may be
discussed.
Section 6. Procedure for preliminary plat approval.
1. On reaching conclusions as recommended in section 5, the subdivider shall have prepared a preliminary
plat of the proposed subdivision for submission to the town council in accordance with the standards outlined
section 7 hereof.
2. Four (4) copies of the preliminary plat as described in section 7 shall be submitted to the town administrator
at least ten (10) days prior to the town council meeting at which consideration is desired.
3. Before an application is presented to the town council for a plat or replat of any property located within the
town limits, the party requesting the plat or replat shall obtain tax certificates showing all taxes then due have
been paid on the property for which the platting or replatting is sought.
4. The preliminary plat shall be considered officially filed after it is examined and found to be in compliance
with the general provisions of these regulations by the town engineer.
5. The following notice shall be stamped on the face of each preliminary plat: “Preliminary plat–For
inspection purposes only, and in no way official or approved for record purposes.”
6. A written report shall be prepared and submitted to the town council at the next regular meeting stating the
comments of the subdivision review. Such report should include comments relative to the proposed subdivision's
compliance to these regulations, the zoning ordinance or other plans of the Town of Highland Park. The report
may include comments from other municipal departments or agencies including utility companies concerned
with urban development.
7. Following review of the preliminary plat and other materials submitted for conformity thereof to these
regulations, and negotiations with the subdivider on changes deemed advisable and the kind and extent of
improvements to be made by him, the town council shall, within thirty (30) days, act thereon as submitted or
modified, and if approved, the town council shall express in writing its approval as conditional approval and
state the conditions of such approval, if any, or if disapproved, shall express its disapproval.
8. The action of the town council shall be noted on two (2) copies of the preliminary plat, referenced and
attached to any conditions determined. One copy shall be returned to the subdivider and the other retained by the
town administrator.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 254/505
9. Conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of the final plat. Rather, it shall be
deemed an expression of approval to the layout submitted on the preliminary plat as a guide to the preparation of
the final plat.
10. The town council shall, in its action on the preliminary plat, consider the physical arrangement of the
subdivision, and determine the adequacy of street and thoroughfare rights-of-way and alignment and the
compliance of the streets and thoroughfares with those existing in the town. The town council shall also
ascertain that adequate easements for proposed or future utility service and surface drainage are provided, and
that the lot size and area are adequate to comply with the minimum requirements of the zoning ordinance and
that all lots constitute legal building sites as defined by the zoning ordinance.
11. A notation of the action taken and requisite reasons therefor shall be entered in the records of the town
council.
12. Preliminary approval of the subdivision shall be valid for a period of twelve (12) months from the date of
approval and the general terms and conditions under which the preliminary approval was granted will not be
changed. The town council shall withdraw its preliminary approval of a subdivision unless the final plat is
submitted within the twelve (12) month period or unless the time period is extended by the town council at the
request of the subdivider.
Section 7. Data requirement for preliminary plat submission.
The subdivider or owner shall file four (4) copies of the preliminary plat as heretofore set forth and such plat
shall be accompanied by or show the following information:
1. Boundary lines, bearings and distances sufficient to locate the exact area proposed for
subdivision. At least one subdivision corner shall be referenced to a known reference point which can
be identified.
2. The name and location of a portion of adjoining lots or subdivisions shall be drawn to the same
scale and shown in dotted lines adjacent to the tract proposed for subdivisions in sufficient detail to
show actually the existing streets and alleys and other features that may influence the layout and
development of the proposed subdivisions. Where adjacent land is not subdivided, owner's name of
the adjacent tract shall be shown.
3. The angle of intersection of the centerlines of all intersecting streets.
4. The location and widths of all streets, alleys, easements and ways proposed for the subdivision
and all known rights-of-way and/or easements within or affecting the area to be subdivided.
5. The subdivision shall show all proposed streets and alleys, easements, blocks, lots, building
sites, building lines, parks, etc., with principal dimensions.
6. Contours at five (5) foot intervals and all easements or rights-of-way necessary for drainage
within or without the boundaries of the addition.
7. The title, if any, under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded, the name of the owner
and the name of the engineer or land planner who prepared the preliminary plat.
8. Sites, if any, to be reserved or dedicated for parks, playgrounds or other area proposed for public
use or to be used in common by any homeowner's association, condominium corporation or similar
organization.
9. Scale, north point, date and other pertinent data. The scale of the preliminary plat may be at, one
inch equals two-hundred (200) feet or, at one inch equals one-hundred (100) feet.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 255/505
10. Property owner's name, address and telephone number.
11. A proposed preliminary layout of any sanitary sewer and water lines needed to serve the
subdivision.
12. Protective covenants–Draft of any protective covenants whereby the subdivider proposes to
regulate land use or development standards in the subdivision.
13. A designation of the proposed uses of land within the subdivision and any zoning amendments,
if any, proposed to be requested.
14. If the proposed subdivision is a portion of a tract which is later to be subdivided in its entirety,
then a tentative master plat of the entire subdivision shall be submitted with the preliminary plat of
the portion first to be subdivided. The master plat shall conform in all respects to the requirements of
the preliminary plat; except, it may be on a scale of not more than one inch to four hundred (400)
feet.
Section 8. Procedure for final plat approval.
1. After approval of the preliminary plat by the town council and within twelve (12) months of the approval
date unless extended by action of the town council, the subdivider may submit for approval the final plat. Four
(4) copies of the final plat, together with a reproducible transparent drawing, shall be submitted to the town
engineer at least ten (10) days prior to the meeting at which consideration is desired.
2. The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved and to the standards
prescribed by section 9 hereof. If desired by the subdivider, the final plat may constitute only that portion of the
approved preliminary plat which he proposes to record and develop at the time, provided however, that such
portion conforms to all requirements of these regulations.
3. The official filing date of the final plat shall be the date upon which the town engineer files a written
statement to the town council that the plat is found to be in full compliance with the provisions of the
preliminary approval.
4. The final plat shall be presented to the town council at its next regular meeting with any appropriate
recommendation by the town administrator and town engineer. The town council shall act on the final plat
within thirty (30) days after the official filing date, unless such time is extended by agreement with the
subdivider or his agent.
5. After the town council has determined that plat is in proper form, the arrangement of the development
proposed for the property being subdivided is consistent with zoning regulations and that the subdivision
complies with the provisions of this ordinance, it may act to approve the plat.
6. Where physical improvements are required to serve the subdivided area, the town council shall consider all
proposals with respect to the dedication of rights-of-way for public use, the construction of utilities, streets,
drainage and other improvements and when satisfied with the proposals, shall authorize the establishment of
agreements for same.
7. The final plat shall then be caused to be filed of record by the subdivider in the plat records of Dallas
County, but only after the town council has officially acted upon the final plat with reference to improvements,
dedications and utilities and the mayor has executed the certificate of approval.
8. The town council's approval of the final plat shall authorize the mayor to execute the certificate of approval
on the original copy of the final plat.
9. Final plats which are disapproved by the town council shall be returned to the subdivider by the town
engineer with an attached statement of the reasons for such action.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 256/505
10. An owner or subdivider, at his option, may obtain approval of a portion or a section of a subdivision
provided he meets all the requirements of this ordinance with reference to such portion or section in the same
manner as is required for a complete subdivision. In the event a subdivision and the final plat thereof is approved
by the town council in sections, each final plat of each section is to carry the name of the entire subdivision, but
is to bear a distinguishing letter, number or subtitle. Block numbers shall run consecutively throughout the entire
subdivision, even though such subdivision may be finally approved in sections.
Section 9. Data and agreement requirement for final plat action.
The owner of land on which approval has been obtained on a preliminary plat shall have prepared and submitted
a final plat to the town council. A reproducible transparent drawing and four (4) copies shall be drawn to a scale
of one hundred (100) feet to one inch and one copy shall be prepared on linen, mylar or equivalent transparent
drafting material 23" x 36" for recording purposes, one print shall show existing contours at an interval of not
more than five (5) feet unless the town engineer deems such information unnecessary. The final plat shall show
the following:
1. The primary control points, or descriptions and “ties” to such control points, to which all
dimensions, angles, bearings and similar data on the plat shall be referred.
2. Tract boundary lines sufficient to locate the exact area proposed for subdivision, right-of-way
lines of streets, easements and other rights-of-way and property lines of residential lots and other
sites; with accurate dimensions, bearings or deflection angles and radii, arcs and central angles of all
curves.
3. Name and right-of-way width of each street or other right-of-way.
4. Location and dimensions of all easements.
5. Number to identify each lot or building site and each block.
6. Purpose for which sites, other than residential lots, are dedicated or reserved.
7. Minimum building setback line when required or approved by the town council.
8. Location and description of monuments and location and size of public sidewalks.
9. Reference to recorded subdivision plats or lots by record name or name of present owner.
10. Surveyor's or engineer's certificate, to be placed on the plat; similar to the one shown below:
Know All Men By These Presents:
That I, , do hereby certify that I prepared this plat from an actual and
accurate survey of the land and that the corner monuments shown thereon were
properly placed under my supervision.
Signature
Date
11. Certificate of approval by the town council:
(To be placed on plat)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 257/505
Approved this day of , 19 , by the town council of the Town of
Highland Park, Texas.
Attest:
Town Secretary, Town of Highland Park, Texas
Mayor, Town of Highland Park, Texas
12. Title, graphic scale and north point.
13. Location of point of intersection and point of tangency of street intersections other than right
angle intersections.
14. A positive reference identification of the plan and date of plat.
15. Owner's certificate or deed of dedication–(to be placed on final plat). The dedication deed or
certificate of dedication shall be executed by all persons, firms or corporations owning an interest in
the property subdivided and platted, and shall be acknowledged in the manner prescribed by the laws
for the State of Texas for conveyances of real property. The wife of any married man executing such
dedication deed or certificate of dedication shall join with her husband therein unless satisfactory
proof be provided showing that the property to be subdivided does not constitute any portion of such
party's homestead, in which case the instrument of dedication shall state the fact that the property
subdivided and platted does not constitute a part of such party's actual homestead. In the case of
surface lien holders, they may execute a subordination agreement subordinating their liens to all
public streets, alleys, parks and any other public areas shown on the plat of such subdivision as being
set aside for public uses and purposes. The dedication deed or certificate of dedication shall, in
addition to the above requirements, contain the following:
a. An accurate description of the tract of land subdivided.
b. A statement and express representation that the parties joining in such dedication are the
sole owners of such tract of land.
c. An express dedication without reservation to the public for public use; the streets, alleys,
rights-of-way and other public areas shown on the attached plat.
d. A positive reference and identification of the plat of such subdivision, date of plat and
engineer.
16. Tax certificates indicating that all taxes on the land being subdivided have been paid to the
current year.
17. Two (2) sets of plans for any street or utility improvements required and a set of reproducible
transparent sheets, 23" x 36" in size along with all data and calculations[,] related utilities, drainage
or other construction in the subdivision. Such plans shall also show all existing or proposed surface
and subsurface improvements and obstructions.
Section 10. Minimum platting design standards.
The physical design of the proposed subdivision shall conform to the planning policies of the town and the
following minimum standards:
1. Street standards.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 258/505
a. Unless otherwise approved by the town council, provisions shall be made for the extension
of streets in accordance with the pattern of existing streets and thoroughfares. Adequate local
streets shall be provided to accommodate the subdivision and provide access to lots.
b. Where no specific plan for streets exists, the street layout in a subdivision shall either:
(1) Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing principal streets in
surrounding areas; or
(2) Conform to any plan for a neighborhood or planned development approved or
adopted by the town council to meet a particular situation where topographical or other
conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets impracticable or where
neighborhood design makes a varied plan appropriate.
c. Local streets shall be laid out so that their use by through traffic will be discouraged.
d. Street intersections: More than two (2) streets intersecting at a common point shall be
avoided, except where the joining of more than two (2) streets is impractical to secure a proper
street system otherwise. All intersections shall be as near ninety (90) degrees as possible.
e. Culs-de-sac, dead ends or courts: Culs-de-sac, courts or places may be permitted where the
subdivision design or the shape of the property makes such street design appropriate. Culs-desac,
courts or places shall provide proper access to all lots and shall generally not exceed six
hundred (600) feet in length and a turnaround shall be provided at the closed end which has a
minimum right-of-way radius of fifty (50) feet except that if an equally safe and convenient
form of paved space is approved by the town council in place of a turning circle such approved
space may be installed as agreed upon.
f. Streets with centerline offsets of less than one hundred fifty (150) feet at intersections shall
not be acceptable except in special cases when approved by the town council.
g. Half-streets shall be prohibited except where essential to the reasonable development of
the subdivision and where the town council finds it will be practicable to require the dedication
of the other half of a street when the adjoining property is subdivided. Wherever a half-street is
adjacent to a tract to be subdivided, the other half of the street shall be platted within such tract.
h. Reserve strips of land controlling access to or egress from other property or to or from any
street or alley or having the effect of restricting or damaging the adjoining property for
subdivision purposes or which will not be taxable or accessible for special improvements shall
not be permitted in any subdivision unless such reserve strips are conveyed to the town in fee
simple.
i. The engineering design and construction plans for all new streets and utilities related
thereto shall be subject to approval by the town council after review and recommendation by
the town engineer.
j. No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with the names of
existing streets. Street names shall be subject to approval of the town council.
2. Alley or easement standards.
a. Alleys or utility easements shall be provided in all residential areas unless otherwise
approved by the town council. In commercial areas, the town council may waive the
requirement where other definite and assured provisions are made for service access such as
through off-street loading, unloading and parking areas which are consistent with and adequate
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 259/505
for the uses proposed. The minimum right-of-way width of an alley or utility easement shall be
fifteen (15) feet.
b. Utility easements shall be provided within the proposed subdivision as may be necessary
to assure the proper design, installation and maintenance of either underground or aerial
utilities. Easement widths shall be determined by the type of utility; however, an easement shall
not normally be required along the rear of any lots served by a dedicated alley.
c. When a proposed subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or
stream or a proposed drainage easement, there shall be provided a storm water easement or
drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the line for such watercourse. The
easement or right-of-way width for such watercourse shall be determined by good engineering
practice and may require improvement or realignment to assure proper drainage of storm water.
The drainageway dedication may include parkway dedication of any flood plain or low area
involving hazard if built upon.
d. When the town engineer finds that easements in areas adjoining proposed subdivisions are
necessary to provide adequate drainage thereof or to serve such subdivisions with utilities, the
subdivider shall obtain such easements.
3. Pedestrian walk standards.
a. Pedestrian walkways up to twenty (20) feet in width may be required where deemed
essential to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers,
transportation and other community facilities. Pedestrian walks a minimum of four (4) [feet]
wide and conforming to the standard specifications of the town shall be installed except that
this provision may be waived by the town council upon evidence that equivalent pedestrian
circulation is otherwise provided for.
b. Sidewalks may be required on the frontal and side streets at the time the structure is
erected on the lot when the subdivision design makes such walks essential for safe pedestrian
access to schools, parks and other community facilities.
4. Building lot standards–Residential building sites.
a. The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation and the minimum building setback lines
shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development
contemplated and shall not be less than either of the following:
(1) The dimensions of the building site originally utilized for a dwelling unit or
dwelling structure, or;
(2) The minimum standards specified in the zoning ordinance for the district in which
the property is located.
b. Each lot or building site shall front upon a public street or officially approved place.
c. Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided, except where essential to
provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific
disadvantages of topography and orientation.
d. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines unless approved
by the town council.
e. Building tracts which are subject to site plan approval for the location of multiple
structures in a planned development district, shopping center, housing project or similar
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 260/505
complex may be platted as building tracts and are subject to the same standards of access utility
service and improvement as lots except that the site plan for multiple structure use must be
approved by the town council and the town zoning commission in accordance with the
provisions of the zoning ordinance.
f. Where building lots or tracts occur on a plat in such a manner as to be below the street
grade elevation thereby requiring water to drain across such lots, the minimum floor elevations
for all main buildings shall be shown for each lot and such elevations shall be adequate to
assure that surface drainage will not enter the buildings.
5. Replatting or alteration of building sites.
a. Property shall not be replatted which has been previously platted by a common dedication,
except with the consent of all directly affected property owners.
b. No existing building site shall be altered in area or dimension without the approval of the
town council.
c. The replat of the subdivision shall meet all the requirements for a new subdivision that
may be pertinent, as provided for herein.
6. Modification or variance of platting standards.
a. Where existing conditions require a modification of the standards and regulations herein
contained because of a distinct and unusual condition that does not prevail or other undeveloped
land generally in the town, the town council may approve a variance from specific standards to
permit the equitable treatment of the land or tract in light of the unusual condition.
b. In granting variances and modifications, the town council may require such conditions as
will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so
varied or modified and maintain the spirit and intent of the standards herein set forth.
Section 11. Improvements required.
1. The improvement of all streets, ways, alleys, drainageways and walkways as herein required shall be in
accordance with the standards specified by the Town of Highland Park for installation of such improvements.
2. All construction work, such as street grading, street paving, storm sewers, curb and/or gutter work, sanitary
sewers or water mains performed by the owner, developer or contractor shall be subject to inspection during
construction by the proper authorities of the town and shall be constructed in accordance with the standard
specifications approved by the town council and in accordance with the provisions of any other ordinance of the
Town of Highland Park applicable thereto.
3. Guarantee for construction or maintenance of streets. Approval of the plat shall not impose any duty upon
the town concerning the maintenance of improvements of any such dedicated parts until the proper authorities of
the town have made acceptance of the same by entry, use or improvement.
Section 12. Withholding of permits and improvements.
1. The town shall withhold all improvements and services of whatsoever nature from all building sites, lots or
additions which have not been approved in accordance with the regulations herein contained.
2. No permit will be issued on property abutting any street in a subdivision prior to the approval of street
grades and street improvements by the Town Engineer.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 261/505
3. No permit shall be issued by the building official of the Town on any parcel of property other than an
original building site or on a lot in a duly approved and recorded subdivision or a planned development tract
which has been approved by the Town Council in accordance with the provisions of the zoning ordinance.
(Ordinance 831 adopted 7/3/75)
Section 13. Plat filing fees.
1. Preliminary plat–A filing fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) shall be paid at the time of submission
of the preliminary plat for review by the Town Council.
2. Final plat–A filing fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) shall be paid at the time of submission of the
final plat for checking and approval by the Town Council.
3. Multiple building tracts–For multiple dwelling projects or business areas, a filing fee of two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) shall be paid when the preliminary plat of tracts or lots is submitted, and two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) shall be paid when the final plat of tracts or lots is submitted.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
The fees and charges herein provided shall be paid into the general fund of the Town of Highland Park when any
map or plat is tendered to the Town Council and each of the fees and charges provided herein shall be paid in
advance and no action of the Town Council shall be valid until the fee shall have been paid.
Section 14. Penalty.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this ordinance or who shall fail to
comply with any provision hereof within the corporate limits of the Town of Highland Park shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, may be fined as provided in section 1-7 [1.01.009] of this Code. The
penalty provided herein shall be cumulative of other remedies provided to the Town by and/or under state law or
regulation and/or federal law or regulation. (Ordinance 1552, sec. 37, adopted 7/21/03)
Section 15. Conflicts.
All ordinances and parts of ordinances inconsistent or in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
Section 16. Severability.
If any section or part of any section, paragraph or clause of this ordinance is declared invalid or unconstitutional
for any reason, such declaration shall not be held to invalidate or impair the validity, force or effect of any other
section or sections, part of section, paragraph or clause of this ordinance.
The fact that the present ordinances of the Town of Highland Park do not provide adequately for the regulation
[of] platting and land subdivision and the establishment of building sites creates an urgency and emergency in
the preservation of the public health, safety and welfare and requires that this ordinance shall take effect
immediately from and after its passage and publication of the caption of this ordinance as the law in such cases
provides.
PASSED AND APPROVED this the 3rd day of July, 1975.
APPROVED AS TO FORM:
H. Lou Morrison, Jr.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 262/505
Town Attorney
Mayor, Town of Highland Park, Texas
ATTEST:
Jerry T. Bell, Town Secretary
Ashley H. Priddy, Mayor
Town of Highland Park, Texas
CHAPTER 11
TAXATION
ARTICLE 11.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 11.02 PROPERTY TAXES†
Sec. 11.02.001 Homestead tax exemption for persons sixty-five years of age or older
(a) Granted; exception. From and after January 1, 1979, four thousand dollars ($4,000.00) of the market value
of resident homesteads, as defined by article VIII, section 1-b(b) of the Texas Constitution, of persons who have
obtained the age of sixty-five (65) years on or before January first of the year for which the exemption is
claimed shall be exempt from Town ad valorem taxes; provided, however, that where the ad valorem tax
heretofore has been pledged by the Town for payment of any debt, the taxing assessor of the Town shall have the
authority to continue to levy and collect the tax against said homestead property at the same rate as the tax was
pledged until the debt is discharged, if the cessation of the levy would impair the obligation of the contract by
which the debt was created.
(b) Proof of entitlement. In order to secure the benefit of the exemption, the owner of said homestead shall,
between January first and April first of each year, file with the Town Assessor-Collector, on a form furnished by
the tax Assessor-Collector, a sworn inventory of such property owned on January first of each year for which the
exemption is claimed and shall initially furnish proof of age by certified copy of his or her birth certificate, or if
such person does not have a certificate of birth then by the affidavit of two (2) persons at least five (5) years
older than the exempt claimant with actual knowledge of the date and place of birth and by the original or
certified copy of any two (2) of the following documents, which must be at least five (5) years old, to wit:
(1) Social security record.
(2) Federal census record.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 263/505
(3) State census record.
(4) Own child's birth certificate.
(5) Original birth notice in newspaper.
(6) School record.
(7) Insurance policy.
(8) Lodge record.
(9) Military record.
(10) Passport.
(11) Marriage record.
(12) Hospital record.
(13) Voter's registration record.
(14) Church baptismal record.
(15) Employment record.
(16) Physician's record.
(1971 Code, secs. 14 1/2-1, 14 1/2-2)
State law reference–Residence homestead tax exemptions, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 11.13.
Sec. 11.02.002 Taxation of certain exempt tangible personal property
The Town elects in 1990 and subsequent years to tax that tangible personal property described in article VIII,
section 1-j, subsection (a), Texas Constitution, and section 11.251, Texas Property Tax Code, which would
otherwise be exempt. (1971 Code, sec. 14 1/2-5)
State law reference–Tangible personal property (freeport goods) tax exemptions, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 11.251.
Sec. 11.02.003 Goods in transit
Goods in transit, as defined in the Texas Tax Code, section 11.253(a)(2), as amended by Senate Bill 1, enacted
by the 82nd Texas Legislature in Special Session, shall remain subject to taxation by the Town. (Ordinance 1868
adopted 10/10/11)
State law reference–Tax exemption for goods in transit, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 11.253.
ARTICLE 11.03 SALES AND USE TAXES*
Sec. 11.03.001 Tax on gas and electricity for residential use
The Town Council hereby officially and affirmatively elects to continue the taxes authorized by the Municipal
Sales and Use Tax Act (V.T.C.A., Tax Code, chapter 321) on the receipts from the sale, production, distribution,
lease, or rental of, and use, storage, or other consumption of, gas and electricity for residential use in the Town,
effective October 1, 1979, as authorized by section 6 of House Bill No. 1, Acts 1978, 65th Legislature, Second
Called Session. (1971 Code, sec. 14 1/2-3)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 264/505
State law reference–Authority of municipality to impose tax on sales of gas and electricity, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 321.105.
Sec. 11.03.002 Tax on telecommunications services
(a) Repeal of exemption. The Town repeals the tax exemption provided in V.T.C.A., Tax Code, section
321.210(a), for the collection of local sales and use taxes in connection with telecommunications services sold in
the corporate limits of the Town.
(b) Tax authorized; rate.
(1) A tax is hereby authorized on all telecommunications services sold within the Town. For
purposes of this section, the sale of telecommunications services is consummated at the location of
the telephone or other telecommunications device from which the call or other communication
originates. If the point of origin cannot be determined, the sale is consummated at the address to
which the call or other communication is billed.
(2) The rate of the tax imposed by this section shall be the same as the rate imposed by the Town
for all other local sales and use taxes as authorized by the Legislature of the State.
(1971 Code, sec. 14 1/2-4)
State law reference–Authority of municipality to impose tax on the sale of telecommunications services, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec.
321.210.
CHAPTER 12
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
ARTICLE 12.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 12.01.001 Title
This chapter shall be known as the traffic code and may be cited as such. (1971 Code, sec. 15-1)
Sec. 12.01.002 Definitions
Words used in this chapter and not specifically defined herein shall have their ordinary and commonly accepted
meaning as set forth in Webster's New International Dictionary (Unabridged), and other dictionaries of
recognized standing. The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall, for the purpose of this
chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
Alley. Any street having no regular or official name, other than “alley,” of twenty (20) feet or less in width.
(1971 Code, sec. 15-2; Ordinance adopting Code)
Bicycle. A nonmotorized vehicle having two or more wheels, propelled by human power upon which any person
may ride, and including any device generally. (Ordinance 2042 adopted 9/10/18)
Bus. Every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten (10) passengers and used for the transportation of
persons; and every motor vehicle, other than a taxicab, designed and used for the transportation of persons for
compensation.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 265/505
Business district. The territory contiguous to and including a roadway when, within any six hundred (600) feet
along such roadway, there are buildings in use for business or industrial purposes which occupy three hundred
(300) feet of frontage on one side or three hundred (300) feet collectively on both sides of the roadway.
(1971 Code, sec. 15-2; Ordinance adopting Code)
Commercial loading zone. A space adjacent to the curb to be used solely by commercial motor vehicles for
loading and unloading materials and/or freight while in the course of business to business commercial activity.
(Ordinance 1791, sec. 2, adopted 4/13/09)
Commercial motor vehicle. A motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, designed or used for the transportation of
property or for delivery purposes. (Ordinance 1977, sec. 2, adopted 5/11/15)
Crosswalk. That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral lines of the
sidewalks on opposite sides of the highway, measured from the curbs, or, in the absence of curbs, from the edges
of the traversable roadway. The word “crosswalk” also includes any portion of a roadway, at an intersection or
elsewhere, distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface.
Curb. The edge of a street, roadway, or highway, marked or understood.
Driver. Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
(1971 Code, sec. 15-2; Ordinance adopting Code)
Electric bicycle. A vehicle with two or more wheels, propelled by an electric motor or a combination of motor
and human power. This definition shall not apply to electric personal assistive mobility devices as defined by
section 551.201 of the Texas Transportation Code. (Ordinance 2042 adopted 9/10/18)
Gross combination weight rating. The value specified by the manufacturer as the loaded weight of a
combination or articulated vehicle or, if the manufacturer has not specified a value, the sum of the gross vehicle
weight rating of the power unit and the total weight of the towed unit or units and any load on a towed unit.
Gross vehicle weight rating. The value specified by the manufacturer as the loaded weight of a single vehicle.
(Ordinance 1977, sec. 2, adopted 5/11/15)
Intersection. The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curblines, or, if none, then
the lateral boundary lines, of the roadways of two (2) streets which join one another at, or approximately at, right
angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different streets joining at any other angle may come in
conflict. Where a street includes two (2) roadways thirty (30) feet or more apart, then every crossing of each
roadway of such divided street by an intersecting street shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the event
such intersecting street also includes two (2) roadways thirty (30) feet or more apart, then every crossing of two
(2) roadways of such streets shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
Laned roadway. A roadway which is divided into two (2) or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
Loading zones. A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or
unloading of passengers or materials.
(1971 Code, sec. 15-2; Ordinance adopting Code)
Motor-assisted scooter. A self-propelled device with: (1) at least two wheels in contact with the ground during
operation; (2) a braking system capable of stopping the device under typical operating conditions; (3) a gas or
electric motor not exceeding 40 cubic centimeters; (4) a deck designed to allow a person to stand or sit while
operating the device; and (5) the ability to be propelled by human power alone. This definition shall not apply to
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 266/505
electric personal assistive mobility devices as defined by section 551.201 of the Texas Transportation Code.
(Ordinance 2042 adopted 9/10/18)
Motor vehicle. A self-propelled vehicle of two (2) or more wheels designed to transport a person or property,
excluding scooters or toy vehicles propelled by nonhuman power.
Negligence. Negligence is the want of such care and caution as a person of ordinary prudence would use under
like or similar circumstances. Negligence shall be prima facie presumed from the fact of collision.
One-way street. Any street or highway on which traffic is restricted to movement in one direction only.
One-way traffic. Traffic restricted to movement in one direction only on any particularly designated street or
thoroughfare, and signposted as such.
Owner. A person who holds the legal title of a vehicle, or, in the event a vehicle is the subject of an agreement
for the conditional sale or lease thereof with the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in
the agreement and with an immediate right of possession vested in the conditional vendee or lessee, or in the
event a mortgagor of a vehicle is entitled to possession, then such conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor
shall be deemed the owner for the purpose of this chapter.
Park. When prohibited, means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for
the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading.
Pedestrian. Any person afoot.
Pole trailer. Every vehicle, without motive power, designed to be drawn by another vehicle and attached to the
towing vehicle by means of a reach or pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle, and
ordinarily used for transporting long or irregularly shaped loads such as poles, pipes or structural members,
capable, generally, of sustaining themselves as beams between the supporting connections.
Police Officer. Every official of the Town Police Department or any official authorized to direct or regulate
traffic or to make arrests of violations of ordinances of the Town and the laws of the State.
Residence district. The territory contiguous to and including a street or highway not comprising a business
district, when the property on such street or highway, for a distance of three hundred (300) feet or more, is in the
main improved with residences or residences and buildings in use for business.
Right-of-way. The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway.
Roadway. That portion of a highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. In the event a
highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways, the term “roadway” shall refer to any such roadway
separately but not to all such roadways collectively.
Roller skates. Footwear with a set of wheels attached.
Scooter. A foot-operated vehicle consisting of a narrow footboard mounted between two (2) wheels tandem with
an upright steering handle attached to the front wheel.
Semitrailer. Every vehicle, with or without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons
or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its
load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.
(1971 Code, sec. 15-2; Ordinance adopting Code)
Shared mobility device. Any bicycle, electric bicycle, motor-assisted scooter, or other similar personal
transportation device, which is displayed, offered and/or placed for rent which may be locked and unlocked with
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 267/505
or without the requirement of a docking station. (Ordinance 2042 adopted 9/10/18)
Sidewalk. That portion of a street between the curblines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent
property lines, intended for the use of pedestrians.
Slow sign. A sign bearing upon its face the word “slow.”
Stop. When required, means complete cessation of movement.
Stop sign. An octagon-shaped sign with the word “stop” displayed thereon and which sign requires traffic to stop
before proceeding past such stop sign.
Stop, stopping or standing. When prohibited, means any stopping or standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or
not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a Police
Officer or traffic-control sign or signal.
Street, road, boulevard or highway. The entire width between property lines of every way or place of whatever
nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter or right, for the purpose of vehicular
traffic.
Toy vehicle. Any vehicle or device which is self-propelled and not capable of speeds exceeding ten (10) miles
per hour during operation and by design not suitable for operation upon a roadway.
(1971 Code, sec. 15-2; Ordinance adopting Code)
Tractor. A motor vehicle designed or used primarily for drawing another vehicle that:
(1) Is not constructed to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load being
drawn; or
(2) Is engaged with a semitrailer in the transportation of automobiles or boats and that transports
the automobiles or boats on part of the truck-tractor.
(Ordinance 1977, sec. 2, adopted 5/11/15)
Traffic. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other conveyances, either singly or together, while
using any street for purposes of travel.
Traffic-control device. All signs, signals, markings or devices, not inconsistent with this chapter, placed or
erected by authority of the Town Council or officials having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning
or guiding traffic.
Traffic-control signal. Any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is
alternately directed to stop and to proceed.
Trailer. Every vehicle, with or without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or
property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the
towing vehicle.
Truck. Every motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property.
Vehicle. A device in or by which a person or property is or may be transported or drawn on a roadway or
sidewalk, other than a device used exclusively on stationary rails or tracks.
Yield sign. A sign with the word “yield” displayed thereon.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 268/505
(1971 Code, sec. 15-2; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 12.01.003 Driving or parking vehicle on Town property other than street or parking lot
No vehicle shall be driven over, parked, or left standing on any property owned by the Town except land laid out
and dedicated for public streets or parking lots. (1971 Code, sec. 15-8)
Sec. 12.01.004 Riding on portion of vehicle not intended for passengers
No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designated or intended for the use of
passengers. This provision shall not apply to any employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to
persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise. (1971 Code, sec. 15-10)
State law reference–Persons under 18 riding in open bed of truck or trailer, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.414.
Sec. 12.01.005 Boarding or alighting from moving vehicle
No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. (1971 Code, sec. 15-11)
Sec. 12.01.006 Use of roller skates, coasters or other toy vehicles on roadway
(a) No person upon roller skates, roller blades or similar device, or riding in or by means of any skateboard,
scooter, toy vehicle or similar device, whether propelled by either human or nonhuman power, shall go upon any
roadway, except while crossing a street on a crosswalk, and when so crossing, such person shall be granted all of
the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians.
(b) Whenever a person is performing an activity described in subsection (a), such person shall utilize the
sidewalk for such activity, provided that the person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian, and the person
shall conduct such activity in a safe and prudent manner.
(1971 Code, sec. 15-13)
Sec. 12.01.007 Use of vehicle for primary purpose of advertising
No person shall operate or park any vehicle on any street nor shall any owner suffer or permit any vehicle
belonging to him to be operated or parked for the primary purpose of advertising. (1971 Code, sec. 15-14)
Sec. 12.01.008 Noisy vehicles
It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle which makes unusually loud and unnecessary noise. (1971 Code, sec.
15-15)
Sec. 12.01.009 Portions of streets closed to vehicular traffic
(a) Lomo Alto Drive between Lemmon and Bowser Avenues. A portion of Lomo Alto Drive, a public street of
the Town, is hereby closed to through vehicular traffic beginning at its intersection with Lemmon Avenue on the
south and the right-of-way of Bowser Avenue on the north, being a tract of land situated with a variable width
right-of-way between block 95 and block 95A of the West Park Addition, an addition to the Town. The Town
retains the right to use that portion of Lomo Alto Drive which is closed to through vehicular traffic for all other
purposes, including, but not limited to, the right to maintain, operate, sell, lease, repair and replace, by itself or
by licensee or a holder of a franchise from the Town, any pole, wires, pipes, conduits, sewer lines, water mains,
and any other facility or equipment for maintenance or operation of any utility.
(b) Oak Lawn Avenue between Wycliffe and Prescott Avenues. The portion of Oak Lawn Avenue, a public
street, being a tract of land situated between Wycliffe Avenue on the south and Prescott Avenue on the north in
block 170 of the Highland Park Acreage Addition as shown in the Wm. Grigsby Survey, abstract numbers 501
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 269/505
and 268, Town of Highland Park, Dallas County, Texas, as recorded in volume 2, page 85, of the Dallas County
plat records and containing 12,620 square feet. The Town forever closes the right-of-way for use as a public
street, and thereby discontinues and/or abandons its use of the right-of-way as a public street. The Town retains
the right to use that portion of the right-of-way for all other purposes, including but not limited to the right to
maintain, operate, sell, lease, repair and replace, by itself or by licensee or a holder of a franchise from the Town,
any pole, wires, pipes, conduits, sewer lines, water mains, and any other facility or equipment for maintenance
or operation of any utility.
(1971 Code, sec. 15-152)
ARTICLE 12.02 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 12.02.001 Duty to enforce traffic laws
It shall be the duty of the officers of the Police Department, or such officers as are assigned by the Chief of
Police, to enforce all provisions of this chapter and all of the State vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the
Town. (1971 Code, sec. 15-3)
Sec. 12.02.002 Authority of Police Officers to direct traffic
Officers of the Police Department, or such officers as are assigned by the Chief of Police, are hereby authorized
to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with this chapter and other traffic laws. In the event
of fire or other emergency, or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the Police Department
may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter and other traffic laws.
(1971 Code, sec. 15-4)
Sec. 12.02.003 Authority of officers of Fire Department to direct traffic
Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the Police in directing traffic
thereat or in the immediate vicinity. (1971 Code, sec. 15-5)
Sec. 12.02.004 Obedience to traffic officers
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a Police Officer or Fire
Department official given to direct or control traffic as authorized in this chapter. (1971 Code, sec. 15-6)
Sec. 12.02.005 Books for traffic citation forms
(a) The Town Secretary shall provide books to include traffic citation forms for notifying alleged violators to
appear and answer to charges of violating traffic laws and ordinances in the Municipal Court of this Town. Such
books shall include serially numbered sets of citations in duplicate in the form prescribed and approved jointly
by the Town Attorney and the Chief of Police.
(b) The Town Secretary shall issue such books to the Chief of Police or his duly authorized agent and shall
maintain a record of every book so issued and shall require a written receipt for every such book.
(c) The Chief of Police shall be responsible for the issuance of such books to individual members of the Police
Department. The Chief of Police shall require a written receipt for every book so issued and shall maintain a
record of every such book and each set of citations contained therein.
(1971 Code, sec. 15-26)
Sec. 12.02.006 Disposition of complaints
Upon the filing of a complaint in the Municipal Court of this Town for a traffic violation, the complaint may be
disposed of only by trial in such court or by other official action by a Judge of such Court, including forfeiture of
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 270/505
bail or payment of a fine to the Traffic Violations Bureau of the Court. (1971 Code, sec. 15-30)
Sec. 12.02.007 Record of violations
(a) The Chief of Police shall maintain or cause to be maintained, in connection with every traffic citation
issued by a member of the Police Department, a record of the disposition of the charge by the Municipal Court.
(b) The Chief of Police shall maintain or cause to be maintained a record of all warrants issued by the
Municipal Court on traffic violation charges and which are delivered to the Police Department for service, and of
the final disposition of all such warrants.
(1971 Code, sec. 15-31)
Sec. 12.02.008 Unlawful disposal or alteration of citation, complaint or warrant
It shall be unlawful and official misconduct for any member of the Police Department or other officer or public
employee to dispose of, alter or deface a traffic citation or any copy thereof, or the record of the issuance or
disposition of any traffic citation, complaint or warrant, in a manner other than as required in this chapter. (1971
Code, sec. 15-32)
ARTICLE 12.03 TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES*
Sec. 12.03.001 Conformity with State manual and specifications; uniformity
All traffic-control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the manual and specifications approved by the
State Transportation Commission. All signs and signals required under this chapter for a particular purpose shall,
so far as practicable, be uniform as to type and location throughout the Town. All traffic-control devices so
erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of State law or this chapter shall be official traffic-control
devices. (1971 Code, sec. 15-81)
State law reference–Adoption of sign manual and specifications, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 544.001.
Sec. 12.03.002 Necessity of signs
No provision of this chapter for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the
time and place of the alleged violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be
seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state that signs are required, such
section shall be effective even though no signs are erected or in place. (1971 Code, sec. 15-83)
Sec. 12.03.003 Location of traffic-control signals
Traffic-control signals are hereby authorized at the following locations, and it shall be unlawful for any person to
fail to obey the traffic-control signals erected to control all traffic at the following streets:
Abbott Avenue at its intersection with Mockingbird Lane.
Airline Road at its intersection with Mockingbird Lane.
Armstrong Avenue at its intersection with Lakeside Drive.
Armstrong Avenue 100 feet east of Preston Road.
Armstrong Parkway at its intersection with Oak Lawn Avenue, Preston Road, Mockingbird Lane.
Beverly Drive at its intersection with Preston Road.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 271/505
Byron Avenue at its intersection with Mockingbird Lane.
Douglas Avenue at its intersection with Mockingbird Lane.
Fairfield Avenue at its intersection with Mockingbird Lane.
Herschel Avenue at its intersection with Oak Lawn Avenue.
Hillcrest Avenue at its intersection with Mockingbird Lane.
Lakeside Drive at its intersection with Armstrong Avenue.
Lomo Alto Drive (north side) at its intersection with Lemmon Avenue.
Lomo Alto Drive (south side) at its intersection with Lemmon Avenue.
Lomo Alto Drive at its intersection with Mockingbird Lane.
Mockingbird Lane at its intersection with Airline Road, Abbott Avenue, Byron Avenue, Douglas
Avenue, Fairfield Avenue, Hillcrest Avenue, Lomo Alto Drive, Preston Road.
Mockingbird Lane 362 feet east of Preston Road.
Mockingbird Lane 288 feet west of Preston Road.
Oak Lawn Avenue at its intersection with Armstrong Parkway, Herschel Avenue, Wycliffe Avenue.
Preston Road at its intersection with Armstrong Parkway, Beverly Drive, Mockingbird Lane.
Wycliffe Avenue at its intersection with Oak Lawn Avenue.
(1971 Code, sec. 15-85)
Sec. 12.03.004 Right on arrow only intersections; no right turn on red intersections
(a) The following “right on arrow only” signs are hereby authorized, and it shall be unlawful for any person to
fail to obey the signs erected to control all traffic at the following intersections:
At the intersection of Armstrong Parkway and Oak Lawn Avenue for southeast-bound traffic on
Armstrong Parkway.
(b) The following “no right turn on red” signs are hereby authorized, and it shall be unlawful for any person to
fail to obey the signs erected to control all traffic at the following intersections:
At the intersection of Armstrong Parkway and Oak Lawn Avenue for northbound traffic on Oak
Lawn Avenue.
At the intersection of Armstrong Avenue and Preston Road for northwest-bound traffic on Armstrong
Avenue.
At the intersection of Mockingbird Lane and Douglas Avenue for northbound traffic on Douglas
Avenue, and for westbound traffic on Mockingbird Lane.
(1971 Code, sec. 15-85.1)
Sec. 12.03.005 Time and location of flashing red signals
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 272/505
Flashing red traffic-control signals shall be installed at the following locations and shall be operable during the
time specified:
Location
Time
Abbott Avenue at Mockingbird Lane
1:00 a.m. to 5:30 a.m.
Airline Road at Mockingbird Lane
1:00 a.m. to 5:30 a.m.
Armstrong Avenue at Lakeside Drive
1:00 a.m. to 5:30 a.m.
Armstrong Avenue at Preston Road
1:00 a.m. to 5:30 a.m.
Armstrong Parkway at Mockingbird
Lane
1:00 a.m. to 5:30 a.m.
Beverly Drive at Preston Road
1:00 a.m. to 5:30 a.m.
Byron Avenue at Mockingbird Lane
10:00 p.m. to 5:30
a.m.
Douglas Avenue at Mockingbird Lane
1:00 a.m. to 5:30 a.m.
Fairfield Avenue at Mockingbird Lane
1:00 a.m. to 5:30 a.m.
Herschel Avenue at Oak Lawn Avenue
1:00 a.m. to 5:30 a.m.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 273/505
Hillcrest Avenue at Mockingbird Lane
1:00 a.m. to 5:30 a.m.
Lakeside Drive at Armstrong Avenue
1:00 a.m. to 5:30 a.m.
Lomo Alto Drive at Mockingbird Lane
1:00 a.m. to 5:30 a.m.
Mockingbird Lane at Hillcrest Avenue
1:00 a.m. to 5:30 a.m.
Mockingbird Lane at Preston Road
1:00 a.m. to 5:30 a.m.
Preston Road at Armstrong Avenue
1:00 a.m. to 5:30 a.m.
Preston Road at Beverly Drive
1:00 a.m. to 5:30 a.m.
Wycliffe Avenue at Oak Lawn Avenue
1:00 a.m. to 5:30 a.m.
(1971 Code, sec. 15-87; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 12.03.006 Time and location of flashing yellow signals
Flashing yellow traffic-control signals shall be installed at the following locations and shall be operable during
the time specified:
Location
Time
Mockingbird Lane at Abbott Avenue
1:00 a.m. to 5:30 a.m.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 274/505
Mockingbird Lane at Airline Road
1:00 a.m. to 5:30 a.m.
Mockingbird Lane at Armstrong
Parkway
1:00 a.m. to 5:30 a.m.
Mockingbird Lane at Byron Avenue
10:00 p.m. to 5:30
a.m.
Mockingbird Lane at Douglas Avenue
1:00 a.m. to 5:30 a.m.
Mockingbird Lane at Fairfield Avenue
1:00 a.m. to 5:30 a.m.
Mockingbird Lane at Lomo Alto Drive
1:00 a.m. to 5:30 a.m.
Oak Lawn Avenue at Herschel Avenue
1:00 a.m. to 5:30 a.m.
Oak Lawn Avenue at Wycliffe Avenue
1:00 a.m. to 5:30 a.m.
Preston Road at Mockingbird Lane
1:00 a.m. to 5:30 a.m.
(1971 Code, sec. 15-88)
ARTICLE 12.04 OPERATION OF VEHICLES GENERALLY*
Sec. 12.04.001 Passing in school zone
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate a motor vehicle so as to overtake or pass another motor
vehicle proceeding in the same direction in a school zone, as designated in section 12.06.004. This section shall
be in effect and force only on official school days, during the hours when school zones are in effect, and when
school zone signs are posted in place. (1971 Code, sec. 15-45; Ordinance adopting Code)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 275/505
Sec. 12.04.002 Turns prohibited at specific intersections
When signs are in place giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle:
(1) Northbound on the east leg of Lakeside Drive to make a left turn on to Armstrong Avenue.
(2) To make a left turn onto Oak Lawn Avenue from the north end of the off-street parking area on
the east side of the 4200 block of Oak Lawn Avenue.
(3) Northbound on Roland Avenue to make a right turn onto Southern Avenue.
(4) Westbound in the left lane of the 4300 block of Southern Avenue, a one-way street at that
location, at its approach to the intersection of Armstrong Parkway, to make any movement other than
a left turn onto Armstrong Parkway.
(5) Westbound in the right lane of the 4300 block of Southern Avenue, a one-way street at that
location, at its approach to the intersection of Armstrong Parkway, to make any movement other than
a right turn onto Armstrong Parkway or to proceed westbound on Southern Avenue.
(1971 Code, sec. 15-48)
(6) To make a left turn from eastbound Shenandoah Avenue at its intersection with High School
Avenue from 2:30 p.m. to 4:30 p.m. school days. (Ordinance 1573, sec. 1, adopted 12/1/03)
Sec. 12.04.003 Streets where right lane must turn right
The following streets are designated as “right lane must turn right” streets:
Street Extent Traffic
Movement
Time
Applicable
Armstrong Avenue At the intersection of Preston Road West All
Hillcrest Avenue At the intersection of Mockingbird
Lane
South All
Mockingbird Lane At the intersection of Hillcrest
Avenue
West All
(1971 Code, sec. 15-48.1)
Sec. 12.04.004 Limitations on turning around
The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street
unless a sign is in place authorizing such a turn at the particular location, and shall not, under any circumstances,
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 276/505
so turn a vehicle unless such movement can be made in safety and without interfering with other traffic. (1971
Code, sec. 15-49)
Sec. 12.04.005 Yield intersections
The following “yield right-of-way” or “yield” signs are hereby authorized, and the driver of a vehicle
approaching such a sign shall yield the right-of-way as required by the Texas Transportation Code: (1971 Code,
sec. 15-54; Ordinance adopting Code)
On Crescent Avenue (westbound lane) at its intersection with St. Johns Drive.
On Oxford Avenue where it intersects with Drexel Drive, requiring southbound Oxford Avenue
traffic to yield the right-of-way to the Drexel Drive traffic.
On Roland Avenue at a point between Livingston Avenue and Southern Avenue where the Dallas
North Tollway northbound exit ramp intersects with Roland Avenue, requiring the northbound
Roland Avenue traffic to yield the right-of-way to the Dallas North Tollway northbound exit ramp
traffic.
On St. Johns Drive at a point north of its intersection with Fitzhugh Avenue, requiring northbound
traffic turning right off Fitzhugh Avenue to yield right-of-way to northbound St. Johns Drive traffic.
(1971 Code, sec. 15-54; Ordinance 1720, sec. 1, adopted 12/10/07; Ordinance 2008, sec. 2, adopted 10/10/16)
Sec. 12.04.006 Stop intersections
The following stop signs are hereby authorized, and it shall be unlawful for any person to fail to obey the stop
signs erected to control all traffic entering the following streets and thoroughfares:
Abbott Avenue
At its intersection with Armstrong Avenue, Auburndale Avenue,
Beverly Drive, Cornell Avenue, Dartmouth Avenue, Drexel Drive,
Harvard Avenue, Knox Street, Princeton Avenue, St. Johns Drive.
Airline Road At its intersection with Cornell Avenue, Drexel Drive, St. Johns
Drive.
Alice Circle At its intersection with Cowper Avenue, St. Johns Drive.
Alley between the MKT
Railroad right-of-way and
Block 71
At its intersection with the east-west alley in Block 71.
Arcady Avenue At its intersection with Eastern Avenue, Roland Avenue, Lomo
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 277/505
Alto Drive, Armstrong Parkway, Douglas Avenue, Preston Road,
Westside Drive.
Armstrong Avenue At its intersection with Abbott Avenue.
Armstrong Parkway At its intersection with Douglas Avenue, Beverly Drive, Southern
Avenue.
Auburndale Avenue At its intersection with Potomac Avenue, Mockingbird Lane,
Cornell Avenue, Beverly Drive, Abbott Avenue, St. Johns Drive.
Belclaire Avenue At its intersection with Westside Drive, Eastern Avenue, Lomo Alto
Drive, Armstrong Parkway, Douglas Avenue, Preston Road.
Belfort Place At its intersection with Roland Avenue, Lomo Alto Drive,
Armstrong Parkway.
Beverly Avenue
At its intersection with Abbott Avenue, Auburndale Avenue,
Hillcrest Avenue, Byron Avenue, St. Johns Drive, Drexel Drive,
Douglas Avenue, Armstrong Parkway, Lomo Alto Drive, Oxford
Avenue, Sewanee Avenue, Roland Avenue, Eastern Avenue,
Westside Drive, Eton Avenue.
Bordeaux Avenue
At its intersection with Lomo Alto Drive, Armstrong Parkway,
Douglas Avenue, Preston Road, Roland Avenue, Eastern Avenue;
Westside Drive.
Bowser Avenue At its intersection with Lomo Alto Drive, Roland Avenue.
Byron Avenue At its intersection with Mockingbird Lane, Cornell Avenue,
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 278/505
Beverly Drive, Euclid Avenue, Lexington Avenue, Armstrong
Avenue, Crescent Avenue, St. Johns Drive, Drexel Drive,
Lindenwood Avenue.
Cambridge Avenue At its intersection with Mockingbird Lane, Drexel Drive.
Cornell Avenue
At its intersection with Airline Road, Abbott Avenue, Hillcrest
Avenue, Byron Avenue, Auburndale Avenue, St. Johns Drive,
Sewanee Avenue.
Cowper Avenue At its intersection with Dartmouth Avenue, Euclid Avenue,
Lexington Avenue, Princeton Avenue.
Crescent Avenue At its intersection with Abbott Avenue, Cowper Avenue.
Dartmouth Avenue At its intersection with Byron Avenue, Auburndale Avenue,
Hillcrest Avenue, Abbott Avenue, St. Johns Drive.
Douglas Avenue At its intersection with Armstrong Parkway, Beverly Drive,
Livingston Avenue.
Drexel Drive
At its intersection with Airline Road, Abbott Avenue, Hillcrest
Avenue, Auburndale Avenue, Byron Avenue, Beverly Drive,
Highland Drive, Miramar Avenue, Euclid Avenue, Lexington
Avenue, Sewanee Avenue.
Eastern Avenue At its intersection with Beverly Drive, Belclaire Avenue, Westside
Drive.
Edmondson Avenue At its intersection with Westside Drive, Eastern Avenue, Lomo Alto
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 279/505
Drive, Armstrong Avenue, Douglas Avenue, Preston Road.
Eton Avenue At its intersection with Mockingbird Lane, Beverly Drive, Drexel
Drive.
Euclid Avenue At its intersection with Lakeside Drive, Highland Drive, Drexel
Drive, Abbott Avenue.
Fairfax Avenue At its intersection with Westside Drive, Eastern Avenue, Lomo Alto
Drive, Armstrong Parkway, Douglas Avenue.
Fairfield Avenue At its intersection with Beverly Drive, Shenandoah Avenue, Euclid
Avenue.
Fairway Avenue At its intersection with Roland Avenue, Lomo Alto Drive.
Fitzhugh Avenue At its intersection with St. Johns Drive.
Fourth Street At its intersection with Abbott Avenue.
Gillon Avenue
At its intersection with Highland Drive, Fairfield Avenue, Eton
Avenue, Byron Avenue, Cowper Avenue, Abbott Avenue, Drexel
Drive, Lakeside Drive.
Gillon Avenue Westbound at its intersection with Harvard Avenue.
Golf Drive At its intersection with Potomac Avenue, Mockingbird Lane,
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 280/505
Shenandoah Avenue, Normandy Avenue.
Harvard Avenue At its intersection with Byron Avenue, Cowper Avenue,
Auburndale Avenue, Hillcrest Avenue, Abbott Avenue.
Harvard Avenue Westbound at its intersection with St. Johns Drive.
Hawthorne Avenue At its intersection with Oak Lawn Avenue.
Highland Drive At its intersection with Beverly Drive, Armstrong Avenue, Euclid
Avenue.
High School Avenue At its intersection with Mockingbird Lane, Potomac Avenue.
Hillcrest Avenue
At its intersection with Abbott Avenue (southbound), Beverly
Drive, Dartmouth Avenue, St. Johns Drive, Normandy Avenue,
Harvard Avenue (southbound).
Holland Avenue At its intersection with Westside Drive.
Key Street At its intersection with Potomac Avenue, Mockingbird Lane.
Knox Street At its intersection with Abbott Avenue.
Lakeside Drive At its intersection with Beverly Drive, Armstrong Avenue, Wycliffe
Avenue.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 281/505
LaSalle Avenue At its intersection with Westway Avenue, Rheims Place.
Laurel Avenue At its intersection with Highland Drive, Lakeside Drive.
Lexington Avenue At its intersection with Highland Drive, Drexel Drive, St. Johns
Drive, Abbott Avenue, Lakeside Drive.
Lindenwood Avenue At its intersection with Byron Avenue, Auburndale Avenue, Abbott
Avenue, Gillon Avenue.
Livingston Avenue At its intersection with Westside Drive, Eastern Avenue, Lomo Alto
Drive, Armstrong Parkway, Douglas Avenue, Preston Road.
Lomo Alto Drive At its intersection with Beverly Drive, Bordeaux Avenue, Bowser
Avenue.
Lorraine Avenue
At its intersection with Roland Avenue, Lomo Alto Drive,
Armstrong Parkway, Douglas Avenue, Preston Road, Eastern
Avenue, Westside Drive.
MacArthur Avenue At its intersection with Westside Drive.
Maplewood Avenue At its intersection with Cambridge Avenue, Oxford Avenue, Eton
Avenue, Drexel Drive, Fairfield Avenue.
Miramar Avenue At its intersection with Highland Drive, Fairfield Avenue, Eton
Avenue, Drexel Drive, Lakeside Drive, St. Johns Drive.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 282/505
Mt. Vernon Avenue At its intersection with Potomac Avenue, Mockingbird Lane,
Normandy Avenue, Shenandoah Avenue.
Normandy Avenue At its intersection with Key Street, High School Avenue, Golf
Drive, Fairfield Avenue, Mt. Vernon Avenue.
Oak Lawn Avenue At the intersection of the right turn lane with Armstrong Avenue.
Oxford Avenue At its intersection with Mockingbird Lane, Beverly Drive.
Potomac Avenue
At its intersection with Hillcrest Avenue, High School Avenue,
Golf Drive, Fairfield Avenue, Preston Road, Douglas Avenue, Key
Street, Mt. Vernon Avenue.
Prescott Street At its intersection with Oak Lawn Avenue, Lakeside Drive.
Princeton Avenue At its intersection with Byron Avenue, Auburndale Avenue,
Hillcrest Avenue, Abbott Avenue, St. Johns Drive.
Rheims Place At its intersection with Roland Avenue, Lomo Alto Drive,
Armstrong Parkway.
Roland Avenue
At its intersection with Beverly Drive, Belclaire Avenue, Bordeaux
Avenue, Lomo Alto Drive, Rheims Place, Fairway Avenue,
Westway Avenue.
Sewanee Avenue At its intersection with Mockingbird Lane, Drexel Drive, St. Johns
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 283/505
Drive, Cornell Avenue, Beverly Drive, Princeton Avenue.
Shenandoah Avenue At its intersection with High School Avenue, Golf Drive, Fairfield
Avenue, Mt. Vernon Avenue.
Southern Avenue At its intersection with Westside Drive, Lomo Alto Drive,
Armstrong Parkway, Eastern Avenue.
St. Johns Drive
At its intersection with Airline Road, Abbott Avenue, Hillcrest
Avenue, Auburndale Avenue, Byron Avenue, Beverly Drive, Euclid
Avenue, Armstrong Avenue, Wycliffe Avenue, Lexington Avenue,
Sewanee Avenue.
St. Johns Drive Southbound at its intersection with Harvard Avenue.
St. Johns Drive Eastbound at its intersection with Harvard Avenue.
Stratford Avenue At its intersection with Oxford Avenue, Eton Avenue, Drexel Drive,
Fairfield Avenue.
Versailles Avenue At its intersection with Armstrong Parkway, Douglas Avenue,
Preston Road.
N. Versailles Avenue At its intersection with Westside Drive, Eastern Avenue, Roland
Avenue, Lomo Alto Drive.
S. Versailles Avenue At its intersection with Westside Drive, Eastern Avenue, Roland
Avenue, Lomo Alto Drive.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 284/505
Westside Drive At its intersection with Beverly Drive, Southern Avenue, Lemmon
Avenue.
Westway Avenue At its intersection with Roland Avenue, Lomo Alto Drive, Douglas
Avenue, Armstrong Parkway.
Willow Wood Circle At its intersection with Preston Road.
Wycliffe Avenue At its intersection with Lakeside Drive, St. Johns Drive.
(Ordinance 2008, sec. 3, adopted 10/10/16)
Sec. 12.04.007 Entering street designated by “do not enter” sign
Vehicle entry prohibited:
Entry on Potomac Avenue from Preston Road.
(1971 Code, sec. 15-55.1)
Sec. 12.04.008 Motor vehicles prohibited on portion of Byron Avenue on school days
On all the public school days of Armstrong School, from one-half (1/2) hour before and ending one-half (1/2)
hour after the regular school hours for this school, as designated by the Highland Park School District, Bryon
Avenue, a public street, at its intersections with the public streets of St. Johns Drive and Cornell Avenue, shall be
closed to all motor vehicles and during this period shall be reserved only for the use of pedestrian and bicycle
traffic. Employees of the Highland Park School District and/or the Department of Public Safety of the Town are
hereby authorized, during these times, to place barricades on Byron Avenue at this designated location for
enforcement of the terms of this section. (1971 Code, sec. 15-55.2)
Sec. 12.04.009 Obstructing intersection or crosswalk
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of
the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of
other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed. (1971 Code, sec.
15-63)
Sec. 12.04.010 Driving in processions
Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the righthand edge of the roadway as practical
and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practical and safe. (1971 Code, sec. 15-67)
Sec. 12.04.011 Driving through processions
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 285/505
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while
they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated. (1971 Code, sec. 15-68)
Sec. 12.04.012 Causing noise by spinning tires
Any driver of a motor vehicle starting from a stopped position with such force so as to create a loud noise by the
slipping and spinning of tires on such motor vehicle, which noise is possible to be heard at a distance of at least
five hundred (500) feet, or any driver of a motor vehicle driving at a slow rate of speed and accelerating with
such force so as to create a loud noise by the slipping and spinning of tires on such motor vehicle, which noise is
possible to be heard at a distance of at least five hundred (500) feet, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (1971
Code, sec. 15-73)
Sec. 12.04.013 Negligent collision
No person driving or operating or in charge of any vehicle shall, by negligence, cause or suffer or permit same to
come in collision with any other vehicle of any nature whatsoever, or with any animal, person, street sign, street
post, water plug, mailbox or any other obstacle or object whatever, in or on any street, alley, avenue, highway or
other public place whatever in the Town. Violation of this section shall be known as the offense of negligent
collision. (1971 Code, sec. 15-75)
Sec. 12.04.014 Use of handheld mobile telephones prohibited in school zones
(a) For purposes of this section the following definitions apply:
(1) Engaging in a call. Talking into, dialing or listening on a handheld mobile telephone, but shall
not include holding a mobile telephone to activate or deactivate such telephone.
(2) Hands-free mobile telephone. A mobile telephone that has an internal feature or function, or
that is equipped with an attachment or addition, whether or not permanently part of such mobile
telephone, by which a user engages in a call without the use of either hand (or prosthetic device or
aid in the case of a physically disabled person), whether or not the use of either hand (or prosthetic
device) is necessary to activate, deactivate or initiate a function of such telephone.
(3) Handheld mobile telephone. A mobile telephone with which a user engages in a call using at
least one hand (or prosthetic device or aid in the case of a physically disabled person).
(4) Mobile telephone. The device used by subscribers and other users of wireless telephone service
to access such service and shall include personal digital assistants.
(5) Personal digital assistant. A device operated using a wireless telecommunications service that
provides for data communication other than by voice.
(6) Wireless telephone service. Two-way real time voice telecommunications service that is
interconnected to a public switched telephone network and commonly referred to as cellular service
or personal communication service.
(b) Except as otherwise provided below, it shall be unlawful for a person to drive or operate a motor vehicle in
a school zone, as designated in section 12.06.004, on official school days, during the hours when school zones
are in effect, and when school zone signs and signs prohibiting handheld mobile telephone use are posted in
place, while using a handheld mobile telephone to engage in a call or to create, send or read messages.
(c) An operator of a motor vehicle who holds a mobile telephone to, or in the immediate proximity of his or
her ear while such vehicle is in motion is presumed to be engaging in a call within the meaning of this section.
“Immediate proximity” shall mean that distance as permits the operator of a mobile telephone to hear
telecommunications transmitted over such mobile telephone, but shall not require physical contact with such
operator's ear.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 286/505
(d) Subsection (b) shall not apply to:
(1) The use of a mobile telephone for the sole purpose of communicating with any of the following
regarding an emergency situation: an emergency response operator; a hospital, a physician's office or
health clinic; the Town's Department of Public Safety;
(2) Any law enforcement, public safety or police officers, emergency services officials, first aid,
emergency medical technicians and personnel, or any fire safety officials in the performance of duties
arising out of and in the course of their employment as such; or
(3) The use of a hands-free mobile telephone when being used in a hands-free manner.
(e) The violation of this section is a strict liability offense.
(Ordinance 1716 adopted 11/12/07)
ARTICLE 12.05 ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS*
Sec. 12.05.001 Designated
The following streets or portions of streets are hereby designated as one-way streets restricted to traffic
movement in the direction indicated during the time specified:
Street Extent Direction of
Traffic
Movement
Time Applicable
Cornell Avenue Byron Avenue to St. Johns
Drive
West 7:30 a.m. to 4:30
p.m. (school days
only)
Eastern Avenue Mockingbird Lane to
Bordeaux Avenue
South All
Fitzhugh Avenue Beginning at the intersection
of Fitzhugh Avenue at the
centerline of Turtle Creek at
St. Johns Drive eastward
along Fitzhugh Avenue, a
distance of 308 feet to the
centerline of a branch of
Turtle Creek and the Town
limits
Westward All
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 287/505
Lexington Avenue Between Drexel Drive and St.
Johns Drive
East All
Oak Lawn
Avenue
Wycliffe to Prescott (east side,
off-street parking area)
North All
Overhill Drive All North All
Roland Avenue Bowser Avenue to
Mockingbird Lane
North All
Southern Avenue Douglas Avenue to Armstrong
Avenue
West All
St. Johns Drive Beginning at the intersection
of Cornell Avenue and
extending north to the
intersection with Byron
Avenue
North/East 7:30 a.m. to 4:30
p.m. (school days
only)
Wycliffe Avenue Beginning at the intersection
of Wycliffe Avenue and the
Town limits at the west line of
Oak Lawn Avenue eastward
along Wycliffe Avenue, a
distance of 853 feet to the
centerline of Turtle Creek at
St. Johns Drive
Westward All
(1971 Code, sec. 15-103; Ordinance 1578, sec. 1, adopted 1/26/04; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 12.05.002 Signs
The Town Administrator shall place and maintain signs giving notice that any street or alley has been designated
for one-way traffic. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every
intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. (1971 Code, sec. 15-104)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 288/505
Sec. 12.05.003 Vehicles to move only in indicated direction
Upon streets and alleys designated for one-way traffic, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated
direction, and no person shall drive a vehicle in any other direction, when signs indicating the direction of lawful
traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited.
(1971 Code, sec. 15-105)
ARTICLE 12.06 SPEED REGULATIONS*
Sec. 12.06.001 Applicability of State speed laws
The State traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be applicable upon all streets within this Town,
except that this article, as authorized by State law, hereby declares and determines that certain speed regulations
shall be applicable upon specified streets or in certain areas. (1971 Code, sec. 15-116)
Sec. 12.06.002 General speed limit
Unless expressly designated otherwise by signs designating another speed in accordance with this article, within
all intersections and on all public streets within the Town, thirty (30) miles per hour shall be the prima facie
maximum speed limit, and any speed in excess thereof shall be prima facie evidence that such speed is not
reasonable or prudent and that it is unlawful. (1971 Code, sec. 15-117(a))
Sec. 12.06.003 Speed limit in alleys
The prima facie maximum speed limit for the operation of motor vehicles in any alley within the Town as
defined in this article shall be fifteen (15) miles per hour, and any speed in excess thereof shall be prima facie
evidence that such speed is not reasonable or prudent and that it is unlawful. (1971 Code, sec. 15-118)
Sec. 12.06.004 Speed limits in school zones
(a) Special school zones are hereby established in which the prima facie maximum speed limit for operation
of motor vehicles in school zones as defined herein shall be twenty (20) miles per hour, and any speed in excess
thereof shall be prima facie evidence that such speed is not reasonable or prudent and that it is unlawful,
notwithstanding any other provision of this article, during the hours indicated. Such special school zones are
hereby designated to control traffic on the following streets and thoroughfares, at the following times:
Street Extent Requested Time
Abbott Avenue Beverly Drive to 125 feet south of
Mockingbird Lane
7:15–9:00 a.m.
2:30–4:30 p.m.
Armstrong Avenue Livingston Avenue to north Town limit
line
7:15–9:00 a.m.
2:30–4:30 p.m.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 289/505
Beverly Drive Drexel Drive to Auburndale Avenue 7:15–9:00 a.m.
2:30–4:30 p.m.
Byron Avenue Mockingbird Lane to Beverly Drive 7:15–9:00 a.m.
2:30–4:30 p.m.
Cornell Avenue Byron Avenue to St. Johns Drive 7:15–9:00 a.m.
2:30–4:30 p.m.
Douglas Avenue Livingston Avenue to Potomac Avenue 7:15–9:00 a.m.
2:30–4:30 p.m.
High School Drive Normandy Avenue to north Town limit
line
7:15–9:00 a.m.
2:30–4:30 p.m.
Hillcrest Avenue Beverly Drive to 125 feet south of
Mockingbird Lane
7:15–9:00 a.m.
2:30–4:30 p.m.
Mockingbird Lane Douglas Avenue to Armstrong Avenue 7:15–9:00 a.m.
2:30–4:30 p.m.
Mockingbird Lane Key Street to Mt. Vernon Avenue 7:15–9:00 a.m.
2:30–4:30 p.m.
St. Johns Drive Cornell Avenue to Byron Avenue 7:15–9:00 a.m.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 290/505
2:30–4:30 p.m.
Southern Avenue Douglas Avenue to Armstrong Avenue 7:15–9:00 a.m.
2:30–4:30 p.m.
(b) The speed limit fixed in this section shall be in effect and in force on all official school days at the times
indicated herein, when special school signs are posted, and at no other time. At all other times, the speed limits
provided for by other sections of this chapter and any amendments thereto shall remain in full force and effect.
(1971 Code, sec. 15-119; Ordinance 1764 adopted 9/22/08; Ordinance 1800 adopted 8/10/09)
Sec. 12.06.005 Twenty miles per hour speed limit
The prima facie maximum speed limit for the operation of motor vehicles on the following streets and
thoroughfares in the Town shall be twenty (20) miles per hour, and any speed in excess thereof shall be prima
facie evidence that such speed is not reasonable or prudent and that it is unlawful:
Street Extent
Cornell Avenue Between Byron Avenue and St. Johns Drive
Overhill Drive All of the 4300 block
Roland Avenue Between Mockingbird Lane and Bowser
Avenue
St. Johns Drive Between Cornell Avenue and Byron Avenue
Southern Avenue Between Douglas Avenue and Armstrong
Parkway
(1971 Code, sec. 15-120; Ordinance 1721 adopted 12/10/07)
Sec. 12.06.006 Posting of signs
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 291/505
The Town Administrator shall cause to be placed appropriate signs in conspicuous places so that every motorist
may be aware of the speed limits established by this article, except no sign shall be required where the maximum
speed limit is thirty (30) miles per hour. (1971 Code, sec. 15-122)
Sec. 12.06.007 Effect of established limits
The speed limits established in this article on the respective streets named are deemed to be the maximum
reasonable and safe speeds that a person may operate a motor vehicle, and any person operating any motor
vehicle upon any public street in excess of the speed limit shall be deemed to be operating such motor vehicle at
a speed that is not reasonable or safe. (1971 Code, sec. 15-123)
Sec. 12.06.008 Exemptions
(a) The provisions of this article regulating the speed of vehicles shall not apply to vehicles of the Fire
Department, when responding to a call, nor to Police patrols, nor to physicians or ambulances when actually
engaged in responding to emergency calls; provided, however, in no event shall an ambulance be driven at a
speed of more than ten (10) miles per hour greater than the authorized posted speed limits on the route of travel
of such ambulance.
(b) This section shall not relieve any driver from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons
using the streets, nor shall it protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequences of a reckless disregard
of the safety of others.
(1971 Code, sec. 15-124)
ARTICLE 12.07 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 12.07.001 Prohibited for certain purposes
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon any street for the principal purpose of:
(1) Displaying such vehicle for sale.
(2) Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency.
(1971 Code, sec. 15-137)
Sec. 12.07.002 Ten feet of roadway to be left available for traffic
No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street in such a manner or under such conditions as to
leave available less than ten (10) feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic. (1971
Code, sec. 15-138)
Sec. 12.07.003 Parking between lines
Whenever parking spaces are marked by lines on the pavement, whether for parallel or angle parking, a vehicle
must be parked entirely within the lines of the parking space. (1971 Code, sec. 15-139(b))
Sec. 12.07.004 Parking in alleys
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available
less than ten (10) feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 292/505
park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. (1971
Code, sec. 15-140)
Sec. 12.07.005 Fire lanes
(a) Fire lanes shall be designated as such by continuous painted lines of red traffic paint placed upon the curb
adjacent to the fire lane and red stripes six (6) inches in width with the words “No Parking–Fire Lane” painted
white four (4) inches in width at 25-foot intervals painted on the pavement around the periphery of the fire lane,
and/or by upright signs with the words “Fire Lane.” It shall be the duty of the Fire Marshal of the Town to
determine the combination, location, and number of these fire lane markings. It shall be unlawful for any person
to park a vehicle in a fire lane. It shall also be unlawful to place any objects, materials, or equipment in a fire
lane.
(b) For the purpose of regulating and supervising fire lanes, any person who desires a fire lane designation of
an area shall make application with the Town Administrator, and the Town Administrator shall then recommend
to the Town Council whether or not the fire lane should be made a permanent part of this section.
(c) It shall be the duty of the person, persons, association(s), or corporation(s) who have the care, custody, or
control of the areas designated as fire lanes as set out herein to provide, at their own expense, the installation and
continued maintenance of the aforementioned fire lane markings.
(1971 Code, sec. 15-141)
(d) Fire lanes are hereby created at the following locations:
Location Extent Side
4700 Abbott Avenue Beginning at the north side of the brick structure
located in Highland Park 1, block 11, lot 4, 18 feet
north and extending from the east curbline of Abbott
Avenue for a distance of 210 feet east.
Lomo Alto Court All
Highland Park Shopping
Village
In front of the marquee at Village Theater for a
distance of 48.5 feet.
4200 Block Oak Lawn
Avenue
Oak Lawn Wycliffe Shopping Center parking lot
along the east curb of Oak Lawn Avenue beginning
225 feet from the north right-of-way line on Wycliffe
Avenue and extending north for a distance of 90 feet.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 293/505
4508 and 4510 Abbott
Avenue
Along the driveway from the entrance at Abbott
Avenue to the parking in the rear yard and to the
alley along the property line.
All
Douglas Avenue Starting 180 feet north of Livingston Avenue, 20 feet
north to the point 200 feet north of Livingston
Avenue.
East
Douglas Avenue Starting 250 feet north of Livingston Avenue, 20 feet
north to the point 270 feet north of Livingston
Avenue
East
(Ordinance 1932, sec. 1, adopted 11/11/13)
State law reference–Marking of fire lane, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 684.011(c).
Sec. 12.07.006 Parking on streets under repair
In any case where any street in the Town is being torn up, repaired or paved, or where any work is being done
under the same, making necessary the regulation of traffic thereon, the Chief of Police is hereby authorized to
prevent parking, either altogether or to any extent deemed necessary by him, for any certain period of time that
may be necessary, or to close the street to traffic altogether for such period of time, by erecting thereon official
signs with the parking restrictions clearly stated on such signs. (1971 Code, sec. 15-142)
Sec. 12.07.007 Parking for more than twenty-four hours
(a) No person shall permit any vehicle to remain standing or parked upon any street, highway or alley or in
any public place within the Town for a longer continuous period of time than twenty-four (24) hours.
(b) The leaving of any vehicle for more than twenty-four (24) hours upon any street, highway or alley or in
any public place within the Town is and is hereby declared a nuisance.
(1971 Code, sec. 15-143)
Sec. 12.07.008 Loading zones
Areas adjacent to the curb of any street designated a loading zone and marked with loading zone signs shall be
used for the sole purpose of loading and unloading persons and/or freight from standing vehicles, and it shall be
unlawful for any person operating a vehicle to stop or park such vehicle in a loading zone for more than two (2)
minutes between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. The following are designated loading zones:
Street Extent
Oak Lawn Avenue Beginning at a point on the west line of Oak Lawn Avenue, 184
feet north of the north line of Wycliffe Avenue, and extending for a
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 294/505
(4200 block) distance of 18 feet northward along the west line of Oak Lawn
Avenue.
Wycliffe Avenue Beginning at a point on the south curbline of Wycliffe Avenue, two
hundred ten (210) feet east of the east curbline of Oak Lawn
Avenue and extending for a distance of one hundred ten (110) feet
eastward along the south curbline of Wycliffe Avenue.
(1971 Code, sec. 15-144; Ordinance 1791, sec. 4, adopted 4/13/09)
Sec. 12.07.009 Parking in bus stop
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, other than a bus, in a
bus stop. (1971 Code, sec. 15-145)
Sec. 12.07.010 Parking on vacant lot; parking on private property without consent of owner
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the owner of the lot, to park or store a motor vehicle on a vacant
lot within the Town. It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle on any other private property without the
consent of the owner of the property. (1971 Code, sec. 15-146)
Sec. 12.07.011 Necessity for parking signs or curb markings
Whenever by this chapter or by any ordinance of the Town any parking time limit is imposed or parking is
prohibited on designated streets or portions thereof, it shall be the duty of the Town Administrator to erect
appropriate signs or mark curbs giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless signs or
markings are in place at the time of an alleged offense. (1971 Code, sec. 15-147)
Sec. 12.07.012 Citations for illegal parking
(a) Whenever any motor vehicle without driver is found parked or stopped in violation of any of the
restrictions imposed by this chapter or other ordinance of this Town or by State law, the officer finding such
vehicle shall take its registration number and may take any other information displayed on the vehicle which
may identify its user, and shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a traffic citation, on a form provided by the
Town Secretary, for the driver to answer to the charge against him within ten (10) days during the hours and at a
place specified in the citation.
(b) If a violator of the restrictions on parking or standing under the traffic laws or ordinances does not appear
in response to a traffic citation affixed to such motor vehicle within a period of ten (10) days, the Clerk of the
Municipal Court shall send the owner of the motor vehicle to which the traffic citation was affixed a letter
informing him of the violation and warning him that, in the event such letter is disregarded for a period of five
(5) days, a warrant of arrest will be issued.
(1971 Code, sec. 15-149)
Sec. 12.07.013 Responsibility of vehicle owner for parking violations and presumption relative thereto
(a) No person shall allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his name to stand or park in any street in
the Town in violation of any provision of this chapter regulating the standing or parking of vehicles.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 295/505
(b) In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation governing the standing or parking of a
vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such law or
regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was, at the time of such parking, the
registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner
of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during
which, such violation occurred. This presumption shall apply only when the procedure prescribed in section
12.07.012 has been followed.
(1971 Code, sec. 15-150)
Sec. 12.07.014 School passenger zones
Areas adjacent to the curb of any street designated a school passenger zone and marked with school passenger
zone signs shall be used for the purpose of loading and unloading persons from standing vehicles, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle so as to park, obstruct or remain standing in a school passenger
zone for more than five (5) minutes between the designated hours and it shall be unlawful for any person
operating a vehicle to park and leave such vehicle unattended in a school passenger zone during the designated
hours on any school day. At the times which the school passenger zones are not in effect, the area may be used
for normal parking operations which are allowed by ordinance. The following are designated school passenger
zones:
Street Extent Hours
Southern Avenue Beginning at a point on the north curb of the
4300 block of Southern Avenue at the
projection of the west side of the west
sidewalk of Douglas Avenue extending west
for a distance of 450 feet west along the north
line of Southern Avenue.
7:30–9:15 a.m.
and
1:45–4:00 p.m.
High School Avenue Beginning at the north right-of-way of
Normandy Avenue north to the Town limit,
east side.
7:30–9:00 a.m.
and
3:00–4:00 p.m.
Cornell Avenue 3600 block, north curb from St. Johns Drive to
Byron Avenue.
7:30 a.m.–9:00 a.m.
and
2:00 p.m.–4:00 p.m.
St. Johns Drive East-south curb from Cornell Avenue to Byron
Avenue.
7:30 a.m.–9:00 a.m.
and
2:00 p.m.–4:00 p.m.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 296/505
(Ordinance 1932, sec. 2, adopted 11/11/13)
Sec. 12.07.015 Commercial loading zones
Areas adjacent to the curb of any street designated a commercial loading zone and marked with commercial
loading zone signs shall be used for the sole purpose of loading and unloading materials and/or freight from
standing motor vehicles and in the course of business to business commercial activity, and it shall be unlawful
for any person operating a vehicle to stop or park such motor vehicle in a commercial loading zone for any other
activity or for more than twenty (20) minutes. The following are designated loading zones:
Street Extent Hours
Livingston Court East curb from fifteen (15) [sic] south of
the fire hydrant to the alley north of
Livingston Avenue.
All
Livingston Court West curb from Avenue A to the alley
north of Livingston Avenue.
12:00 a.m.–10:00 a.m.
Douglas Avenue Beginning at a point on the east curb line
of Douglas Avenue and that is 270 feet
north of the north line of Livingston
Avenue and extending for a distance of
50 feet north to a point 320 feet north of
the north line of Livingston Avenue.
All
(Ordinance 1791, sec. 5, adopted 4/13/09)
Secs. 12.07.016–12.07.040 Reserved
Division 2. Impoundment of Illegally Parked Vehicles*
Sec. 12.07.041 Authority to impound; designation of pound
(a) Whenever any Police Officer finds a vehicle standing, parked or stopped upon a street, highway, alley or
any other public place in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, such officer is hereby authorized to
remove or cause to be removed - at the vehicle owner's expense - such vehicle and to impound the same in a
storage facility or other place designated or maintained by the Town, and to hold the same until redeemed by the
vehicle's owner pursuant to section 12.07.043, or until sold at public auction as provided for in this division.
(b) Whenever any Police Officer finds a vehicle parked on private property in violation of section 12.07.010,
such officer is hereby authorized to remove or cause to be removed - at the vehicle owner's expense - such
vehicle and to impound the same in a storage facility or other place designated or maintained by the Town, and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 297/505
to hold the same until redeemed by the vehicle's owner pursuant to section 12.07.043, or until sold at public
auction as provided for in this division.
(c) The Town Council shall select and establish a place or places owned or designated by the Town, to which
place such vehicles shall be removed in accordance with this section.
(Ordinance 1717, sec. 1, adopted 11/12/07)
Sec. 12.07.042 Notice of impoundment
When any motor vehicle has been impounded under this division, it shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to
send the proper notice of impoundment as set forth in Vernon's Texas Code Annotated, Transportation Code
section 683.012, as amended. (1971 Code, sec. 15-188)
Sec. 12.07.043 Redemption before sale
Prior to the sale of a vehicle impounded under this division, the owner or any person legally entitled to
possession of such vehicle may redeem the same by paying to the storage facility and/or the Town the fees
prescribed by section 12.07.044, along with any other actual expenses incurred by the Town in impounding and
keeping the vehicle. (Ordinance 1717, sec. 2, adopted 11/12/07)
Sec. 12.07.044 Fees
(a) The Town Council shall, by resolution duly enacted at a regular meeting, establish the fees to be charged
for the impounding and selling of any vehicle under this division. Such fees will include, but not be limited to:
(1) Taking up and impounding the vehicle;
(2) Storing the vehicle, per day after the first day;
(3) Selling the vehicle; and
(4) Preparing the advertisement of sale.
(b) The Town shall have a lien against the vehicle for the fees prescribed in this section, which lien shall be
prior and superior to all other liens of any kind, save and except liens for ad valorem taxes.
(1971 Code, sec. 15-192)
Secs. 12.07.045–12.07.080 Reserved
Division 3. Parking Regulations for Specific Streets
Sec. 12.07.081 Angle parking permitted
No angle or head-in parking of vehicles shall be permitted except on the following streets:
Street Extent Side Block
Bowser Avenue Extending east from Lomo Alto Drive for 150
feet
South 4600
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 298/505
Bowser Avenue Extending west from Lomo Alto Drive for 140
feet
South 4700
Byron Avenue Starting 36 feet north of the north curb of
Cornell Avenue, 100 feet north to the point 136
feet north of Cornell Avenue.
West 5200
Lexington Avenue Between Drexel Drive and St. Johns Drive North
Lomo Alto Avenue Extending south from Bowser Avenue to
Lemmon Avenue (2 rows)
East 4100
Lomo Alto Avenue Extending south from Bowser Avenue for 140
feet (2 rows)
West 4100
Oak Lawn Avenue Extending north from Wycliffe Avenue to
Prescott Street (2 rows)
East 4200
Oak Lawn Avenue Extending north from Wycliffe Avenue for 246
feet
West 4200
Oak Lawn Avenue Rear of retail stores (public parking lot) - 4200
Oak Lawn Avenue Extending north from Herschel Avenue for 160
feet
West 4300
Wycliffe Avenue Extending east from Oak Lawn Avenue for 150 North 4300
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 299/505
feet
(Ordinance 1932, sec. 3, adopted 11/11/13)
Sec. 12.07.082 Parking prohibited at all times
When signs are erected or curbs painted giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle at any time upon
any of the streets or sides of streets or portions thereof hereafter enumerated:
Street Extent Side
Abbott Avenue Gillon Avenue to Armstrong Avenue West
Airline Road Mockingbird Lane south to Town limits West
Airline Road Mockingbird Lane south 177 feet East
Airline Road South Town limits north 100 feet East
Armstrong Parkway For a distance of 50 feet north and 50 feet south of
Southern Avenue
East
Bowser Avenue For a distance of 20 feet on either side of Lomo Alto
Court intersecting the north side of Lomo Alto Drive
North
Bowser Avenue Roland Avenue south 200 feet North
Byron Avenue From Cornell Avenue north a distance of 150 feet East
Douglas Avenue From intersection with Mockingbird Lane north to alley Both
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 300/505
(5500 block) between Mockingbird Lane and Potomac Avenue, 150 feet
Douglas Avenue From Mockingbird Lane to 145 feet south of Livingston
Avenue
West
Douglas Avenue Livingston Avenue north 130 feet East
Douglas Avenue 438 feet north of Livingston Avenue to the entrance of
Theater Court (i.e., north 50 feet)
East
Drexel Drive Eton Avenue to Euclid Avenue West
Drexel Drive 180 feet northeast from Oxford Avenue extending to 150
feet southwest from Beverly Drive
Both
Drexel Drive South curb of Drexel Drive beginning at the west curbline
of Byron Avenue extending 275 feet to a point opposite
Tennis Court No. 2
South
Eastern Avenue Mockingbird Lane to Bordeaux Avenue Both
Edmondson Avenue Roland Avenue east 225 feet South
Eton Avenue Drexel Drive to Gillon Avenue East
Fairway Avenue
(4400 Block)
From Lomo Alto Drive east for a distance of 50 feet North
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 301/505
Fairway Avenue Lomo Alto Drive east to Town limits South
High School Avenue From a point 60 feet north of intersection with Normandy
Avenue a distance of 60 feet
East
High School Avenue Normandy Avenue north 100 feet West
Hillcrest Avenue Mockingbird Lane to Harvard Avenue Both
Hillcrest Avenue
(5500 block)
From Mockingbird Lane north to Potomac Avenue West
Knox Street
(3400 block)
From the west right-of-way line of the alley west for a
distance of 95 feet
South
Knox Street
(3400 block)
From the west right-of-way line of the alley west for a
distance of 50 feet
North
Livingston Avenue Preston Road to Douglas Avenue North
Lomo Alto Drive For a distance of 20 feet on either side of Lomo Alto
Court intersecting the east side of Lomo Alto Drive
East
Lomo Alto Drive Mockingbird south 150 feet Both
Lomo Alto Drive From intersection with Fairway Avenue south 20 feet West
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 302/505
(4200 block)
Lomo Alto Drive
(4200 block)
From a point 150 feet south of intersection with Fairway
Avenue a distance of 235 feet
East
Lomo Alto Drive
(4200 block)
From a point 460 feet south of intersection with Fairway
Avenue a distance of 60 feet
East
Lomo Alto Drive
(4200 block)
From intersection with Fairway Avenue south 88 feet East
Lomo Alto Drive
(4200 block)
For a distance of 20 feet on north side of the alley
intersecting the west side of Lomo Alto Drive
West
Lomo Alto Drive
(4200 block)
From Roland Avenue north to the alley intersecting the
west side of Lomo Alto Drive
West
Miramar Avenue Drexel Drive to St. Johns Drive Both
Mockingbird Lane Airline Road to Westside Drive South
Mockingbird Lane 315 feet east of Hillcrest Avenue to Westside Drive North
Oak Lawn Avenue Wycliffe Avenue to Prescott Street East
Oak Lawn Avenue Hawthorne Avenue to Armstrong Parkway West
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 303/505
Overhill Drive 4300 block West
Potomac Avenue
(3400 block)
From the west right-of-way line of Hillcrest Avenue to the
east right-of-way line of Auburndale Avenue (entire
block)
South
Potomac Avenue
(3400 block)
From the west right-of-way line of Hillcrest Avenue west
for a distance of 25 feet
North
Prescott Street Lakeside Drive to Oak Lawn Avenue Both
Preston Road Armstrong Avenue to north Town limits Both
Roland Avenue Bowser Avenue to alley north of Bowser Avenue East
Roland Avenue Alley north of Bowser Avenue to Beverly Drive Both
Roland Avenue
(4500 block)
At intersection with Lomo Alto Drive extending 160 feet South
Roland Avenue
(4500 block)
At intersection with Lomo Alto Drive extending 30 feet North
Roland Avenue
(4500 block)
From a point 185 feet west of the intersection with Lomo
Alto Drive extending west a distance of 30 feet
North
St. Johns Drive Euclid Avenue north 300 feet West
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 304/505
Wycliffe Avenue For a distance of 320 feet east of Oak Lawn Avenue Both
Wycliffe Avenue For a distance of 240 feet west of Lakeside Drive North
Wycliffe Avenue Lakeside Drive east 350 feet North
(Ordinance 1971, sec. 2, adopted 4/13/15; Ordinance 2009 adopted 10/24/16; Ordinance 2012 adopted 12/12/16)
Sec. 12.07.083 Parking or standing prohibited except on Sundays and holidays
When signs are erected or curbs painted giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to park or
stand any vehicle at any time, except Sundays and holidays between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m., on
any of the streets or sides of streets or portions thereof enumerated as follows:
Street Extent Side
Oak Lawn Avenue 165' south of Prescott Avenue to Hawthorne
Street
West
Mockingbird Lane 315' east of Hillcrest Avenue to Airline Road North
(Ordinance 1795, sec. 5, adopted 6/8/09; Ordinance 2012 adopted 12/12/16)
Sec. 12.07.084 Parking or standing prohibited during certain hours
(a) When signs are erected or curbs painted giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to park
or stand any vehicle between the hours designated below on any official school day upon any of the streets or
portions thereof enumerated as follows:
Street Extent Side Time
Armstrong Parkway Starting at the north curb of Southern
Avenue and extending in a northerly
East 7:15 a.m.–9:00 a.m.
2:30 p.m.–4:30 p.m.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 305/505
direction to the south curb of
Mockingbird Lane
Byron Avenue Starting at the north curb of Beverly
Drive and extending in a northerly
direction to the south curb of Cornell
Avenue
Both 7:15 a.m.–9:00 a.m.
2:30 p.m.–4:30 p.m.
Douglas Avenue Starting 130 feet north of Livingston
Avenue, 50 feet north to the point 180
feet north of Livingston Avenue
East 7:15 a.m.–9:00 a.m.
2:30 p.m.–4:30 p.m.
Douglas Avenue Starting 200 feet north of Livingston
Avenue, 50 feet north to the point 250
feet north of Livingston Avenue
East 7:15 a.m.–9:00 a.m.
2:30 p.m.–4:30 p.m.
Douglas Avenue Starting 320 feet north of Livingston
Avenue, 118 feet north to the point 438
feet north of Livingston Avenue
East 7:15 a.m.–9:00 a.m.
2:30 p.m.–4:30 p.m.
High School Avenue Starting at the south curb of
Shenandoah Avenue and extending in a
southerly direction to the alley between
Normandy Avenue and Potomac
Avenue
West 8:00 a.m.–9:00 a.m.
3:00 p.m.–4:30 p.m.
St. Johns Drive From a point 132 feet west of the
intersection with Byron Avenue
extending west a distance of 130 feet
North 6:00 a.m.–4:30 p.m.
(Ordinance 1971, sec. 3, adopted 4/13/15; Ordinance 2023 adopted 8/14/17)
(b) When signs are erected or curbs painted giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle at any time
upon the indicated sides of the following streets, during the designated hours, except Sundays and holidays:
Street Extent Side Time
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 306/505
Lakeside Drive South Town limits to Armstrong
Avenue
East 4:00 p.m.–6:00 p.m.
Lakeside Drive South Town limits to Armstrong
Avenue
West 7:00 a.m.–9:00 a.m.
Oak Lawn Avenue Prescott Street to Hawthorne Avenue East 7:00 a.m.–9:00 a.m.
(Ordinance 1971, sec. 3, adopted 4/13/15)
Sec. 12.07.085 Parking limited to two hours
When signs are erected or curbs painted giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to park any
vehicle upon the indicated sides of the following streets, for a longer period of time than two (2) hours, during
the time designated below:
Street Extent Side Time
Abbott Avenue Mockingbird Lane to Drexel Drive Both 6:00 a.m.–6:00 p.m.
Monday–Friday
Bowser Avenue Lomo Alto Drive east 150 feet South All
Bowser Avenue Lomo Alto Drive west 140 feet South All
Douglas Avenue Mockingbird Lane to Fairfax Avenue Both All
Douglas Avenue North Town limits to alley between
Mockingbird Lane and Potomac
Avenue
Both 9:00 a.m.–4:00 p.m.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 307/505
Fairway Avenue From 50 feet east of Lomo Alto Drive
to 100 feet west of Lomo Alto Drive
North 7:00 a.m.–6:00 p.m.
Fairway Avenue East Town limits to Lomo Alto Drive North 7:00 a.m.–6:00 p.m.
Knox Street (3400
block)
Abbott Avenue east 190 feet North All
Knox Street (3400
block)
Abbott Avenue east 155 feet South All
Livingston Avenue 530 feet west of the centerline of
Douglas Avenue
Both 7:00 a.m.–6:00 p.m.
Livingston Avenue Preston Road to Douglas Avenue South 7:00 a.m.–6:00 p.m.
Lomo Alto Drive Westway Avenue to Fairway Avenue Both 7:00 a.m.–6:00 p.m.
Lomo Alto Drive Fairway Avenue to Bowser Avenue Both 7:00 a.m.–6:00 p.m.
Oak Lawn Avenue Wycliffe Avenue north 246 feet West All
Oak Lawn Avenue Herschel Avenue north 160 feet West All
Potomac Avenue Douglas Avenue to west Town limits Both 7:00 a.m.–6:00 p.m.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 308/505
Sewanee Avenue Mockingbird Lane to Drexel Drive Both 6:00 a.m.–6:00 p.m.
Monday–Friday
(Ordinance 1971, sec. 4, adopted 4/13/15)
Sec. 12.07.086 Parking limited to five minutes
When signs are erected or curbs painted giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to park any
vehicle upon the indicated side of the following street, for a longer period of time than five (5) minutes, during
the time designated below:
Street Extent Side Time
Euclid Avenue From 55' to 75' west of St. Johns Drive North All
(Ordinance 1586, sec. 1, adopted 4/5/04)
Sec. 12.07.087 Parking spaces designated for persons with disability
(a) The term “disability,” as defined in Vernon's Texas Code Annotated (V.T.C.A.), Transportation Code
section 681.001, is hereby adopted. (1971 Code, sec. 15-166)
(b) Parking privileges designed solely for a person with a disability as defined in subsection (a) of this section
are hereby created at the following parking locations:
(1) 5900 block of High School Avenue, east side of street, one parking space;
(2) 4700 block of Drexel Drive, east side of street, one parking space; and
(3) 4500 block of St. Johns Drive, west side of street, one parking space.
(Ordinance 1932, sec. 7, adopted 11/11/13)
(c) Only a person with a disability whose motor vehicle displays special license plates issued under V.T.C.A.,
Transportation Code section 502.253, as amended, or a disabled parking placard issued under V.T.C.A.,
Transportation Code section 681.004, as amended, shall have parking privileges at the parking locations
designated in subsection (b) of this section. Identification cards may be obtained from the County Tax Collector.
(d) The Town Engineer shall designate by nonmovable signs of the type and style defined in Vernon's
Annotated Civil Statutes art. 9102, section 5(i), as amended, each parking space designated specifically for a
person with a disability as defined in this section.
(e) A person commits an offense under this section if:
(1) The person is neither a person with a disability, nor transporting a person with a disability, and
parks a vehicle without such special license plate or placard identified in subsection (c) of this section
in any parking space or parking area designated specifically for persons with a disability;
(2) The person parks a vehicle neither displaying the special license plate or placard identified in
subsection (c) of this section in any parking space or parking area designated specifically for persons
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 309/505
with a disability;
(3) The person parks a vehicle so that the vehicle blocks an access or curb ramp or any other
architectural improvements designed to aid a person with a disability.
(f) Any person who shall commit an offense under this section is punishable by a fine of not less than two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and each violation thereof shall
constitute a distinct and separate offense.
(1971 Code, sec. 15-166)
Secs. 12.07.088–12.07.110 Reserved
Division 4. Parking in Highland Park Shopping Village
Sec. 12.07.111 Definitions
The following words and phrases, when used in this division, shall, for the purpose of this division, have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
Highland Park Shopping Village. A shopping village located within the Town, bounded by Preston Road,
Mockingbird Lane, Douglas Avenue and Livingston Avenue, all streets being within the corporate limits of the
Town.
Restricted parking area. That area around and adjacent to the curb of any street in the Highland Park Shopping
Village marked with a sign on the curb or on a standard stating a prohibition of parking or limitation of time for
parking vehicles.
Restricted parking sign. A sign painted on a curb or on a standard in a restricted parking area bearing words
which prohibit parking or which designate a time limit for parking vehicles and the hours of day to which such
time limit applies.
(1971 Code, sec. 15-173)
Sec. 12.07.112 Approval of parking plan
This division shall not become effective unless and until the owner of the Highland Park Shopping Village
submits a detailed parking plan to the Town Administrator and the Administrator approves such plan. Likewise,
changes in the parking plan shall not become effective from time to time until similar approval is given by the
Town Administrator. It is distinctly understood that the provisions of this division are not mandatory on the
owner of the Highland Park Shopping Village, but may be put into force and effect if the owner so desires. (1971
Code, sec. 15-174)
Sec. 12.07.113 Designation of restricted parking areas
(a) The owner, merchant or operator of the Highland Park Shopping Village shall have the authority to
designate, by appropriate signs and markings to be approved by the Town Administrator, the various restricted
parking areas in the Highland Park Shopping Village.
(b) The owner, operator or merchant of the Highland Park Shopping Village shall have the authority to
designate, by appropriate signs and markings to be approved by the Town Administrator, the time limits in
restricted parking areas where parking is permitted for limited times, which time limits shall not be less than one
(1) hour.
(1971 Code, sec. 15-175)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 310/505
Sec. 12.07.114 Parking in prohibited area
No person shall park or leave unattended a vehicle within the limits of the Highland Park Shopping Village in a
restricted parking area identified by proper signs indicating a prohibition of “park” or “no parking.” (1971 Code,
sec. 15-176)
Sec. 12.07.115 Overtime parking
No person shall park or leave unattended a vehicle within the limits of the Highland Park Shopping Village in a
restricted parking area properly marked by a restricted parking sign for a period longer than that designated in
the restricted parking area by restricted parking signs. (1971 Code, sec. 15-177)
Sec. 12.07.116 Enforcement
Limitations on parking in the Highland Park Shopping Village, as set forth in this division, shall be enforced by
a suitable person employed by the Highland Park Shopping Village, but subject to the approval of the Chief of
Police of the Town. The Chief of Police shall issue such person a Special Police commission to enforce the
provisions of this division. Such person designated, upon being supplied with a Special Police commission, shall
be authorized to issue traffic violation tickets for illegal parking and shall charge the offense of trespassing upon
private property. Such person shall be authorized to enforce this division only on the premises and within the
limits of the Highland Park Shopping Village. (1971 Code, sec. 15-178)
Sec. 12.07.117 Vehicle owner presumed responsible for violations
If any vehicle is found unattended or unoccupied within the restricted parking areas in the Highland Park
Shopping Village in a prohibited area or for a longer time than indicated by restricted parking signs, the owner
of such vehicle shall be presumed to be the person who illegally parked it. Within the meaning of this section, it
shall constitute prima facie evidence of guilt that the person in whose name the vehicle is registered is the party
who illegally parked it. (1971 Code, sec. 15-179)
Secs. 12.07.118–12.07.140 Reserved
Division 5. Temporary No-Parking Zones and Temporary Resident-Only Permit Parking Zones
Sec. 12.07.141 Authority of Director of Public Safety
The Director of Public Safety (the “Director”) is hereby authorized to order the creation upon the public streets
of the Town, of:
(1) Temporary no-parking zone(s); and
(2) Temporary resident-only permit parking zones.
Sec. 12.07.142 Time periods of zones
Temporary no-parking zone(s) and temporary resident-only permit parking zones shall exist for a time period of
no longer than one hundred and sixty-eight (168) hours.
Sec. 12.07.143 Creation of zones
The Director shall order the creation of said temporary no-parking zones and/or temporary resident-only permit
parking zones only for the following purposes:
(1) To aid the public health, safety or welfare;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 311/505
(2) To alleviate extraordinary and temporary problems in the movement of traffic and/or
hindrances in the movement of authorized emergency vehicles;
(3) To facilitate public works or the maintenance, cleaning or care of public streets, and facilities;
(4) For Town-sponsored events; or
(5) In conjunction with any Town-authorized, temporary street closing.
Sec. 12.07.144 Notice of zones
The Director shall cause the temporary no-parking zone and/or the temporary resident-only permit parking zone
to be adequately and clearly posted to inform the public of the parking zone.
Sec. 12.07.145 Parking prohibited in temporary no-parking zones
For temporary no-parking zones, and during the time designated under any such order of the Director, it shall be
unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle or conveyance within such zone.
Sec. 12.07.146 Temporary resident-only permit parking
(a) Following the creation of a temporary resident-only permit parking zone(s), the Director shall mail to
every residence within the designated zone the following documents:
(1) A “notice of designation” that shall inform the residents in the applicable zone of:
(A) The existence, along with the street block(s), and/or residential address(es) that comprise
the temporary resident-only permit parking zone;
(B) The parking restrictions applicable to all vehicles in the designated zone that do not
properly display a parking permit authorized under this division;
(C) The duration of the temporary resident-only permit parking zone; and
(2) Two (2) Town-issued parking permits and which are dated for the specific resident-only permit
parking time period (the “temporary resident-only parking permit”).
(b) Upon application, the Town may also issue additional temporary resident-only parking permits, but only:
(i) to the inhabitants of those residences within the temporary resident-only parking zone and no other; and (ii)
for guests of the applicant during the specific resident-only permit parking time and no other.
(1) In an application for additional temporary resident-only parking permits, the applicant, in
addition to demonstrating proof of residency in the temporary resident-only permit parking zone,
shall provide the following information:
(A) The type and kind of event which applicant will host at applicant's residence during the
specific resident-only permit parking time, and the anticipated number of guests that will attend
the event;
(B) The number of additional temporary resident-only parking permits that applicant requests
for the guests/attendees of the event in subsection (A) above; and
(C) The signature of the applicant.
(2) In accordance with section 12.07.143 above, the Director may limit the number of additional
temporary resident-only parking permits issued to applicants.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 312/505
(c) Individuals receiving temporary resident-only parking permits pursuant to subsection (a)(2) and/or
subsection (b) above are deemed to be lawful holders of a temporary resident-only parking permit, and they shall
only use said permit for his/her own vehicle(s) or that of his/her guests.
(d) All temporary resident-only parking permits shall be conspicuously displayed on the vehicle's rear view
mirror or front dashboard.
(e) A temporary resident-only parking permit shall not:
(1) Guarantee or reserve any parking space(s) within a designated zone; and
(2) Authorize the stopping, standing or parking of any vehicle in such places and during such times
when such stopping, standing, or parking is prohibited or restricted by regulations other than those
established under this division.
Sec. 12.07.147 Temporary resident-only permit parking zone offenses; revocation of permit privilege
(a) A person commits an offense if he stops, stands, or parks a motor vehicle in a temporary resident-only
permit parking zone without displaying a valid temporary resident-only parking permit on the vehicle as
required under this division.
(b) A person commits an offense if he displays or allows the display of a temporary resident-only parking
permit on a motor vehicle contrary to section 12.07.146(c) above.
(c) A person commits an offense if he falsely represents himself as being eligible for additional temporary
resident-only parking permits and/or makes a false statement of a material fact on his application for additional
permits.
(d) A lawful holder of a temporary resident-only parking permit commits an offense if he sells, barters, or
trades said permit to another person and/or entity.
(e) It shall be a defense to prosecution under this division that at the time of the stopping, standing or parking,
the person was:
(1) Expeditiously loading or unloading passengers or property;
(2) Providing a maintenance, repair, delivery, or lawn service to a residence located within the
temporary resident-only permit parking zone(s);
(3) In the performance of official duties as a law enforcement officer, government employee or
contractor or utility company employee or contractor;
(4) Duly-qualified for Texas Transportation Code section 681.006 parking privileges; or
(5) Operating an authorized emergency vehicle in the performance of official duties.
(f) The Director may revoke the temporary resident-only permit parking privilege of anyone who violates any
provision of this division or who has an unresolved parking citation issued by the Town and which is in warrant
status with the Town's Municipal Court.
Sec. 12.07.148 Removal of signs
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any sign or signs placed by the order of the Director designating
the temporary no-parking zone and/or the temporary resident-only permit parking zone.
(Ordinance 1914 adopted 4/8/13)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 313/505
Secs. 12.07.149–12.07.180 Reserved
Division 6. Residential-Only Parking Permit Area
Sec. 12.07.181 Definitions
Director of Public Safety or Director. Director of the Highland Park Department of Public Safety, or their
designee.
General contractor. A person, organization, or association responsible for oversight of new or remodel building
construction.
Moving truck. A motor vehicle, including any trailer attached thereto, that is greater than ten (10) feet and is
designed, used, or maintained primarily to transport property.
Park. To stand an occupied or unoccupied vehicle, other than temporarily while loading or unloading
merchandise or passengers.
Property owner. Individual, or their authorized representative, or entity (including, but not limited to a (1) trust;
(2) company; (3) partnership; (4) corporation, or other similar legal entity) in possession of title for land and/or
building.
Resident-only parking area or area. Any designated on-street parking spaces within a residential area where
only resident motor vehicles displaying a valid permit may stop, stand, or park.
Stand. To halt an occupied or unoccupied vehicle, other than temporarily while receiving or discharging
passengers.
Stop. To halt, including temporarily halting, an occupied or unoccupied vehicle, unless necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or to comply with the directions of a Police Officer or a traffic-control sign or signal.
Sec. 12.07.182 Process for designating a resident-only parking area
(a) The Town Council is authorized to establish, modify, or eliminate a resident-only parking area on its own
volition or upon application by a resident. Any property owner may request the designation, elimination, or
modification of an area by filing a petition with the Director or the Director's designee. A proposed area must
include at least one full street block (both sides) from intersection to intersection. Any request to modify or
eliminate an area must also include at least one full street block (both sides) from intersection to intersection.
(b) A petition to designate, modify, or eliminate an area must be filed using a form provided by the Town. In
addition, the application must include a filing fee of $300.00 to cover the cost of processing. Any such petition
must be submitted to the Director. The person who files a petition (the “petitioner”) requesting the designation,
elimination, or modification of an area shall:
(1) Agree to serve as the designated Town contact person on behalf of the proposed area;
(2) Be responsible for affected property owner notification and compilation of evidence of support
for the proposed area; and
(3) Serve as the liaison in response to any Town-received resident or community inquiries.
(c) A request for the designation, elimination, or modification of an area will be processed by the Director or
the Director's designee only if a petition is filed in accordance with this section.
(d) A petition will not be processed if the petition:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 314/505
(1) Is incomplete or illegible;
(2) Contains untruthful or inaccurate representations; or
(3) Does not represent or account for all properties within the proposed area. All addresses within
the proposed area must be noted as either a signatory to the petition or not.
(e) The petition application shall be provided by the Director or the Director's designee.
(f) The petition must be signed by fifty-one percent (51%) of the property owners which either face or abut a
street within a proposed area.
(g) Only one petition signature per residence will be considered.
(h) Except for condominiums, for purposes of this article, a multifamily property shall be, regardless of the
total number of dwelling units contained, considered as a single property and a property manager or property
owner's signature shall be considered as representing all units of a particular multifamily property.
(i) The petition must indicate both sides of the complete blocks of all residential street(s) and those which
either face or abut a street located within the proposed area.
(j) Upon receipt of a valid petition, the Director shall mail a letter of notice and a ballot, with a pre-addressed
and postage paid envelope, to all property owners within the area. Ballots in support must be received from
seventy-five percent (75%) of the property owners within thirty (30) days of the mailing of the notice and ballot
for the residential-only parking area to be considered for approval by the Town Council.
(k) The Director shall advise the petitioner in writing, within ten (10) business days, the tabulation results of
ballots received.
Sec. 12.07.183 Designated resident-only parking areas
The Town Council, as may be amended from time to time, shall designate resident-only parking areas.
Sec. 12.07.184 Public hearing
(a) The Town Council sets the date, time, and place of a public hearing to consider a resident-initiated petition
for the designation, elimination, or modification of a resident-only parking area.
(b) No later than ten (10) days before the hearing date, the Town Secretary shall send written notification of
the date, time, and place of the hearing to each owner, as indicated by the most recently approved tax roll, of real
property within two hundred (200) feet of the proposed area, and include with such notification a map of the
proposed area along with a summary of the proposed parking restrictions.
(c) The Town Council will conduct the public hearing at which parties in interest and citizens will have an
opportunity to be heard.
Sec. 12.07.185 Posting of approved area
(a) The Town's special event parking ordinance shall continue in full force and effect.
(b) The Public Works Department shall install advisory warning signs consistent with the Texas Manual on
Uniform Traffic-Control Devices, as amended, indicating the locations and times for which parking is by permit
only and indicating that unauthorized vehicles may be towed or booted at the expense of the owner or operator.
(c) Such signs shall be installed at or near adjoining property lines within Town rights-of-way.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 315/505
Sec. 12.07.186 Parking regulations within a resident-only parking area
(a) Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c), no vehicle shall be parked in a resident-only parking area
between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, without displaying a permit issued under
this division.
(b) Nonpermitted vehicles may be parked for no more than two (2) contiguous hours in the same location.
(c) The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit the parking of a moving truck for more than
two hours for the purpose of actually loading or unloading household items.
Sec. 12.07.187 Temporary suspension of resident-only parking
(a) The Director may temporarily suspend the resident-only parking regulations of section 12.07.186 for one
or more residential blocks within a resident-only parking area.
(b) The Director, in exercising the authority provided in subsection (a), may direct Town personnel to
temporarily cover one or more applicable advisory signs within the area.
(c) The Director shall notify the Town Administrator at least one business day prior to any temporary
deactivation of one or more signs.
Sec. 12.07.188 Notice to residents of Town Council-approved designated area
Upon approval of a resident-only parking area, the Director shall send, via U.S. Mail, a notification to all
residences within the area indicating the following:
(1) The existence, exact location, and numerical block designation of the area;
(2) The applicable parking restrictions; and
(3) The procedures to obtain a parking permit.
Sec. 12.07.189 Issuance of a permit by Director
(a) The Director shall create the application for a resident-only parking permit in a manner determined by the
Director.
(b) The application for a resident-only parking permit shall include at least the following
(1) The name and residential address of the owner of the vehicle along with the make, model,
vehicle identification number (VIN), color, and license plate number;
(2) The name, residential address, and driver's license number of the principal operator of the
vehicle; and
(3) The signature or electronic signature if applicable, of the applicant for the residential parking
permit.
(c) No more than two (2) residential parking permits shall be issued, at no cost, per residence.
(d) Residential parking permits shall only be issued for vehicles that are owned or operated by a person who
resides within the designated area.
(e) Parking permits are vehicle-specific and may not be transferred or sold to other persons.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 316/505
(f) All resident-only parking permits shall expire on September 30th once every three (3) years beginning
September 30, 2018.
(g) An area designated in an interim three-year period shall have permits issued for up to the succeeding
ending year period.
Sec. 12.07.190 Replacement of residential parking permits
(a) A resident-only parking permit may be replaced upon verification of holder's prior submission of a
completed and validated parking permit application.
(b) Upon affirmation that the permit was lost, stolen, or destroyed, the holder shall receive a new residential
permit at a cost of $25.00. A replacement permit shall be provided at no charge to the holder upon the return of
the prior permit to the Director.
(c) Lost, stolen, or destroyed permits shall be considered void and any use is unlawful.
(d) Replacement of a resident-only parking permit shall not affect the permit's original expiration date.
Sec. 12.07.191 Issuance of guest and temporary permits
(a) Two (2) guest permits shall be issued for each residence within the area. Guest permits are to be used at the
discretion of the resident for vehicles temporarily parked within the area. A permit holder shall be issued two (2)
guest permits at no cost. Guest permits expire upon the expiration of the residential parking permit.
(b) A resident may obtain unlimited temporary parking permits at no charge for guests for special events or
occasions. The issuance of temporary parking permits is at the discretion of the Director. To obtain temporary
guest permits, the resident must submit an application to the Department of Public Safety not less than twentyfour
(24) hours or more than seventy-two (72) hours (excluding weekends and official Town holidays) before the
event. Such application shall include a description of the event, its duration, and the anticipated number of
guests. Temporary permits expire based on the length of the event as provided thereon. In no case shall a
temporary parking permit be valid for more than thirty (30) days.
(c) The resident is responsible for the use or misuse of the guest and temporary permits.
Sec. 12.07.192 Issuance of permits for construction vehicle
(a) A general contractor is eligible to receive at no charge up to four (4) permits for construction vehicle
parking, within that block or an adjacent block, per construction site.
(b) The Director may issue additional construction parking permits per construction site. For additional
permits 5–10, the cost of such permit shall be $25.00 per permit. For additional permits 11–20, the cost of such
permit shall be $100.00 per permit. For any additional permits beyond 20, the cost of such permit shall be
$500.00 per permit.
(c) Construction vehicles parked under a construction parking permit may park in an area between the hours
of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday.
(d) Construction vehicle parking permits may only be issued in companion with a Town-issued building
permit, and expire twenty-four (24) months after issuance of said permit, or on the date of building permit
completion, whichever occurs first.
(e) The general contractor shall return all construction vehicle parking permits to the Town prior to the
issuance of a certificate of construction completion. In the event the general contractor fails to return all permits,
a charge equal to twice the cost of the original permit for each non-returned permit must be paid prior to such
certificate issuance. A fee of $200.00 each shall be charged for those permits provided in subsection (a) above.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 317/505
(f) The general contractor is responsible for the use or misuse of construction vehicle parking permits. Any
use or abuse of the general contractor's permit(s) may result in the temporary suspension of the underlying
building or construction permit.
Sec. 12.07.193 Display of parking permit
The Director shall establish the means by which a permit is identifiable for enforcement.
Sec. 12.07.194 Use of parking permit
(a) A permit is not a guarantee or reservation of a parking space within an area.
(b) A permit does not authorize the standing or parking of a vehicle in such places and during such times
when it otherwise would be prohibited.
(c) Permit holders must observe all applicable traffic rules and regulations.
(d) A permit remains valid until its expiration date as long as the permit holder continually resides, or business
activity continues permissibly, within the area.
(e) If the Director determines that a permit holder violated one or more provisions of this division, the
Director may direct the holder to surrender the permit. A permit holder may appeal the Director's decisions to
the Town Administrator. The permit holder must request an appeal in writing to the Town Administrator within
10 (ten) days after the Director orders the surrender of a permit.
(f) A permit holder commits an offense if he or she fails to surrender a permit when directed to do so.
(g) It shall be unlawful for a person to represent in any fashion that a vehicle is entitled to a permit when it is
not so entitled.
(h) It is unlawful for a person to attach to or display on a motor vehicle a parking permit that:
(1) Is a duplicate;
(2) Is assigned to a different vehicle; or
(3) Is fictitious.
(i) It is unlawful for a person to duplicate, or attempt to duplicate, by any means, a resident-only parking
permit.
(j) For the purposes of prosecution of this section, the registered owner of the vehicle is presumed to have
displayed the unlawful permit.
Sec. 12.07.195 Exemptions
The following vehicles are exempt from the parking regulations under this division:
(1) A motor vehicle:
(A) Owned by or operated under contract to a utility when used in the construction,
operation, removal or repair of utility property or facilities or engaged in authorized work in the
area by the Town; or
(B) Identified as owned by or operated under contract to a federal, State, or local
governmental agency and being used in the course of official government business.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 318/505
(2) An authorized emergency vehicle as defined by State law.
Sec. 12.07.196 Offense - parking without a valid permit in a designated area
(a) No person shall:
(1) Stop, stand, or park a motor vehicle in a resident-only parking area for a period greater than
two hours between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, without displaying
a valid parking permit.
(2) Stop, stand, or park a motor vehicle in a resident-only parking area that has attached to it a void
or expired resident-only parking permit.
(b) It shall be presumed for the purposes of prosecution under this section that the registered owner of the
vehicle is the operator of the vehicle.
Sec. 12.07.197 Penalty
(a) Violations of this division are punishable by a fine of up to $500.00.
(b) Each day of occurrence shall be considered a separate offense.
(c) The Director may cause a vehicle in violation to be booted or towed by the Town and/or its towing
contractor.
Sec. 12.07.198 Enforcement and collection of towing and/or booting fees
(a) The Town Council will establish towing and administrative fees by resolution.
(b) Any vehicle that is booted and the boot not removed within twenty-four (24) hours will continue to be
ticketed each day. Any vehicle that has a boot on it after the second day is subject to being towed, at the owner's
expense. After the first booting of the vehicle, there will be an additional accumulating $50.00 charge per
offense in addition to the initial $100.00 booting fee.
(c) Town parking citations and any other municipal parking citations must be paid before the Town or its
towing contractor will release the vehicle that is subject to the fines.
(Ordinance 1976 adopted 4/27/15)
ARTICLE 12.08 COMMERCIAL VEHICLES
Sec. 12.08.001 Truck routes - designated; commercial vehicle traffic prohibited elsewhere
(a) Designated truck routes. The following streets or portions of streets are established as “designated truck
routes”:
(1) Mockingbird Lane from west Town limits to Roland Avenue;
(2) Mockingbird Lane from Hillcrest Avenue to east Town limits;
(3) Hillcrest Avenue from north Town limits to Armstrong Parkway;
(4) Preston Road from north Town limits to Armstrong Parkway; and
(5) Oak Lawn Avenue from Armstrong Parkway to south Town limits.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 319/505
(b) Violation. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a truck, tractor, trailer, or other commercial
vehicle with a gross combination weight rating or gross vehicle weight rating greater than ten thousand (10,000)
pounds on a street other than a designated truck route, as defined in this section.
(c) Exceptions. This section does not apply to:
(1) The operation of an authorized emergency vehicle responding to an emergency call;
(2) The operation of a vehicle for the purpose of constructing, maintaining, or inspecting a public
utility or street in the Town; or
(3) The operation of a passenger motorbus upon regularly established schedules under licenses and
franchises expressly granted or that may hereafter be granted by the Town.
(d) Defenses. It is a defense to prosecution of this section that the vehicle was operated off of a designated
truck route for the purpose of performing a service or making a delivery, using the shortest practicable route
from and back to the designated truck route. The operators of such vehicles shall carry evidence of the location
of the place of performing a service or the place of loading or unloading in order for this affirmative defense to
apply.
(e) Signs. The Town Engineer has the authority to erect appropriate signs and markings as deemed necessary
to notify motorists of the designated truck routes established by this section.
(Ordinance 1977, sec. 3, adopted 5/11/15)
Sec. 12.08.002 Parking or standing on street
No commercial motor vehicle, truck, truck-tractor, farm-tractor, road-tractor, trailer or semitrailer shall be parked
or left standing on any street, highway or other public way within the corporate limits of the Town during the
day or at night, except for a reasonable time in which to make delivery of goods, wares, merchandise, building
materials or other commodities or to perform services requiring the use of such vehicle. (1971 Code, sec. 15-
205)
Sec. 12.08.003 Buses
(a) Every bus operated within the corporate limits of the Town shall follow its regular designated route
through the Town.
(b) The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any place other than at a
designated bus stop.
(c) The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street at any place for the purpose of loading or
unloading passengers or their baggage, other than at a designated bus stop.
(d) The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop on a public street in such a manner that the bus, when stopped
to load or unload passengers or baggage, shall be in a position with the right front wheel of such vehicle not
further than eighteen (18) inches from the curb and the bus approximately parallel to the curb, so as not to
unduly impede the movement of other vehicular traffic.
(1971 Code, sec. 15-206)
ARTICLE 12.09 BICYCLES, ELECTRIC BICYCLES, MOTOR-ASSISTED SCOOTERS AND
SHARED MOBILITY DEVICES*
Sec. 12.09.001 Applicability of traffic regulations to riders
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 320/505
Any person riding a bicycle or electric bicycle upon a public right-of-way shall be granted all the rights and shall
be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by the laws of the State declaring rules of the
road applicable to vehicles or by this chapter, except as to special regulations prescribed in this article and except
as to those provisions of laws and ordinances which, by their nature, can have no application.
Sec. 12.09.002 Motor-assisted scooters
No person may operate a motor-assisted scooter upon any public area or public right-of-way within the corporate
limits of the Town.
Sec. 12.09.003 Riders to obey traffic-control devices
(a) Any person riding a bicycle or electric bicycle within the Town shall obey the instruction of official trafficcontrol
signals, signs, and other control devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a Police
Officer.
(b) Upon dismounting a bicycle or electric bicycle, such person shall be considered a pedestrian, and shall
obey all regulations applicable to pedestrians.
Sec. 12.09.004 Speed
No person shall ride a bicycle or electric bicycle at a speed that is greater than is reasonable and prudent under
the conditions then existing.
Sec. 12.09.005 Riders to yield right-of-way in certain cases
Any person riding a bicycle or electric bicycle shall yield the right-of-way in the following circumstances:
(1) When a pedestrian is crossing or about to cross a street;
(2) When a pedestrian is in a crosswalk or in an intersection when the signal light changes;
(3) When a vehicle is stopped to yield the right-of-way to a pedestrian; or
(4) When traffic is so close as to be a hazard.
Sec. 12.09.006 Riding on sidewalk
(a) No person shall ride a bicycle upon the sidewalk in any commercial or business district of the Town.
Whenever a person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any
pedestrian.
(b) No person shall ride an electric bicycle upon the sidewalk in any part of the Town.
Sec. 12.09.007 Parking
(a) Definitions. The following words and phrases in this section shall have the meanings set forth below,
unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
Abandon. Leaving a bicycle, electric bicycle, motor-assisted scooter, or shared mobility device unattended for
such time and under such circumstances as to cause a person to reasonably believe it has been abandoned.
Operator. A corporation, firm, joint venture, limited liability company, partnership, person, or other organized
entity that operates a shared mobility device, whether for profit or not for profit.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 321/505
Public area. Any outdoor area that is open to the public for public use, whether owned or operated by the Town
or a private party.
Public right-of-way. Any public alley, parkway, public transportation path, roadway, alleyway, easement,
sidewalk, or street that is owned, granted by easement, operated, or controlled by the Town.
User. A person who rents and uses a shared mobility device from an operator.
(b) No person shall park, or otherwise abandon, a bicycle, electric bicycle, motor-assisted scooter or shared
mobility device in a public area or on a public right-of-way, or in such a manner as to impede access or ingress
to, egress from, or use of, a public area or public right-of-way. This provision shall apply to owners, users and/or
operators of such personal transportation devices.
(c) Owners, users and/or operators of bicycles, electric bicycles, motor-assisted scooters or shared mobility
devices, shall be responsible at all times, for the duty, care, and use of the bicycle, electric bicycle, motorassisted
scooter or shared mobility device in compliance with Town rules and regulations, including but not
limited to the parking provisions contained herein.
(d) No person shall place a bicycle, electric bicycle, motor-assisted scooter or shared mobility device in a
public area or on a public right-of-way for the purpose of:
(1) Displaying the bicycle, electric bicycle, motor-assisted scooter or shared mobility device for
rent; or
(2) Displaying advertising from the bicycle, electric bicycle, motor-assisted scooter or shared
mobility device.
(e) A bicycle, electric bicycle, motor-assisted scooter or shared mobility device found in violation of this
section may be immediately impounded by the Town.
(f) Authority. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the Director of Public Safety has broad authority to
implement, administer and enforce this section, including adopting administrative regulations to implement the
provisions of this section, including but not limited to the timely removal of hazards caused by a bicycle, electric
bicycle, motor-assisted scooter or shared mobility device, parked or abandoned on, or impeding access or ingress
to, egress from, or use of a public area or a public right-of-way.
(g) Impoundment fine. If a bicycle, electric bicycle, motor-assisted scooter or shared mobility device is
impounded pursuant to the provisions of this section, the owner and/or operator shall be subject to an
impoundment fine as described below.
(1) For a first impoundment, the owner and/or operator shall be subject to an impoundment fine of
$30.00 per personal transportation device. The impoundment fine shall be assessed against and
collected from the owner and/or operator as a condition for redemption.
(2) For a second impoundment by the same owner and/or operator, the owner and/or operator shall
be subject to an impoundment fine of $50.00 per personal transportation device. The impoundment
fine shall be assessed against and collected from the owner and/or operator as a condition for
redemption.
(3) For a third impoundment by the same owner and/or operator, the owner and/or operator shall
be subject to an impoundment fine of $75.00 per personal transportation device. The impoundment
fine shall be assessed against and collected from the owner and/or operator as a condition for
redemption.
(4) For a fourth or more impoundment by the same owner and/or operator, the owner and/or
operator shall be subject to an impoundment fine of $100.00 per personal transportation device. The
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 322/505
impoundment fine shall be assessed against and collected from the owner and/or operator as a
condition for redemption.
(5) The Director of Public Safety may reduce such impoundment fines upon the owner and/or
operator demonstrating good cause.
(h) Daily storage fees. In addition to all applicable impoundment fines, an owner and/or operator shall also be
subject to a $10.00 daily storage fee per personal transportation device, per day to cover all reasonably necessary
costs of towing, storage, and all related clerical and administrative expenses incurred by the Town.
(i) Disposition.
(1) Upon impoundment, the Town shall notify the owner and/or operator, if known or clearly
ascertainable based upon external markings, via electronic mail (email) or U.S. Postal Service with
notice of such impoundment. If the owner and/or operator, or his or her agent, fails to redeem the
bicycle, electric bicycle, motor-assisted scooter or shared mobility device within fifteen (15) calendar
days of the Town sending a notice of impoundment, the Town may proceed to dispose of the bicycle,
electric bicycle, motor-assisted scooter or shared mobility device in a manner consistent with State
law. The Town may decide the manner of disposal in its sole discretion, including but not limited to
public auction, sealed bids, donation or destruction.
(2) If an impounded bicycle, electric bicycle, motor-assisted scooter or shared mobility device is
sold via sealed bid or at public auction, the owner and/or operator of a bicycle, electric bicycle,
motor-assisted scooter or shared mobility device at the time of impoundment shall be required to pay
all incurred impoundment fines and daily storage fees for such bicycle, electric bicycle, motorassisted
scooter or shared mobility device prior to being awarded a sealed or public auction bid.
(Ordinance 2042 adopted 9/10/18)
Sec. 12.09.008 Permitting violations by children
The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or
ward to violate any of the provisions of this article. (1971 Code, sec. 15-228)
ARTICLE 12.10 PEDESTRIANS*
Sec. 12.10.001 Applicability
Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic-control signals as provided in this chapter, but at all other places
pedestrians shall be granted those rights and be subject to the restrictions stated in this article. (1971 Code, sec.
15-239)
Sec. 12.10.002 Use of crosswalks required
(a) Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in operation, pedestrians shall not cross
a roadway at any place except in a crosswalk.
(b) No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk in any business district.
(1971 Code, sec. 15-241)
Sec. 12.10.003 Walking or running on roadway
(a) Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk, jog, trot or run along and
upon any adjacent roadway.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 323/505
(b) Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking, jogging, trotting or running along and upon a
street or highway shall, when practicable, walk, jog, trot or run on the left side of the roadway, or its shoulder,
facing traffic which may approach from the opposite direction.
(1971 Code, sec. 15-244)
Sec. 12.10.004 Receiving and discharging passengers
The driver or operator of any motor vehicle shall not receive or discharge passengers in the roadway of any
street in the Town, but shall drive to the righthand sidewalk as nearly as possible, or, in the absence of a
sidewalk, to the extreme righthand side of the road, and there receive or discharge passengers, except upon oneway
streets, where passengers may be discharged or received at either the righthand or lefthand sidewalk, or
roadway in the absence of a sidewalk. (1971 Code, sec. 15-246)
Sec. 12.10.005 Crosswalks designated
The following “pedestrian crosswalk” markings or “pedestrian crossing” signs are hereby authorized, and the
driver of a vehicle approaching such a crosswalk marking or sign shall yield the right-of-way as required under
the Texas Transportation Code:
On Wycliffe Avenue, 225 feet east of Oak Lawn Avenue, requiring westbound Wycliffe traffic to
yield the right-of-way to a pedestrian crossing the roadway.
(1971 Code, sec. 15-248)
ARTICLE 12.11 REGULATION OF CARRIAGES
Sec. 12.11.001 Definitions
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall, for purposes of this article, have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this section:
Carriage. Any vehicle which is drawn by horse, mule, or any other beast of burden which may be hired for the
transportation of passengers.
Carriage business. Any person or business that operates carriages, wagons, carts, or any other vehicles which
are drawn by horse, mule, or any other beast of burden for the purpose of transporting passengers for hire.
Carriage driver permit. A permit issued by the Town of Highland Park to an individual driver of a carriage
operated by a carriage business that has a valid carriage license.
Carriage license. A license issued by the Town of Highland Park for the operation of a carriage business. A
license is valid for all carriages operated by a single carriage business.
Carriage registration. A registration permit issued for a specific carriage operated by a carriage business that
has a valid carriage license.
Carriage stand. A fixed location for the loading and unloading of passengers.
Sec. 12.11.002 Carriage license
(a) No person may operate a carriage business within the corporate limits of the Town without first obtaining a
valid carriage license issued by the Town.
(b) Carriage licenses shall be issued for an operating period beginning on April 1st of each year and expiring
on March 31st of the following year.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 324/505
(c) The carriage license may be issued by the Town Administrator or his designee upon approval of an
application that has the following minimum components:
(1) Name of all persons or business entities that own or control the carriage business.
(2) List the number and type of carriages to be used.
(3) Proof of insurance meeting the requirements set forth in this article.
(4) Proposed areas for loading and unloading carriages, draft animals, and equipment.
(5) Proposed locations for carriage stands to include documentation of the following requirements:
(A) Carriage stands are established by private agreement with property owners. A copy of
this agreement shall be submitted with this application;
(B) Carriage stands should allow adequate area for the staging of carriages, loading and
unloading of passengers, care of draft animals, and customer parking; and
(C) Carriage stands shall comply with all laws, ordinances, and zoning regulations of the
jurisdiction in which they are located.
(6) Proposed hours of operation.
(7) Proposed plans for the care of draft animals during operational hours.
(8) Proposed sanitary plans for the collection and disposal of manure and excrement.
(9) Proposed routes and map thereof.
(10) Proposed rates for service.
(d) A copy of the carriage license shall be maintained at the carriage stand during hours of operation.
(e) Carriage licenses are not transferable.
(f) The annual fee for a carriage license shall be established by Town Council resolution in the form of the
Town's miscellaneous fee schedule.
Sec. 12.11.003 Carriage registration
(a) No person may operate a carriage in a carriage business within the corporate limits of the Town without
first obtaining for said carriage a registration issued by the Town.
(b) Carriage registrations shall be issued for an operating period beginning on April 1st of each year and
expiring on March 31st of the following year.
(c) The carriage registration may be issued by the Town Administrator or his designee upon approval of an
application that has the following minimum components:
(1) Proof of a valid carriage license issued by the Town for the carriage business operating the
carriage;
(2) Description of carriage to include color, make, seating capacity, and any identifying numbers or
marks.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 325/505
(d) The carriage registration shall consist of a decal supplied by the Town to be affixed to the rear of the
carriage in a manner that will be plainly visible by a vehicle operator behind the carriage.
(e) Carriage registrations are specific to a carriage and are not transferable.
(f) The annual fee for a carriage registration shall be established by Town Council resolution in the form of
the Town's miscellaneous fee schedule.
Sec. 12.11.004 Carriage driver permit
(a) No person may drive a carriage upon the public streets of the Town without first obtaining a valid carriage
driver permit issued by the Town.
(b) Carriage driver permits shall be issued for an operating period beginning on April 1st of each year and
expiring on March 31st of the following year.
(c) A carriage driver permit may be issued by the Town Administrator or his designee upon approval of an
application that has the following minimum components:
(1) Proof of employment by a carriage business holding a valid carriage license issued by the
Town;
(2) Full legal name of applicant;
(3) All aliases and nicknames of applicant;
(4) Date of birth of applicant;
(5) Valid driver's license number and issuing State;
(6) Home address of applicant; and
(7) Home telephone number of applicant.
(Ordinance 1763 adopted 9/8/08)
(8) An authorization to conduct a criminal background check on the applicant along with a
processing fee of $40.00. (Ordinance 1980 adopted 7/27/15)
(d) A carriage driver permit may be refused or revoked for:
(1) Failure to maintain a valid vehicle driver's license;
(2) Conviction, including probation or deferred adjudication, for driving offenses involving
impairment by drugs or alcohol;
(3) Conviction of any felony;
(4) Conviction of any sex crime or crime against children; and
(5) Conviction for any crime involving animal cruelty or neglect.
(e) A carriage driver permit is valid only under a single carriage license. A carriage driver may obtain an
additional carriage driver permit under an additional licensed carriage business for an additional fee.
(f) The annual fee for a carriage driver permit shall be established by Town Council resolution in the form of
the Town's miscellaneous fee schedule.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 326/505
Sec. 12.11.005 Insurance and indemnification
(a) A carriage licensee shall pay, and by its acceptance of a license specifically agrees to pay, any and all
damages or penalties which the Town may be legally required to pay as a result of the carriage licensee's
operation or maintenance of a horse-drawn vehicle under this article, whether or not the acts or omissions
complained of are authorized, allowed or prohibited by the Town.
(b) A carriage licensee shall also pay all expenses incurred by the Town in defending itself with regard to any
and all damages and penalties mentioned in subsection (a) above. The expenses shall include all out-of-pocket
expenses, including a reasonable attorney's fee and the reasonable value of services rendered by any employee of
the Town.
(c) The carriage licensee shall maintain, throughout the term of the permit, liability insurance insuring the
Town and the licensee with regard to all damages mentioned in the subsections above caused by the carriage
licensee or its agents, in the minimum amounts of:
(1) Workers' and unemployment compensation insurance as provided by the laws of this State.
(2) Two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) for bodily injury or death to any one person
within the limit, and two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death resulting from any
one accident, and two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) for property damage resulting from
any one accident.
(3) The insurance policies obtained by a carriage licensee in compliance with this section shall be
insured by a company or companies acceptable to the Town and a current certificate or certificates of
insurance, along with written evidence of payment of all required premiums, shall be filed and
maintained with the Town during the term of the permit. The policies shall name the Town as an
additional insured and shall contain a provision that written notice of cancellation or reduction in
coverage of the policy shall be delivered by registered mail to the Town at least thirty (30) days in
advance of the effective date thereof.
Sec. 12.11.006 General operation of carriages
The following provisions apply to the operation of carriages and carriage stands within the Town:
(1) A carriage must display a valid carriage permit issued by the Town and have it permanently
affixed to the carriage and visible from behind the carriage.
(2) A driver must display a valid carriage driver permit issued by the Town on their person. The
carriage driver permit must be issued under the carriage license for which the driver is currently
operating.
(3) Loading or unloading of carriages or draft animals, care or harnessing of draft animals, or any
other preparatory or final operations shall not be conducted on Town streets, alleys, rights-of-way,
easements, or parks.
(4) Carriages must be equipped with devices to prevent manure and other excrement from falling
on Town streets. Any excrement that should fall on a Town street shall be removed at the expense of
the carriage licensee and disposed of in a manner consistent with all health and sanitation standards
and laws.
(5) Carriages are prohibited from operating during the hours from 12:30 a.m. until 5:00 p.m.
(6) Each carriage licensee shall maintain at least one carriage stand at a fixed location. Drivers
must load and unload passengers at designated carriage stands.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 327/505
(7) Carriage stands shall not be allowed on property zoned as residential within the Town.
(8) A carriage is required to be equipped with lighting and a slow moving vehicle emblem as
required by State law. In addition, the draft animal must be equipped with white, amber, or yellow
marker lights or reflective material visible from a distance of 500 feet from the front or sides of the
animal.
(9) A person operating a carriage on a roadway has the rights and duties applicable to the operator
of a vehicle under State law or Town ordinance, except a right or duty that by its nature cannot apply
to a person operating a vehicle drawn by an animal.
(10) Carriage drivers may not consume alcohol while operating a carriage and may not operate a
carriage while intoxicated by alcohol or any other substance.
(11) The maximum load in any carriage drawn by a single draft animal shall be eight individual
passengers. An infant carried in the arms of an adult shall not be counted as an individual passenger.
(12) Passengers must remain seated while the carriage is in motion.
(13) The driver of a carriage must yield to traffic overtaking the carriage when safe to do so.
Sec. 12.11.007 Right to regulate carriage traffic
In the event of emergency, or to expedite traffic, or to safeguard pedestrians, the Town may regulate carriage
traffic in certain areas. Notice of carriage traffic regulation will be provided to all licensed carriage businesses.
This regulation may include:
(1) Directions of travel on specific roadways;
(2) Prohibited areas; and
(3) Defined areas of operation.
Sec. 12.11.008 Exceptions
Carriage businesses contracted for exclusive activities that include funerals, private parties, or private events are
exempt from the provisions in section 12.11.006 regulating hours of operation and requirements for carriage
stands.
Sec. 12.11.009 Revocation of carriage registration, carriage license, and/or carriage driver permit
All registrations, licenses, and permits may be revoked by the Town Administrator or his designee for failure to
comply with any provision of this article. Notice of revocation will be delivered by certified mail to the address
on file for the affected carriage business and/or carriage driver. Said notice shall be deemed received three (3)
business days after the date that the Town deposits it in the U.S. mail.
(Ordinance 1763 adopted 9/8/08)
ARTICLE 12.12 COMMERCIAL USE OF PEDICABS AND NEIGHBORHOOD ELECTRIC
VEHICLES
Sec. 12.12.001 Definitions
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall, for purposes of this article, have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this section:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 328/505
Neighborhood electric vehicle (NEV). A mode of transportation that is a self-propelled capable vehicle
constructed in such a manner as to engage in the business of carrying passengers for hire that has successfully
completed the neighborhood electric vehicle test program conducted by the Federal Department of Energy and
that conforms to the definition and requirements for a maximum high speed of 35 miles per hour on a paved
level surface and otherwise complies with Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard (49 C.F.R. section 571.3(b)
and 571.500). The vehicle shall not be an electric golf cart.
NEV business. Any person or business that operates a NEV or NEV's for the purpose of transporting passengers
for hire.
(Ordinance 1900 adopted 10/8/12)
Pedicab. A device upon which any person or persons may ride, propelled by human power or a motorized
electric or gas powered engine through a belt, chain or gears, having two or more wheels and constructed in such
a manner as to engage in the business of carrying passengers for hire that pulls, or to which is attached, a device
designed to carry one or more persons. (Ordinance 2042 adopted 9/10/18)
Pedicab business. Any person or business that operates a pedicab or pedicabs for the purpose of transporting
passengers for hire.
Sec. 12.12.002 Pedicab businesses and NEV businesses prohibited
No person may operate a pedicab business or a NEV business within the corporate limits of the Town.
Sec. 12.12.003 Penalty
That, any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and
upon conviction thereof may be fined as provided in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(Ordinance 1900 adopted 10/8/12)
CHAPTER 13
UTILITIES
ARTICLE 13.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 13.01.001 Prohibited additives to cooling towers or boilers
It shall be unlawful for any person, either as owner, tenant, employee, plumber or contractor, to place or permit
the placement of an additive into a water cooling tower or into a boiler, the effluent of which empties or will be
emptied into the storm sewer system or the sanitary sewer system, except for discharges for maintenance of a
closed system, which additive contains any of the following substances:
(1) Chromium;
(2) Any salt of chromium;
(3) Any compound containing chromium;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 329/505
(4) Zinc;
(5) Any salt of zinc;
(6) Any compound containing zinc.
(1971 Code, sec. 16-4.1)
Sec. 13.01.002 Runoff of Town water onto streets, alleys or easements
(a) It shall be unlawful for any customer, and/or the occupant of premises, to cause or permit to be caused
excessive water runoff of Town water from that person's premises onto streets, alleys, easements, or public
rights-of-way. Runoff of Town water is excessive when it extends for a distance of greater than twenty (20) feet
from the premises, and/or extends directly into a storm sewer located in and on public rights-of-way.
(b) The Town shall serve a person in violation of this section with a written notice stating the nature of the
violation and providing a 72-hour time limit for satisfactory compliance. Notice is properly served when it is
delivered to the customer, or the occupant of the premises, in the form of a door hanger, or when it is sent by
registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the customer and/or the person
occupying the premises at the time of the violation.
(c) Any person who has received notice of a violation of this section and who fails to comply with the
provisions or terms of this section within the 72-hour time limit shall be deemed guilty of violating the
provisions or terms of this section.
(1971 Code, sec. 16-4.3)
Sec. 13.01.003 Prohibited discharges to storm sewer or surface drainage system
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or permit to be placed any continuous water discharge into the
surface drainage system of the Town that promotes the breeding of mosquitoes or growth of algae or that softens
the ground under curbs, streets, or sidewalks contributing to their displacement or destruction. (Ordinance 1990
adopted 2/22/16)
ARTICLE 13.02 SERVICE REGULATIONS
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 13.02.001 Definitions
The following definitions shall apply exclusively in the construction of this article:
Business unit. Any other unit other than a single-family dwelling unit and a multiple dwelling, as herein defined,
and shall include schools, churches, theaters, clubs and retail and commercial businesses of every kind and
character.
Commercial, non-restaurant. A customer occupying property located within the corporate limits of the Town
which is commercial or retail in purpose or use, except those properties which are designated for restaurant use.
Commercial, restaurant. A customer occupying property located within the corporate limits of the Town which
is commercial in purpose or use and is designated for restaurant use, where guests are served at tables within a
building or other designated areas.
Connection. The service to one (1) single-family dwelling unit within the Town, or to each dwelling unit in a
multiple dwelling, or to a business unit.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 330/505
Cross-connection. In accordance with the definition in Publication No. 525, U.S. Department of Health,
Education, and Welfare, Public Health Service, means any physical connection or arrangement of pipes between
two (2) otherwise separate water supply systems, one (1) of which contains potable water and the other water of
unknown or questionable safety, whereby water may flow from one (1) system to the other, the direction of flow
depending on the pressure differential between the two (2) systems, as such definition may be amended from
time to time.
Customer. A person that:
(1) Has an account with the Town for the supply of water, sewer or sanitation (refuse collection)
services; or
(2) Has made application, whether written or oral, to the Town for water, sewer or sanitation
(refuse collection) services; and
(3) Such service has been provided or made available by the Town at the premises specified in the
application.
(1971 Code, sec. 16-1)
Director of Public Works. That person specifically charged with operation of the water system, the sewer system,
the care and maintenance of streets, and the care and custody of all Town-owned buildings. (1971 Code, sec. 16-
1; Ordinance adopting Code)
Equipment belonging to the Water Department. All pipes, meters, connections, valves and other chattel goods
used by the Water Department as part of the water system of the Town.
Multiple dwelling. A building or structure containing two (2) or more dwelling units.
Office building. Any premises within the Town the principal use of which is nonresidential and in which there
are multiple tenants or spaces for multiple tenancy.
Person. Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation or body politic or corporate, and shall
specifically include all customers.
(1971 Code, sec. 16-1)
Plumber. Any person licensed in accordance with and performing plumbing as defined by the Plumbing License
Law of the State. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Premises. Any real property located within the corporate limits of the Town, whether such property be improved
or unimproved or in the process of being improved, and whether residential or commercial in purpose or use.
Residential, lessee. A customer occupying property located within the corporate limits of the Town which is
residential in purpose or use and who is not the owner of occupied property.
Residential, owner. A customer occupying property located within the corporate limits of the Town which is
residential in purpose or use and who is the owner of occupied property.
Sewer system. That system of pipes and other equipment maintained by the Town for the collection and
transportation of sanitary sewer waste within the corporate limits of the Town.
Single-family dwelling unit. A house designed for and used and occupied by the constituent members of one
family and their bona fide servants.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 331/505
Town Administrator. That person appointed by the Town Council to manage the affairs of the Town, or his
authorized representative.
Town code. The Code of Ordinances of the Town, as amended from time to time.
Town water. Any water supplied to any premises, whether or not through a meter or fire hydrant, or to any
customer, or to any other person, the source of which is the water system of the Town.
Utility service. The delivery of treated water, transference of sanitary sewer waste, collection of refuse,
monitoring of security alarm systems or other services rendered by the Town to persons and institutions under
the conditions of this article.
Water Department. That Department of the Town charged with the responsibility for the provision and
distribution of water, sewer or sanitation (refuse collection) services to persons or premises within the corporate
limits of the Town, and the authorized officers, employees and agents of such Department.
Water leaks. Leaks in a customer's water distribution system. This excludes the loss of water due to mechanical
failure of water closets, irrigation controllers and other mechanical equipment.
Water system. That system of pipes and other equipment maintained by the Water Department for the provision
and distribution of water to premises or fire hydrants within the corporate limits of the Town.
(1971 Code, sec. 16-1)
Sec. 13.02.002 Penalty; disconnection of service for violations
Any person or entity that shall fail to comply with or that shall violate any of the terms of this article shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof may be fined as provided in section 1.01.009 of
this code. In addition, any violation of the terms of this article shall authorize the Water Department to terminate
water or sewer service or both to the offending person or entity and to withhold further service until such time as
the terms of this article shall have been complied with. (Ordinance 1624, sec. 2, adopted 4/25/05)
Sec. 13.02.003 Application for service
(a) Any person who desires water, sewer or sanitation (refuse collection) service to any premises shall make
written application to the Town therefor upon a form provided by the Water Department. The application form
shall contain, among other things, the address of the premises, the name and address of the customer and the
name and address of the owner of the premises, and a contract on the part of the applicant to pay the Water
Department all charges for water, sewer and sanitation (refuse collection) services, including any pro rata
charges, and shall contain an agreement that the applicant will abide by all provisions of this article and other
ordinances of the Town relating to such services.
(b) If the application required herein be for service to a residence, the application shall include, in addition to
those terms enumerated above in subsection (a), the name of the head of the family in control of such premises.
(c) If the application required herein be for service to premises other than a residence, the application shall
include, in addition to those terms enumerated above in subsection (a), the name or names of the person or
persons in control of the premises, whether owners or tenants.
(d) If the application required herein be for service to an office building, the application shall include, in
addition to those terms enumerated above in subsections (a) and (c), the signature of the person or persons who
own the office building or his or their designated agent.
(e) The application required herein may be accepted by the Water Department by telephone; provided that, in
such case, the form will be mailed to the applicant to be signed by him and returned, together with the deposits
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 332/505
and other fees required by this article, within ten (10) days of the date the application for service was made by
telephone.
(f) If an application made as provided above in subsection (e) be not returned as therein provided, services
covered by the application shall be discontinued immediately, without further notice to the customer, until the
application, properly signed, is filed and the deposit made with the Water Department at its main office in person
by the applicant.
(g) An applicant or customer shall furnish proper identification upon request of the Water Department,
together with all information regarding the service address, including but not limited to ownership, tenancy or
any relationship of the applicant or customer to other present or former applicants or customers at the service
address. Failure of the applicant or customer to furnish such information within ten (10) days shall be sufficient
grounds for the immediate discontinuance, without further notice, of any water, sewer or sanitation (refuse
collection) services to the service address then being rendered.
(h) Where an application required hereunder is accepted for water, sewer or sanitation (refuse collection)
service to any premises, such premises shall be deemed the bona fide residence or other location, described
above in subsections (b) through (d), of the customer, and should water, sewer or sanitation (refuse collection)
service be discontinued to such premises because of violations of any of the provisions of this article, no new
application shall be accepted from any person to continue service to such premises under any other name so long
as the premises are in the control of the original customer, whether owner or occupier, until all penalties, bills
and damages due to the Water Department have been paid in full or until agreement relating to payment thereof
has been reached between the customer and the Water Department. If any person shall knowingly and willingly
make a false statement in any application for water, sewer or sanitation (refuse collection) services, he shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof may be fined as provided in section 1.01.009 of
this code.
(1971 Code, sec. 16-2)
Sec. 13.02.004 Water meters and connections
(a) Meter required. All customers shall be supplied with water only when the amount supplied is measured
through a meter. Meters for service within the Town shall be furnished and installed by the Water Department at
the customer's expense, which shall include the cost of any excavation necessary to install meters and service
lines and to expose water or sewer mains for connection.
(b) Location, type and number of meters. The location, installation, size, type and number of meters on the
premises shall be at the direction of the Director of Public Works.
(1971 Code, sec. 16-3)
(c) Fee for installation of meter. The Town shall charge, and shall collect in advance, a fee for the installation
and connection (does not include excavation cost) to mains of each meter in accordance with the following
schedule:
(1) 5/8-inch meter: $750.00.
(2) 1-inch meter: $850.00.
(3) 1-1/2-inch meter: $1,400.00.
(4) 2-inch meter: $1,800.00.
(5) Meter larger than 2-inch: Cost.
(Ordinance 1875, sec. 9, adopted 11/14/11)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 333/505
(d) Request for different meter location. In the event that a customer requests a meter location other than that
prescribed by the Director of Public Works, and if the Director of Public Works gives his approval, the customer
shall bear the entire expense of any excavation or extension of existing lines necessary to make the requested
connection.
(e) Equipment to remain property of Town. All meters, curb cocks, valves, meter boxes, and fixtures
appurtenant thereto connected, installed or used by the Water Department as provided herein, including those
furnished at the customer's expense, shall remain the property of the Town, under the direct control of the Water
Department.
(f) Maintenance of meters. All meters, when rendered unserviceable through normal wear and tear, shall be
maintained, repaired and renewed as necessary exclusively by the Water Department. When such maintenance,
including adjustment, repair or replacement, of any meter is rendered necessary by the act, neglect, negligence
or carelessness of the owner or occupant of the premises, any expense thereby incurred by the Water Department
shall be charged against and collected from the customer and, if such charges be not paid when billed, services
shall be discontinued within ten (10) days of such default of payment.
(g) Stop and waste cock. The customer shall install inside the property line a stop and waste cock of a design
approved by the Director of Public Works, at a location accessible in the event of an emergency. The curb cock
at the meter shall not be used in lieu of the stop and waste cock required by this subsection.
(h) Backflow prevention device. The Director of Public Works shall have authority in his discretion to require
the installation of a checkvalve or backflow and backsiphonage device of a design approved by him, on any
premises, for the protection of the water system. Should the Director deem such installation necessary, upon
written notice to the customer of such determination, the customer shall immediately install the type of device
indicated in the notice at his own expense. Failure or refusal on the part of the customer immediately to install
the device as required by this subsection or the inability of the water system on the premises of the customer to
receive such device shall constitute a ground for the Water Department to discontinue water service to the
premises until such device be installed.
(i) Reading of meters.
(1) All meters shall be read monthly, as may be practicable, by the Town Water Department, and
bills rendered therefor, as provided in section 13.02.044 of this article.
(2) An estimate of the quantity of water delivered to the premises and bill therefor shall be made if:
(A) The meter reader is unable to procure a reading of the meter because access to the meter
is obstructed in any manner subject to the control of the customer;
(B) The meter cannot be located by the meter reader;
(C) The meter does not properly function or is otherwise defective, as provided in subsection
(j) of this section;
(D) Adverse weather or other acts of God prevent the reading of the meter;
(E) No meter is in place at the premises; or
(F) A meter reading is not available to the billing section of the Water Department at the time
of preparation of the bill for any other reason.
(3) All estimates herein allowed shall be based upon:
(A) Past consumption experience at the premises, adjusted for seasonal consumption; or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 334/505
(B) If there be no past experience, then upon consumption of the same type of customer
under similar conditions as adjusted for seasonal consumption.
(4) The customer shall pay to the Town the amount of the bill rendered, as provided in section
13.02.044 of this article; provided that, in the event that the customer demonstrates that an estimate
allowed by this subsection is excessive, the customer shall pay an amount based upon:
(A) An actual meter reading on the premises; or
(B) A revised estimate made by the Water Department as provided in subsection (i)(3) of this
section.
(j) Testing of meters. In the event that a water customer of the Town requests the Water Department to remove
and test a customer's water meter, the Water Department shall cause such testing to be done only when a
customer's request is in writing and contains a promise by the customer to the Water Department to pay for all
expenses incurred by it for such test. If, upon such removal and test, the meter is found by the Water Department
to register more than two (2) percent more water than actually passes through it for meters of one (1) inch or
smaller, or three (3) percent for meters larger than one (1) inch in size, the fee charged the customer under this
subsection shall be credited to his account. Whenever a meter has been found by the Water Department to be out
of order, as herein defined, the customer shall be charged with an average daily consumption, as shown by the
corrected meter, for the ninety-day period preceding the filing of the request.
(k) Connection for sprinkler or fire service system.
(1) No connection for a sprinkler or fire service system shall be permitted on any premises without
a meter, or a detector check with a bypass meter; provided that such installation may be allowed after
written application therefor has been made to and granted in writing by the Water Department and
approved by the Plumbing Inspector of the Town.
(2) Should it be found that any such connection has been made otherwise than as authorized in this
subsection, or that any water has been used from a sprinkler or fire service system for any purpose
other than extinguishing a fire, or that waste of water is permitted from such connection through
leakage in the pipes or fixtures, the water service to the premises concerned shall be shut off and not
turned on until a meter of the size and type prescribed by the Director of Public Works shall have
been installed as provided in this section. In any event above enumerated, the customer shall make
application for service as prescribed in this article for new applicants.
(3) The costs of purchase, installation, maintenance and inspection of all equipment required by
this article for the installation and operation of sprinkler and fire service systems shall be at the
expense of the customers.
(l) Water at construction sites. The Director of Public Works shall have authority to permit water to be
supplied to a construction site without a meter under such regulations as he may issue.
(1971 Code, sec. 16-3)
Sec. 13.02.005 Water service prerequisite to sewer connection; applicability of sewer charge to vacant
property
No sewer connection shall be made to any property within the Town unless such property is likewise connected
to and served by the water system of the Town, and such sewer service charge shall be made and billed
concurrently with the water service charge on the premises. The bill for such sewer charge shall be rendered
monthly jointly with the water bill, but shall be separately shown thereon. In no event shall there be any
abatement of the sewer service charge by reason of the vacancy of any dwelling unit or improved property or
structure connected to the sewer system of the Town. (1971 Code, sec. 16-5)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 335/505
Sec. 13.02.006 Sewer service to be rendered jointly with water service
The sewer service herein provided for shall be rendered jointly and in connection with the water service of the
Town. (1971 Code, sec. 16-5.1)
Sec. 13.02.007 Sewer connections
All persons owning or occupying property in the Town with occupied buildings thereon situated are required to
have a connection with the sanitary sewer of the Town. The property owner is responsible for excavating in a
Town street, alley or easement to uncover or expose the sanitary sewer main and for restoring the street, alley or
easement to its original condition. The property owner or his contractor shall comply with all ordinances of the
Town regulating excavations on public property. Upon payment of a fee in the amount of seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00), the Town will install the property owner's tap or connection and extend the building sewer to
the property line. (Ordinance 1875, sec. 10, adopted 11/14/11)
Sec. 13.02.008 Notices to or from Town
(a) Unless otherwise provided in this article, all required notices shall be in writing and presented to the Water
Department within ten (10) days.
(b) Notice to or from the customer or any person, or to or from the Water Department, shall be required in the
following cases:
(1) The customer, or his duly authorized agent, shall give notice to the Water Department
immediately upon the use of any of his water by an employee or contractor of the Town who is
engaged in any work of public improvement, or work of any character, or for any other reason. Such
notice shall state the name of the owner of the premises, the address of the premises, and the
approximate amount of water use for the public purpose.
(2) The customer, or his duly authorized agent, shall give notice to the Water Department when it
is desired permanently to discontinue all water, sewer or sanitation (refuse collection) services to the
premises; provided that, if water service to the premises be through more than one meter, the
customer may limit the notice herein required to such meter or meters as he may desire. Notice given
under this subsection shall be effective upon receipt by the Water Department, as defined in section
13.02.044(c) of this article, to terminate any further accrual of liability by the customer for service
through the meter or meters included in the limited notice. In the event that a total and permanent
cessation of services is desired, then the notice given under this subsection shall, upon receipt by the
Water Department, terminate any further accrual of liability for such services by the customer.
(3) The customer, or his duly authorized agent, shall give notice to the Water Department on the
next business day after the premises of that customer shall become vacant or occupied; provided that,
if such notice be not given, the owner of the premises shall be conclusively presumed to be the
customer for all purposes of this article; provided further that services to the premises shall be
discontinued immediately and shall not be restored until any past due bills are paid in full, upon
notice of vacancy under this subsection.
(4) Before the commencement of the construction of any sidewalk, driveway, or street in the Town,
any person engaged in such construction shall give notice to the Water Department at least twentyfour
(24) hours prior to the date upon which construction is to begin. The notice required by this
subsection shall include the location of such construction and the date of commencement of
construction so as to provide the Water Department an opportunity to make such arrangements as are
necessary to protect the water system. In the event that such arrangements shall require more than
twenty-four (24) hours to complete, the Water Department shall notify the person or persons affected
and shall have authority to restrain the commencement of construction for such period as shall be
necessary for the protection of the water system.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 336/505
(5) Before the commencement of any opening, grading, regrading, filling, excavation or any other
structural work on any street or alley, any person engaged in such work shall give notice to the Water
Department at least ten (10) days prior to the date upon which construction is to begin. The contents
of the notice required by this subsection should be identical to that prescribed in the immediately
preceding subsection of this section.
(6) Any other case in which notice is required to be given by or to the Water Department, the Town
Administrator, or the Director of Public Works by or to any person or customer under the provisions
of this article.
(7) Failure to furnish the notices required in subsections (b)(4) and (5) of this section shall subject
the person engaged in the construction or work described to liability to the Town for any damages to
the water system proximately caused by such failure.
(1971 Code, sec. 16-8)
Sec. 13.02.009 Fire hydrants
(a) Fire hydrants are provided for the sole purpose of use by the Town to extinguish fires and may be used or
opened only by the Water Department or Fire Department or upon written authority of the Water Department.
(b) Any person authorized to open fire hydrants shall use only an approved spanner wrench and shall replace
the caps on the outlets when the same are not in use.
(c) The Water Department may in its discretion require a deposit in an amount fixed by the Department for
any use of water from fire plugs other than by the Water Department or Fire Department.
(d) Upon written request by the owner of the premises on which a fire hydrant is located, and upon approval
of such request by the Water Department, a fire hydrant may be moved, the costs of such a move to be borne
solely by the owner of the premises, which costs are to be deposited with the Water Department prior to such a
move.
(1971 Code, sec. 16-9(a)–(d))
Sec. 13.02.010 Water storage tanks; cross-connections
(a) In a case in which Town water is used as an auxiliary supply to a roof or suction tank which is supplied
also from any other source, such tank shall be of the open type, not of the pressure type, and Town water shall, in
such a case, be delivered:
(1) Above the flow line; and
(2) Under the control of an automatic valve of a type approved for such use by the Water
Department.
(b) All storage tanks shall be subject to periodic inspection by the Water Department and shall be maintained
in conformity with the standards and requirements of the Department of State Health Services, as they may be
amended from time to time.
(c) No pump taking suction from the Town supply for the purpose of service of storage tanks shall be installed
or operated for such purpose, except upon prior issuance of a permit therefor by the Water Department, which
permit shall specifically approve the size, rate, capacity and valving arrangements of such pumps.
(d) No cross-connection shall be permitted between any system of piping supplied by water from the mains of
the Water Department and any other source of supply, public or private, or any secondary source known to be
made unsafe for drinking water.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 337/505
(e) Violation of this section shall result in the disconnection of any Town service lines, whether water or sewer
or both, to the offending system until such time as the noncompliance is removed, the costs of such
discontinuance and restoration of service to be borne by the customer and paid in full before restoration is
effected.
(1971 Code, sec. 16-9(e)–(i))
Sec. 13.02.011 Plumbing work; duties of plumbers
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person other than a plumber, as defined in this article, to connect any water
service on the premises or outlet side of any meter or meter box.
(b) It shall be the duty of any plumber who engages in construction or repair operations on any portion of the
water system to report promptly to the Water Department:
(1) Every instance in which he has reason to believe that any person has tampered with, damaged
or rendered unserviceable any meter, meter box, or other equipment belonging to the Water
Department; and
(2) Every instance in which he has reason to believe that any unauthorized connections have been
made by any person for any purpose.
(c) Whenever any plumber shall use Town water in testing pipes or repairing fixtures, he shall, before leaving
the premises, turn the curb cock to the position in which he found it when he first opened the meter box.
(d) It shall be unlawful for any plumber to leave open for inspection any ditch, trench or other type of
excavation on any public right-of-way or public way unless the excavation is barricaded and lighted in a manner
approved by the Town. After inspection, the plumber responsible for the excavation shall backfill and securely
tamp any such excavation so that the public way shall be safe for vehicular or pedestrian traffic. For the purposes
of this subsection a plumber shall in no case be deemed an agent of the Town, and failure to comply with the
provisions of this subsection shall render such plumber primarily liable for any damage or injury to any person
or property that results from such noncompliance.
(e) Failure of any plumber who does any work under provisions of this article to pay promptly all charges and
permit fees when rendered by the Water Department shall result in the withholding of any further permits for
such work until such fees and charges shall have been paid in full.
(f) Any communication between the plumber and the Water Department required under subsection (b) of this
section shall be privileged, and no action may lie against any plumber for such communication made in good
faith.
(g) Only pipes of a size and type prescribed by the Water Department shall be used to connect to the water
mains and other equipment of the Water Department, and the use of any other kind of pipe is expressly
prohibited. Violation of this subsection shall be punishable as a misdemeanor.
(1971 Code, sec. 16-10)
Sec. 13.02.012 Offenses against water system; theft of water
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to receive water from the Town otherwise than through a meter, as
prescribed and subject to the exceptions in section 13.02.004 of this article.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to convert to his use any water from any hydrant or other water
connection that is not on his premises, except that such conversion shall be permitted if:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 338/505
(1) The consent of the owner or occupier of the premises or of the customer whose water is to be
converted is first obtained; or
(2) For the purpose of containing or extinguishing a fire or similar exigent circumstance.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(1) Prevent water from passing through, or to bypass in any manner, any meter used by the Water
Department to supply water to a customer;
(2) Prevent a meter used by the Water Department from registering the quantity of water supplied
to a customer;
(3) Interfere with the proper and accurate registration upon a meter used by the Water Department
of the amount of water supplied to a customer;
(4) Divert water, by the use of any device, from a pipe or pipes used by the Water Department;
(5) Refuse to surrender upon demand to the Water Department any meter or other equipment in his
possession, custody or control;
(6) Turn on or use water from the Water Department without an application or permit, properly
issued as provided by this article for the premises, prior to such turning on or use;
(7) Place upon or about any valve, manhole, curb cock, stop box, meter, meter box or fire hydrant
connected to any water pipe belonging to the Water Department, regardless of location, any object or
structure that will prevent free access to the same;
(8) Deny any employee of the Town authorized by section 13.02.014 of this article access to any
valve, manhole, curb cock, meter, meter box or fire hydrant connected to any water pipe belonging to
the Water Department, whether such denial be by overt act or by creation or tolerance of a hazardous
condition on the premises;
(9) Interfere with the performance of any lawful duty of any employee of the Town by obstruction
of the employee in the discharge of his duties, whether such interference be by threats, gestures or
otherwise;
(10) Injure, deface or destroy unlawfully, willfully or maliciously any reservoir, machinery, pipes,
hydrants, meters, meter boxes, lids or other equipment belonging to the Water Department;
(11) Communicate any current of electricity to, or transmit the same along or through, or cause or
permit any current of electricity to be communicated to or transmitted along or through, any
equipment belonging to the Water Department;
(12) Make or cause or permit to be made any metallic connections, either directly or indirectly,
with any equipment belonging to the Water Department whereby any electrical current shall or may
be communicated to or transmitted along or through such equipment;
(13) Conduct or carry away any water from any fire hydrant without a written permit from the
Water Department;
(14) Make any cross-connection between any system of piping supplied by water from the mains
of the Water Department and any other source of supply;
(15) Maintain storage tanks supplied only with Town water, unless the tanks are constructed and
maintained in accordance with such regulations as may be issued by the Water Department or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 339/505
Director of Public Works;
(16) Build, or cause to be built, any structure in such a manner as to expose any equipment
belonging to the Water Department to damage from vehicular traffic on any street, road or alley,
whether public or private, unless a permit for such a structure shall have been first obtained;
(17) Sell water for domestic or any other use within the Town, unless a permit for such sale or use
has been first obtained from the Town Administrator;
(18) Interconnect private supplies of water, including deep well systems, with the Water
Department water system, except as provided in this subsection:
(A) Correction and maintenance, in a manner satisfactory to the Department of State Health
Services and the Water Department of the Town, of all existing sanitary defects in and around
the private supply system;
(B) Provision to be made for complete bacteriological analyses by the Water Department of
the supply involved, in accordance with the standard methods of water analysis of the American
Public Health Association. This requirement means not less than four (4) analyses per month of
two (2) standard samples, or more often if the analyses so warrant; and
(C) Provision by the owner of the private system involved to pay an equitable, pro rata share
of the cost of all inspections and testing required herein, the rates to be determined by the Water
Department subject to the approval of the Town Administrator, and the amount of such charges
to be made a part of the net amount of the bill rendered to the customer as provided in section
13.02.044 of this article.
(1971 Code, sec. 16-11)
(19) A person commits an offense of the theft of water by any of the following actions:
(A) A person may not knowingly tamper with, connect to, or alter any component of the
Town's water system, including valves, meters, meter boxes, lids, hydrants, lines, pump
stations, ground storage tanks, and elevated storage tanks.
(B) If, without the written consent of the Town Administrator or the designee, a person
knowingly causes or allows the initiation or restoration of water service to the property after
termination of services(s). For purposes of this subsection, it shall be assumed that the owner,
occupant, or person in control of the property caused or allowed the unlawful initiation or
restoration of the service(s).
(C) A person may not knowingly make or cause a false report to be made to the Town of a
reading of a water meter installed for metered billing.
(Ordinance 1624, sec. 1, adopted 4/25/05)
(d) The existence of any device, pipe or meter connected to any equipment belonging to the Water Department
for the purpose of furthering any of the unlawful objects stated in subsections (a) through (c) of this section shall
constitute prima facie evidence of knowledge of the particular violation charged.
(1971 Code, sec. 16-11)
Sec. 13.02.013 Liability for damage
(a) The Town shall not be liable for any damage that may occur to boilers, air conditioning equipment, or
other water-consuming devices that are supplied directly with Town water as a result of the interruption of water
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 340/505
service for any reason.
(b) The Town shall not be responsible for nor held liable to any person for any property damage by water or
sewage as a result of:
(1) Faulty or defective plumbing;
(2) Plumbing that does not meet the requirements of this article or the plumbing ordinance of the
Town;
(3) Open pipes or fixtures;
(4) Water or sewer main breaks or leakage therefrom;
(5) Any damage resulting from the termination of or insufficiency of the water supply or pressure
to the premises;
(6) Any damage resulting from any chemical condition of the water or any soluble or insoluble
substances that may mix with or be in the water as delivered to the customer at the meter.
(7) Any other reason.
(1971 Code, sec. 16-12)
Sec. 13.02.014 Access to premises; inspections
(a) The Water Department shall issue an official credential or badge to its authorized officers or employees,
which shall remain the property of the Water Department and shall be returned thereto upon termination of
employment of the person to whom issued.
(b) Upon presentation of the credential provided in subsection (a) of this section, the bearer thereof shall have
the right to free access to any premises supplied with Town water or sewer services at all reasonable hours for
the purpose of making an inspection of the water or sewer installation on the premises or for the reading of
meters.
(c) In any case in which an authorized officer or employee of the Water Department, upon presentation of his
credential, is denied access to or is hindered or prevented from the performance of the duties indicated in the
preceding subsection, the Water Department may cause the water to be turned off from such premises without
notice to the customer or occupant of the premises until such time as the Water Department is allowed to
perform its lawful duties.
(d) The Plumbing Inspector of the Town shall make inspections of all service pipes, connections, utilities or
fixtures installed for the purpose of receiving Town water, and in the event that such installations be not so
approved, the Water Department shall refuse to initiate or to continue water service to the premises until such
installations shall be approved by the Inspector.
(1971 Code, sec. 16-13)
Secs. 13.02.015–13.02.040 Reserved
Division 2. Rates, Charges and Billing*
Sec. 13.02.041 Deposit
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 341/505
(a) At the time application is made for utility services, a deposit in the form of currency, check, cashier's check
or money order shall be made with the Town for each water meter in the following minimum amounts for
premises served as indicated:
(1) Residential, owner: $70.00.
(2) Residential, lessee: $100.00.
(3) Commercial, non-restaurant: $200.00.
(4) Commercial, restaurant: $500.00.
(b) If any customer has an account that requires a minimum deposit of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or
more, the Town Administrator, in his discretion, may accept a bond in lieu of the cash deposit.
(c) If a customer's water service is disconnected for nonpayment, as provided in section 13.02.044(f) of this
article, three (3) or more times within any twelve-consecutive-month period, the customer shall make a deposit
with the Town in the amount equal to the sum of the highest gross utility bills for any three (3) consecutive
months during which the customer's water service has been active. The deposit required by this subsection shall
be maintained by the customer at the dollar amount indicated herein, regardless of any forfeitures charged
against it by the Town.
(d) If water service be discontinued for nonpayment of the bill as provided in section 13.02.044(f) of this
article, the customer shall forfeit a portion of the deposits provided in subsections (a) through (c) of this section
equal to the amount of such bill.
(e) Any and all sums of money collected or hereafter collected from customers as cash deposits to secure the
Water Department against losses that it may sustain when a customer discontinues his water service shall be
deposited in a special fund. The Town Administrator shall keep an accurate record of such customers and
amounts so deposited.
(f) The principal amount of active deposits received prior to September 7, 1960, shall earn simple interest at
the rate of six (6) percent per annum. Deposits received on and after September 7, 1960, shall not be entitled to
earn interest. Interest shall cease to accrue when water service is discontinued at the customer's request.
(g) The deposits required by this article, plus accrued interest, if any, less any amounts due and owing to the
Water Department, shall be due and payable to the customer at the offices of the Water Department when water
service is permanently discontinued at the request of the customer, provided that the customer signs an affidavit
on a form provided by the Water Department to affirm his entitlement to receive such deposit.
(h) (1) After a period of three (3) continuous years of service, utility deposits will be returned as
credit to an active account, provided that:
(A) The customer has a good payment record with the Town; and
(B) The deposit is for service to a resident-owner.
(2) Such refund as defined in this section will be granted as credit to the subsequent bill of each
depositor having three (3) years' service prior to each January 1.
(3) If utility services are transferred in the name of the depositor to an address other than originally
applied for, the deposit amount will also be transferred. If the deposit amount has been returned as
defined in this section, then no deposit for a new address will be required as long as the service
remains in the name of the transferring customer.
(1971 Code, sec. 16-4(a))
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 342/505
Sec. 13.02.042 Water rates
(a) (1) For all water bills rendered by the Town, all customers shall be required to pay a service
charge, as established and approved by the Town Council and included in the Town's adopted master
fee schedule, for each regular monthly billing period or for any period for less than one (1) month in
which service was made available. Where more than one customer unit is served by one water meter,
the customer in whose name such meter is registered shall be required to pay such service charge for
each customer unit serviced by said meter, for each regular monthly billing period or for any period
less than one (1) month in which water service is made available and shall be liable therefor.
(2) Each water customer shall also pay a unit cost per thousand gallons of water which is registered
by said water meter as established and approved by the Town Council and included in the Town's
adopted master fee schedule.
(Ordinance 1896 adopted 9/10/12)
(b) Any customer who is now receiving water services or may hereafter make application for such service
through two (2) or more meters shall be charged no less than the minimum monthly rate prescribed in subsection
(a) of this section for each meter on the premises so connected, whether active or inactive. Removal and
reconnection of a meter for any seasonal purpose, including but not limited to lawn sprinkling, water or air
conditioning, shall subject the customer to a reconnection charge in an amount equal to the minimum monthly
charge multiplied by the number of months that such service was disconnected, not to exceed a twelve-month
period. Any request that a meter be removed and reinstalled within any twelve-month period shall be deemed for
a seasonal purpose and presumed not permanent within the meaning of this section. (1971 Code, sec. 16-4(b))
Sec. 13.02.043 Sewer rates
(a) The Town shall charge and collect monthly from each customer a sum for sewer service rendered to
consumer units in accordance with rates set forth in this section. (1971 Code, sec. 16-5.2; Ordinance adopting
Code)
(b) (1) For all sewer bills rendered by the Town, all customers shall be required to pay a service
charge, as established and approved by the Town Council and included in the Town's adopted master
fee schedule, for each regular monthly billing period or for any period for less than one (1) month in
which service is made available if a water meter is connected to plumbing which drains to the
sanitary sewer. Where more than one customer unit is served by one water meter, the customer in
whose name such meter is registered shall be required to pay such service charge for each customer
unit served by said meter, for each regular monthly billing period for any period less than one (1)
month period in which service is made available and shall be liable therefor.
(2) In addition to the above sanitary sewer charge, each customer shall pay a unit cost charge per
thousand gallons of water metered by the water service meter as established and approved by the
Town Council and included in the Town's adopted master fee schedule
(Ordinance 1897 adopted 9/10/12)
(c) All charges under this section, including any penalties assessed, unless otherwise specifically provided for,
shall be payable monthly in accordance with bills rendered therefor to the customer by the Water Department.
(1971 Code, sec. 16-5.2; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 13.02.044 Billing generally; delinquent payments; adjustment of bills
(a) Monthly billing. All charges under this article, including any penalties assessed, unless otherwise
specifically provided for, shall be payable monthly in accordance with bills rendered therefor to the customer by
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 343/505
the Town Water Department. “Render” shall mean deposit in the United States mail by the Town Water
Department.
(b) Due date. The bill as rendered shall be the net amount due and payable to the Water Department for all
water, sewer or sanitation (refuse collection) services, and the charges so rendered shall become delinquent
fifteen (15) days after the date of billing as shown on the face of the bill, such date of delinquency to be
determined as provided in the subsection (c) of this section.
(c) Date of receipt of payment. Payment shall be made to the Water Department as provided in this
subsection:
(1) If payment is to be made by mail, whether in cash or by check, the date of receipt by the Water
Department shall be conclusively deemed to be the date of the postmark upon the envelope that
contains the payment, provided that the payment enclosed in said envelope is fully negotiable;
provided further that the burden of proof as to the date of receipt in such a case shall be upon the
party asserting it.
(2) If payment is to be made in person and in cash, the date of receipt shall be the date stamped
upon the cash receipt issued therefor by the Water Department; provided that, if payment in person is
to be made by check, the date of receipt shall be the date of receipt stamped upon the reverse thereof
as part of the endorsement of the Water Department.
(3) Any bill not paid, as of the date indicated in this subsection, within fifteen (15) days of the date
of billing shall be delinquent for purposes of this article.
(d) Delinquency penalty. Any customer whose bill is not paid within three (3) days after the date of
delinquency shall thereupon be liable for payment of a penalty in the amount of ten (10) percent of the net
amount shown on the face of the delinquent bill, provided that:
(1) Such liability shall be discharged upon payment of the delinquent bill, plus the penalty herein
provided, prior to the due date of the next succeeding bill; and
(2) If such payment of a delinquent bill, plus the penalty herein provided, be not paid prior to the
due date of the next succeeding bill, the amount of the delinquent bill, plus the penalty herein
provided, shall be added to and become a part of the net amount of the next succeeding bill.
(e) Failure to receive bill. Failure to receive any bill provided by this section shall not relieve the customer of
any liability therefor.
(f) Discontinuance of service. Upon the failure or refusal of any customer to pay within fifteen (15) days of
the date such bill becomes delinquent, as provided in this section, it shall be the duty of the Town Administrator,
without further notice to the customer, immediately to discontinue water, sewer and sanitation (refuse collection)
services and to refuse further service to such customer until such charges are paid or until arrangements for
payment satisfactory to the Town Administrator have been made.
(g) Verification of meter reading. In any case in which there appears to be a material discrepancy in the net
amount of the bill rendered to the customer, it shall be the duty of the Water Department, upon written notice
from the customer, to send an Inspector to inspect and to verify the reading of the meter within five (5) days of
receipt of the complaint, at no charge to the customer; provided that, if the number of written notices shall
exceed three (3) within any twelve-month period, the Water Department shall be entitled to charge the customer
five dollars ($5.00) for any inspection made as provided in this subsection during the succeeding twelve-month
period, said charge to be added to and made a part of the net amount of the bill next rendered to the customer by
the Water Department after the inspection so made.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 344/505
(h) Adjustment of bill. In the event that the discrepancy provided in the preceding subsection arises as a result
of hidden water leaks or other latent causes of which the customer was unaware and which the customer could
not have discovered on reasonable inspection, an adjustment of this bill for water service shall be made on the
following basis:
(1) The amount of the customer's average usage of water for the corresponding billing period in
each of the three (3) years immediately preceding the bill in question shall be deducted from the
amount shown on the bill in which the discrepancy occurs. Should the customer occupy the premises
less than three (3) years, the adjustment shall be made using the corresponding billing period in the
immediately preceding year(s).
(2) Any remainder shall be abated by the Town to equal the difference between the Town's resale
rate per thousand (1,000) gallons and the Town's purchase cost per thousand (1,000) gallons;
provided that the abatement herein provided shall be subject to:
(A) A written statement from a plumber that the leak was in fact due to causes of which the
customer could not have been aware upon reasonable inspection; or
(B) An affidavit of the customer attesting to the above facts.
(3) In no case may the abatement provided for in this subsection be made more often than once
within any six-month period.
(4) In the event that the discrepancy provided for in subsection (g) of this section arises as a result
of hidden water leaks or other latent causes of which the customer was unaware and which the
customer could not have discovered upon reasonable inspection to an account which incurs sanitary
sewer charges, an adjustment of the bill for sanitary sewer service shall be made using the same basis
as subsections (h)(1), (2) and (3) of this section.
(i) Premises with more than one occupant served by single meter. If water is supplied to more than one (1)
family or occupant through a single meter to the premises, the Town shall render its bill for such water, sewer
and sanitation (refuse collection) services as are provided to the customer in whose name the account stands, and
the Town shall not be responsible for any apportionment of the bill for said services among the occupants of the
premises; provided that, upon default of payment by the customer of any bill rendered, the occupant or
occupants of the premises shall be jointly and severally liable for payment thereof as if they were the customer;
provided further that, in the event enumerated in the preceding clause, and if the occupant shall pay such bill on
demand of the Town, the Town shall be subrogated to the paying occupant as to any cause of action by such
paying occupant on the debt of the customer that is thus discharged.
(j) Water used for construction or repair of premises. Water used in the construction or repair of any premises
shall be charged against the owner of such premises, who shall be conclusively presumed to be the customer for
all purposes of this article.
(k) Water furnished to Town departments. All water furnished to the various departments of the Town shall be
payable to the Water Department as in the case of customers, from such funds as may be appropriated to those
departments by the Town Council.
(1971 Code, sec. 16-6)
Sec. 13.02.045 Billing for sewer and sanitation service
(a) Each customer billed for water service shall be billed for sewer service at rates in accordance with the
provisions of section 13.02.043, as amended from time to time, and such charges shall be shown on the water
bill rendered to the customer under provisions of section 13.02.044 of this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 345/505
(b) Each customer billed for water service shall be billed for sanitation (refuse collection) service at rates in
accordance with the provisions of article 13.05, as amended from time to time, and such charges shall be shown
on the water bill rendered to the customer under provisions of section 13.02.044 of this article.
(1971 Code, sec. 16-4(c), (d))
Sec. 13.02.046 Miscellaneous fees and charges
(a) For continuation of utility services which have been discontinued due to nonpayment of bill as provided in
section 13.02.044(f) the Town shall assess the customer a fee as set by the Town Council by resolution on the
miscellaneous fee schedule, to be included in the net amount of the next succeeding bill rendered to the
customer.
(b) When a customer to whom the Water Department furnishes sewer services only becomes delinquent in the
payment of his account, as provided in section 13.02.044 of this article, the Town Administrator in his discretion
may order the sewer line cut and plugged until such time as the delinquency has been satisfied, the costs of such
discontinuance and any subsequent restoration of sewer service to be borne by the customer and to be included
in the net amount of the next succeeding bill rendered to the customer.
(c) The Water Department shall assess the customer a fee, as set by the Town Council by resolution on the
miscellaneous fee schedule, for the dishonor of any check tendered to the Town in payment of any charges or
fees assessed under this article, such fee to be included in the net amount of the next succeeding bill rendered to
the customer.
(1971 Code, sec. 16-7)
(d) The Town shall assess a fee, as set by the Town Council by resolution on the miscellaneous fee schedule,
for discontinuation or continuation of water service between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 7:30 a.m. weekdays, or
on weekends or holidays, to be included on the net billing of the next succeeding bill rendered to the customer.
(1971 Code, sec. 16-7; Ordinance adopting Code)
(e) The service charges and fees provided in this section shall be in addition to, not in lieu of, any charges,
fees, rates or penalties assessed under other provisions of this article or the Town code. (1971 Code, sec. 16-7)
ARTICLE 13.03 SEWER USE*
Sec. 13.03.001 General provisions
(a) Purpose and policy. This article sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned treatment
works (POTW) for the Town and enables the Town to comply with all applicable State and Federal laws,
including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code section 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment
Regulations (40 Code of Federal Regulations part 403). The objectives of this article are to:
(1) Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will
interfere with its operation;
(2) Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will pass
through the publicly owned treatment works, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise
be incompatible with the publicly owned treatment works;
(3) Protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel who may be affected by wastewater
and sludge in the course of their employment and the general public;
(4) Promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge from the publicly owned
treatment works;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 346/505
(5) Enable the Town to comply with the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit
conditions of the City of Dallas, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other Federal or State
laws to which the publicly owned treatment works is subject.
This article shall apply to all users of the publicly owned treatment works. The article authorizes the issuance of
wastewater discharge permits; provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes
administrative review procedures; and requires user reporting.
(b) Administration. Except as otherwise provided herein, the Director of Public Works (Director) shall
administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon
the Director may be delegated by the Director to other personnel.
(c) Abbreviations. The following abbreviations, when used in this article, shall have the designated meanings:
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
COD Chemical oxygen demand
EPA U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
gpd Gallons per day
mg/l Milligrams per liter
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
POTW Publicly owned treatment works
RCRA Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
SIC Standard Industrial Classification
TSS Total suspended solids
USC United States Code
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 347/505
(d) Definitions. Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this
article, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated:
Act or the act. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33
USC section 1251 et seq.
(1971 Code, sec. 16-31)
Activated sludge. The sludge produced in a wastewater treatment plant that is withdrawn from the treatment
plant for disposal. (Ordinance 2024 adopted 8/28/17)
Approval Authority. The Regional Administrator of the EPA.
Authorized representative of the user.
(1) If the user is a corporation:
(A) The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a
principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy- or decisionmaking
functions for the corporation; or
(B) The manager of one (1) or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities
employing more than two hundred fifty (250) persons or having gross annual sales or
expenditures exceeding twenty-five million dollars ($25,000,000.00) (in second-quarter 1980
dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in
accordance with corporate procedures.
(2) If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively.
(3) If the user is a Federal, State, or local governmental facility: a director or the highest official
appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government
facility, or their designee.
The individuals described in subsections (1) through (3) above may designate another authorized representative
if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall
operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the Town.
Biochemical oxygen demand or BOD. The quantity of oxygen, expressed in mg/l, utilized in the biochemical
oxidation of organic matter by standard methods.
(1971 Code, sec. 16-31)
BOD. The value of the five-day test for biochemical oxygen demand, as described in the latest edition of
“Standard Methods for the Examination of Water & Wastewater.” (Ordinance 2024 adopted 8/28/17)
Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits
promulgated by the EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the act (33 USC section 1317) which
apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR, chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405–471.
Composite sample. Samples collected during a period of time exceeding fifteen (15) minutes and combined into
one (1) sample.
Control Authority. The operator of any part of the POTW if different from the Town, e.g., the City of Dallas
Water Utilities.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 348/505
Environmental Protection Agency or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or, where appropriate,
the Regional Water Management Division Director or other duly authorized official of said agency.
Existing source. Any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the
publication by the EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards which will be applicable to such source if
the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307 of the act.
(1971 Code, sec. 16-31)
Fats, oils, and grease (FOG). The organic polar compounds derived from animal and/or plant sources that
contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules. These substances are detectable and measurable using
analytical test procedures established in 40 CFR 136, as may be amended from time to time. All are sometimes
referred to herein as “grease” or “greases.”
Generator. A person who causes, creates, generates, stores, or otherwise produces liquid waste, excluding a
person storing liquid waste in a mobile tank or fixed storage tank for temporary storage.
(Ordinance 2024 adopted 8/28/17)
Grab sample. A sample which is taken from a waste stream without regard to the flow in the waste stream and
over a period of time not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes. (1971 Code, sec. 16-31)
Grease trap. A receptacle, structure, or mechanical device used by a generator to intercept, collect, separate, and
restrict the passage of fat, oil, grease, organic, inorganic, liquid, semi-liquid, semi-solid, or solid waste from
wastewater prior to discharge to the Publicly Owned Treatment Works (“POTW”).
Grease trap waste. Fats, oils, grease organic, inorganic, liquid, semi-liquid, semi-solid, or solid waste collected
by and removed from a grease trap.
Grit trap. A receptacle, structure, or mechanical device used by a generator to intercept, collect, separate, and
restrict the passage of petroleum-based oil and grease waste, and inorganic or other solids or semi-solids from
wastewater prior to discharge to the POTW.
Grit trap waste. Petroleum-based oil and grease waste, and inorganic or other solids and semi-solids collected by
and removed from a grit trap.
(Ordinance 2024 adopted 8/28/17)
Indirect discharge or discharge. The introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source
regulated under section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the act.
Industrial user. An industry that discharges wastewater into the wastewater system.
Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit. The maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be
discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected,
independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.
Interference. A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources,
inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal, and
therefore is a cause of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following
statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent State or local regulations:
section 405 of the act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including title II, commonly referred to as the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any State regulations contained in any State sludge management plan
prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances
Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 349/505
(1971 Code, sec. 16-31)
Liquid waste. Waterborne solids, semi-solids, semi-liquids, and liquids that contain dissolved or suspended
waste materials including:
(1) Septic tank waste;
(2) Activated sludge;
(3) Chemical toilet waste;
(4) Grease trap waste;
(5) Grit trap waste;
(6) Wastewater that is collected on a vehicle or transported on a vehicle; and
(7) Other liquid waste collected on a vehicle or transported on a vehicle.
Liquid waste hauler. A person who stores, transports, transfers, or hauls liquid waste.
(Ordinance 2024 adopted 8/28/17)
Medical waste. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes,
sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and
dialysis wastes.
New source.
(1) Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of
pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment
standards under section 307(c) of the act, which will be applicable to such source if such standards
are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:
(A) The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other
source is located;
(B) The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production
equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or
(C) The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or
installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining
whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the
same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered.
(2) Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather
than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation
meeting the criteria of subsection (1)(B) or (C) above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to
existing process or production equipment.
(3) Construction of a new source as defined under this subsection has commenced if the owner or
operator has:
(A) Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site construction program:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 350/505
(i) Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment;
(ii) Significant site preparation work, including clearing, excavation, or removal of
existing buildings, structures, or facilities, which is necessary for the placement, assembly,
or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
(B) Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment
which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or
contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for
feasibility, engineering, and design studies, do not constitute a contractual obligation under this
subsection.
Noncontact cooling water. Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw
material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product.
Pass-through. A discharge of pollutants through the Town's wastewater system into waters of the United States
in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources,
is a cause, in whole or in part, of a violation of any discharge requirement of the Town, including an increase in
the magnitude or duration of a violation.
Person. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock
company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents, or
assigns. This definition includes all Federal, State, and local governmental entities.
pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration of a solution.
Pollutant. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge,
munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment,
rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater
(e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).
Pretreatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the
nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW.
This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes, by process changes,
or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable
pretreatment standard.
Pretreatment requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a
user, other than a pretreatment standard.
Pretreatment standards or standards. Pollutant concentration discharge limitation requirements or standards,
categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits. National pretreatment standard means any pretreatment
regulations containing pollutant discharge limits that have been established or will be established for industrial
users by the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges. Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain
substances; these prohibitions appear in section 13.03.002(a) of this article.
Publicly owned treatment works or POTW. A “treatment works,” as defined by section 212 of the act (33 USC
section 1292), which is owned by the Town and/or the Control Authority. This definition includes any devices or
systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a
liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant.
Septic tank waste. Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic
tanks.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 351/505
Sewage. Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.).
Significant industrial user.
(1) A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or
(2) A user that:
(A) Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gpd or more of process
wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown
wastewater);
(B) Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five (5) percent or more of the
average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant;
(C) Is designated as such by the Director or the Control Authority on the basis that it has a
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any
pretreatment standard or requirement; or
(D) Is defined as subject to National categorical pretreatment standards by the United States
EPA.
(3) Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (2) has no reasonable potential for
adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement,
the Town and/or the Control Authority may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a
petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(0(6), determine
that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user.
Slug load or slug. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited
discharge standards in section 13.03.002(a) of this article.
Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) code. A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual issued by the United States Office of Management and Budget.
Stormwater. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation, including snowmelt.
Superintendent (Director of Public Works). The person designated by the Town to supervise the operation of the
wastewater collection system, and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this article, or a
duly authorized representative.
Suspended solids. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater,
or other liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtering.
(1971 Code, sec. 16-31)
Transporter. A person who is registered with and authorized by the TCEQ to transport sewage sludge, water
treatment sludge, domestic septage, chemical toilet waste, grit trap waste, or grease trap waste in accordance
with V.T.C.A., title 30 Texas Administrative Code § 312.142.
TSS. The value of the test for total suspended solids, as described in the latest edition of “Standard Methods for
the Examination of Water & Wastewater.”
(Ordinance 2024 adopted 8/28/17)
User or industrial user. A source of indirect discharge.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 352/505
Wastewater. Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial
buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are
contributed to the POTW.
Wastewater treatment plant or treatment plant. That portion of the POTW which is designed to provide
treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste.
(1971 Code, sec. 16-31)
Sec. 13.03.002 Discharge standards
(a) Prohibited discharges.
(1) General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any
pollutant or wastewater which causes pass-through or interference. These general prohibitions apply
to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any
other National, State, or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
(2) Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the
following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:
(A) Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not
limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140°F (60°C) using the test
methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21;
(B) Wastewater having a pH less than 5.5 or more than 10.5;
(C) Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the
POTW resulting in interference;
(D) Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge
at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other
pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW;
(E) Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150°F (65°C), or which will inhibit
biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater
which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104°F
(40°C);
(F) Used motor oil;
(G) Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW
in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems;
(H) Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the Director
and/or Control Authority in accordance with section 13.03.003(c) of this article;
(I) Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or
by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or
to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair;
(J) Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such
as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts
color to the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the applicable National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (“NPDES”) permit;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 353/505
(K) Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes in a manner that will permit a
transient concentration higher than one hundred (100) microcuries per liter, except in
compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations;
(L) Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof runoff, and subsurface
drainage, unless specifically authorized by the Director and/or the Control Authority;
(M) Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes;
(N) Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's
effluent to fail a toxicity test;
(O) Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive
foaming in the POTW;
(P) Except where the Director and/or the Control Authority have determined that different
limits under an industrial waste permit are appropriate, a person may not discharge fat, oil,
grease, or similar material to the POTW in excess of one hundred (100) mg per liter. If
necessary to protect the POTW or sanitary sewer, the Director may issue a permit, order, or rule
that assigns the limits on discharge of fat, oil, grease, or similar substance as:
(i) Instantaneous maximum allowable limits;
(ii) Daily average limits;
(iii) Daily maximum limits;
(iv) Monthly average limits; or
(v) Limits of other sampling duration or averaging period.
The following is a list of oils, fats, and grease types not permitted:
(i) Floatable grease of any origin;
(ii) Free or emulsified grease of petroleum or mineral origin, or both, including but not
limited to:
a. Cooling or quenching oil;
b. Lubricating oil;
c. Non-biodegradable cutting oil; and
d. Non-saponifiable oil;
(Q) A discharge of water, normal domestic wastewater, or industrial waste that in quantity of
flow exceeds, for a duration of longer than fifteen (15) minutes, more than four (4) times the
average twenty-four-hour flow during normal operation;
(R) Insecticides and herbicides in concentrations that are not amenable to treatment;
(S) Polychlorinated biphenyls;
(T) Garbage that is not properly shredded to such an extent that all particles will be carried
freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in wastewater mains, with no particle
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 354/505
having greater than a one-half-inch cross-sectional dimension;
(U) Wastewater or industrial waste generated or produced outside the Town, unless approval
in writing from the Director and the Control Authority has been given to the person discharging
the waste; or
(V) Without the approval of the Director and/or Control Authority, a substance or pollutant
other than industrial waste, normal domestic wastewater, septic tank waste or chemical toilet
waste that is of a toxic or hazardous nature, regardless of whether or not it is amenable to
treatment, including but not limited to bulk or packaged chemical products.
Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be stored in such a manner that they
could be discharged to the POTW.
(b) National categorical pretreatment standards. The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR
chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405-71 are hereby incorporated.
(1) Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the
concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the Director and/or the Control Authority may impose
equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c).
(2) When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not
regulated by the same standard, the Director and/or the Control Authority shall impose an alternate
limit using the combined waste stream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
(3) A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove,
pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its
discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by the EPA when developing the
categorical pretreatment standard.
(4) A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR
403.15.
(c) Local limits. The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass-through and
interference. No person shall discharge, or cause or permit to be discharged, wastewater containing in excess of
the following instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limits:
(1) Metals in the form of compounds or elements in solution or suspension in concentrations
exceeding the following:
0.5 mg/l arsenic
1.0 mg/l cadmium
5.0 mg/l chromium
4.0 mg/l copper
1.6 mg/l lead
0.01 mg/l mercury
9.0 mg/l nickel
0.2 mg/l selenium
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 355/505
4.0 mg/l silver
5.0 mg/l zinc
(2) Organic chemical substances in concentrations exceeding the following:
21,000.0 mg/l acetone
1.0 mg/l benzene
1.6 mg/l ethyl benzene
26,250.0 mg/l isopropyl alcohol
20,000.0 mg/l methyl alcohol
249.0 mg/l methyl ethyl ketone
21.0 mg/l methylene chloride
149.0 mg/l total phenols
3.0 mg/l toluene
2.0 mg/l xylene
(3) 1.6 mg/l cyanide or cyanogen compounds.
(4) 100.0 mg/l oil and grease.
(5) 10.0 mg/l sulfides.
(6) 10,000 mg/l BOD5.
(7) 10,000 mg/l total suspended solids.
The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW. All concentrations for
metallic substances are for “total” metal unless indicated otherwise.
(d) Right of revision. The Town reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge
permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW.
(e) Dilution of discharge. No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute
a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge
limitation, unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The Director may
impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.
(f) Restrictions on discharge of liquid waste.
(1) Except as otherwise provided in this article, a person shall dispose of liquid waste only by
discharge or deposit at an approved receiving station.
(2) Offenses:
(A) A person commits an offense under this article if the person:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 356/505
(i) Discharges or disposes of liquid waste at a location other than an approved receiving
station;
(ii) Discharges waste from grease traps, grit traps, or hold haul tanks that has been
commingled with sewage, septic tank waste, activated sludge, or chemical toilet waste to
an approved receiving station;
(iii) Discharges hazardous waste or liquid waste containing pollutants in violation of
Federal, State, or local law;
(iv) Possesses or presents a false manifest, chemical analysis, list of industrial
contributors, or other document to obtain approval for discharge or disposal of liquid
waste;
(v) Discharges to the POTW or sanitary sewer liquid waste not documented by a
manifest as required by local and State health officials;
(vi) Discharges wastes from a grit trap, grease trap, or hold haul tank to:
a. The POTW;
b. The Town's sanitary sewer system; or
c. The POTW's wholesale wastewater customers;
(vii) Discharges liquid waste collected from one or more generators into a service line,
cleanout, sampling port, manhole, or other device that discharges into the POTW and is
owned or operated by a third party;
(viii) Discharges grease trap waste, grit trap waste, or other liquid waste removed from
a grease trap or grit trap into the device from which it was removed or any other device;
or
(ix) Discharges grease trap waste, grit trap waste, or other liquid waste that has been
physically or chemically treated, separated, commingled with other liquid waste, or
otherwise altered, into a grease trap, grit trap, or other device while or after the device is
being serviced.
(g) Fees and charges.
(1) A liquid waste hauler seeking a permit must complete and file an application for a permit with
the Director on the form provided by the Director and pay the annual application and permit fee.
(2) A liquid waste hauler shall remit to the Town an amount equal to five percent (5%) of all gross
revenues from all operations of the liquid waste hauler within the Town. Said amounts shall be
remitted no later than the thirtieth (30th) day after such revenue is earned. The liquid waste hauler
shall submit a monthly report to the Town accounting for its gross revenues under the permit for any
month in which revenue is earned pursuant to the permit. As applied in this section, the term gross
revenue shall exclude the amount of any municipal, county, State, or Federal sales or excise tax on
sales, which is both added to the selling price and paid to the taxing authority by the liquid waste
hauler; and the amount of any city, county, State, or Federal admission tax or use tax or similar
governmental charge which is paid to the relevant taxing authority by the liquid waste hauler. The
Town Council reserves the right to increase the liquid waste hauler fee at its sole discretion by
amending this section.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 357/505
(h) Recordkeeping requirements. A person discharging or proposing to discharge liquid waste shall maintain
written reports, information, or other documentation showing:
(1) The nature and concentration of pollutants in the liquid state; and
(2) The origin of the waste including:
(A) The name, address, and telephone number of the generator;
(B) The nature of operations conducted by the generator; and
(C) Other information the Director determines necessary to identify the liquid waste
discharged and to implement the provisions of this chapter.
(i) Grease trap design requirements.
(1) Grease trap design is as specified in the Town's plumbing code with the approval of the
Building Official.
(2) All existing facilities that are not compliant with grease trap maintenance standards will be
given a compliance deadline not to exceed six (6) months from the date of notification to have
approved and installed grease-handling equipment in compliance with this Policy. Failure to do so
will be considered a violation of the Town's ordinance and may subject the facility to enforcement
action.
(j) Requirements for cleaning grease traps.
(1) A person who discharges wastewater from a grease trap to the POTW shall:
(A) Completely remove all fat, oils, or grease waste, other liquid waste, semi-solid or solid
and residue from the grease trap when the grease trap is cleaned;
(B) Reimburse the cost to remove all fat, oils, or grease waste from the POTW; and
(C) Receive a maximum fine pursuant to the Town's Code of Ordinances per day, every day,
until the subject grease trap has been returned to the Town's ordinance requirements and
inspected by Town Staff;
(D) Clean the grease trap the earlier of:
(i) A minimum of every ninety (90) days, or
(ii) When fifty percent (50%) or more of the wetted height of the grease trap, as
measured from the bottom of the grease trap to the invert of the outlet pipe, contains
grease and solids. Failure to clean the grease trap on a timely basis will be considered a
violation of the Town's ordinance and may subject the facility to enforcement action.
(2) The Director may reduce the cleaning frequency requirement in writing if the Director
determines, based on written documentation submitted by the generator, that the reduced cleaning
frequency does not contribute to or cause a violation of this chapter.
(3) A person cleaning a grease trap shall dispose of the waste removed from the grease trap in
accordance with Federal, State and local regulations.
(4) The Director may establish other cleaning requirements for grease traps as necessary to protect
the POTW or a portion of the sanitary sewer.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 358/505
(k) Requirements for cleaning grit traps.
(1) A person who discharges wastewater from a grit trap to the POTW shall completely remove all
oil and grease waste, other liquid waste, semi-solid, or solid, and residue from the grit trap when the
grit trap is cleaned.
(2) A person cleaning a grit trap shall dispose of the waste removed from a grit trap in accordance
with Federal, State, and local restrictions.
(3) The Director may establish other cleaning requirements for grit traps as necessary to protect the
POTW or a portion of the sanitary sewer system.
(l) Permit and application requirements for grease/grit traps.
(1) A person seeking a permit must complete and file an application for a permit with the Director
on the form provided by the Director and pay the application and permit fees established by
resolution.
(2) An application for a permit under this chapter must include:
(A) The name, title, address, and telephone number of the authorized representative for the
applicant;
(B) The description or address of the location;
(C) The description of the activity and process conducted at the location;
(D) The description of the facility at the location;
(E) The nature and characteristics of the proposed discharge;
(F) A list of the raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the location that may be
discharged to the POTW, intentionally or accidentally;
(G) The type, amount, process, and rate of product produced;
(H) The type and amount of raw materials processed, including daily average and daily
maximum;
(I) A copy of the site, floor, mechanical, and plumbing plans that show sewers, floor drains,
and pretreatment facilities by size, location, elevation and points of origin; and
(J) The time and duration of discharge.
(3) The Director may require additional application information as necessary to determine
compliance by the premises and proposed discharge.
(4) An annual permit fee, as established by Town Council Resolution. The permit fee will cover up
to three inspections of the operational grease trap by Town Staff.
(5) The authorized representative of the applicant must sign the application and make the following
certification: “I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared
under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified
personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person
or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 359/505
complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including
the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violation.”
(m) Transfer of existing grease trap permit.
(1) A person assuming ownership, occupancy, or management of a premises covered by an existing
permit shall apply for a transfer of the existing permit no later than the 30th day before the proposed
transfer.
(2) The Director may transfer an existing permit if:
(A) The new owner, occupant, or manager:
(i) Complies with the application requirements of this section; and
(ii) Pays the permit transfer fee; and
(B) The discharge from the permitted premises complies with the requirements of this
chapter at the time of the transfer.
(3) A person assuming ownership, occupancy, or management of a currently permitted premises
shall file an application for a transfer of the permit with the Director on the form provided by the
Director and pay a permit transfer fee.
(4) An application for transfer of an existing permit must include:
(A) The name, title, address, and telephone number of the authorized representative for the
applicant;
(B) The description or address of the location;
(C) The description of the activity and the process conducted at the location;
(D) The description of the facility at the location;
(E) The nature and characteristics of the proposed discharge;
(F) A list of raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the location that may be
discharged to the POTW, intentionally or accidentally;
(G) The type, amount, process, and rate of product produced;
(H) The type and amount of raw materials processed, including the daily average and daily
maximum;
(I) A copy of the site, floor, mechanical, and plumbing plans that show sewers, floor drains,
and pretreatment facilities by size, location, elevation, and points of origin; and
(J) The time and duration of discharge.
(5) A person assuming ownership, occupancy or management of a premises covered by an existing
permit shall certify that there has been no material change in:
(A) The equipment, facility or process used on the permitted premises; or
(B) The character, quantity, rate of flow, or other characteristics of the discharge.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 360/505
(6) The Director may waive the permit application requirement for the transfer of a permit issued
to a user that is not a significant industrial user.
(n) Grease trap permit renewal.
(1) A person holding a permit shall apply for a renewal no later than the 60th day before the
expiration of an existing permit.
(2) The Director may renew an existing permit if the person holding the permit complies with the
application requirements of this section and timely pays the invoice for the permit renewal fee.
(3) A significant industrial user shall apply for renewal of a permit by filing a complete permit
application form.
(4) The Director may waive the permit renewal application requirement for a user that is not a
significant industrial user.
(5) The Director may issue a permit renewal notice to a user that is not a significant industrial user
with an attached invoice for payment of the permit renewal fee.
(o) Grease trap permit renewal fee. A person who receives a permit renewal notice shall pay the invoiced
permit renewal fee on or before its due date.
(p) Grease trap permit for multiple user facility.
(1) The Director may issue a permit for a multiple user facility that discharges prohibited waste to
the POTW.
(2) The owner, occupant, or manager of, or person who has contracted for water and wastewater
service for a multiple user facility shall file an application for a permit with the Director on the form
provided by the Director and pay a permit application fee.
(Ordinance 2024 adopted 8/28/17)
Sec. 13.03.003 Pretreatment of wastewater
(a) Pretreatment facilities. Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this article
and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set
out in section 13.03.002(a) of this article within the time limitations specified by the EPA, the State, the Control
Authority, or the Director, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be
provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating
procedures shall be submitted to the Director for review, and shall be acceptable to the Director before such
facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user
from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the Town
under the provisions of this article.
(b) Accidental discharge/slug control plans. At least once every two (2) years, the Director shall evaluate
whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The Director may
require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the Director may
develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the
following:
(1) Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges;
(2) Description of stored chemicals;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 361/505
(3) Procedures for immediately notifying the Director of any accidental or slug discharge, as
required by section 13.03.006(f) of this article; and
(4) Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures
include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of
materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of
containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including
solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response.
(c) Septage waste.
(1) Septage waste may be introduced into the Dallas central wastewater treatment plant in the
manner designated by the Control Authority, and at such times as are established by the Control
Authority. The Control Authority may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater
discharge permits.
(2) Septage waste generators must provide a manifest form for every load. This form shall include,
at a minimum, the name and address of the generator, the waste hauler, permit number, truck
identification, disposal site and volume and characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the type
of industry, known or suspected waste constituents and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous
wastes. The generator shall retain a completed manifest in its business office for three (3) years after
disposal.
(1971 Code, sec. 16-33)
Sec. 13.03.004 Wastewater discharge permit required; application; issuance or denial
(a) Wastewater analysis. When requested by the Director, a user must submit information on the nature and
characteristics of its wastewater within ten (10) days of the request. The Director is authorized to prepare a form
for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this information.
(b) Permit required.
(1) No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining
a wastewater discharge permit from the Director, except that a significant industrial user that has filed
a timely application pursuant to subsection (c) of this section may continue to discharge for the time
period specified therein.
(2) The Director may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to
carry out the purposes of this article.
(3) Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a
violation of this article and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in
sections 13.03.009 through 13.03.011 of this article. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does
not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all Federal and State pretreatment standards or
requirements or with any other requirements of Federal, State, and local law.
(c) Existing users. Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was discharging
wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of this article (ordinance adopted October 4, 1993), and
who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within sixty (60) days after said date, apply to the
Director for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with subsection (e) of this section, and shall not cause
or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after sixty (60) days of the effective date of this article except in
accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the Director.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 362/505
(d) New users. Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to begin or
recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit prior to beginning or recommencing of such
discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with subsection (e) of this section,
must be filed at least thirty (30) days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence.
(e) Application contents. All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit
application. The Director may require all users to submit as part of an application the following information:
(1) All information required by section 13.03.006(a)(2) of this article;
(2) Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all
raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or
intentionally be, discharged to the POTW;
(3) Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation;
(4) Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production;
(5) Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day);
(6) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor
drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge;
(7) Time and duration of discharges; and
(8) Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the Director to evaluate the wastewater
discharge permit application.
Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision.
(f) Signatories and certification. All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed
by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: “I certify under
penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in
accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the
information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons
directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and
belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false
information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.”
(g) Decision; issuance. The Director will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional
information. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the
Director will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The Director may deny any
application for a wastewater discharge permit. The Director shall furnish the City of Dallas with a copy of the
application and permit within fourteen (14) days after issuance.
(1971 Code, sec. 16-34)
Sec. 13.03.005 Duration of discharge permit; conditions; modification; transfer; revocation
(a) Duration. A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5)
years from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than
five (5) years, at the discretion of the Director. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date
upon which it will expire.
(b) Contents. A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably
necessary by the Director to prevent pass-through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 363/505
the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and
protect against damage to the POTW.
(1) Wastewater discharge permits must contain:
(A) A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall
exceed five (5) years;
(B) A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior
notification to the Town in accordance with subsection (d) of this section, and provisions for
furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit;
(C) Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards;
(D) Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and recordkeeping requirements.
These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling
location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on Federal, State, and local law; and
(E) A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment
standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not
extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable Federal, State, or local law.
(2) Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following
conditions:
(A) Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or
requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
(B) Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or
construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the
introduction of pollutants into the treatment works;
(C) Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other
special conditions, including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental,
unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges;
(D) Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of
pollutants discharged to the POTW;
(E) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the
wastewater discharged to the POTW;
(F) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and
equipment;
(G) A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the
permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable Federal and State pretreatment
standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge
permit; and
(H) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Director or the Control Authority to
ensure compliance with this article and State and Federal laws, rules, and regulations.
(c) Modification. The Director may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not
limited to, the following reasons:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 364/505
(1) To incorporate any new or revised Federal, State, or local pretreatment standards or
requirements;
(2) To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes or wastewater
volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance;
(3) A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination
of the authorized discharge;
(4) Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the POTW, Town
personnel, or the receiving waters;
(5) Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit;
(6) Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge
permit application or in any required reporting;
(7) Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR
403.13;
(8) To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or
(9) To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator.
(d) Transfer. Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the
permittee gives at least thirty (30) days' advance notice to the Director and the Director approves the wastewater
discharge permit transfer. The notice to the Director must include a written certification by the new owner or
operator which:
(1) States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's
operations and processes;
(2) Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and
(3) Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit.
Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of
facility transfer.
(e) Revocation. The Director and/or the Control Authority may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good
cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
(1) Failure to notify the Director of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed
discharge;
(2) Failure to provide prior notification to the Director of changed conditions pursuant to section
13.03.006(e) of this article;
(3) Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge
permit application;
(4) Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
(5) Tampering with monitoring equipment;
(6) Refusing to allow the Director timely access to the facility premises and records;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 365/505
(7) Failure to meet effluent limitations;
(8) Failure to pay fines;
(9) Failure to pay sewer charges;
(10) Failure to meet compliance schedules;
(11) Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application;
(12) Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility;
or
(13) Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater
discharge permit or this article.
Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership.
All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater
discharge permit to that user.
(f) Reissuance. A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge
permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with section 13.03.004(e) of this
article, a minimum of thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the user's existing wastewater discharge permit.
(1971 Code, sec. 16-35)
Sec. 13.03.006 Reporting requirements
(a) Baseline monitoring reports.
(1) Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a categorical
pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR
403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to
discharge to the POTW shall submit to the Director a report which contains the information listed in
subsection (2) below. At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their discharge, new
sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable
categorical standard, shall submit to the Director a report which contains the information listed in
subsection (2) below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet
applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and
quantity of pollutants to be discharged.
(2) Users described above shall submit the information set forth below.
(A) Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the
operator and owner.
(B) Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the
facility.
(C) Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production,
and Standard Industrial Classification of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This
description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to
the POTW from the regulated processes.
(D) Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum
daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams,
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 366/505
as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste stream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
(E) Measurement of pollutants.
(i) The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process.
(ii) The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration,
and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the Director, of regulated pollutants in
the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term
average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be
representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set
out in subsection (j) of this section.
(iii) Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in subsection
(k) of this section.
(F) Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified
by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a
consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or
additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.
(G) Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet
the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional
pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the
compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule
pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in subsection (b) of this section.
(H) Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified
in accordance with section 13.03.004(f) of this article.
(b) Compliance schedule progress reports. The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule
required by subsection (a)(2)(G) of this section:
(1) The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and
completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment
required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not
limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major
components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine
operation);
(2) No increment referred to above shall exceed nine (9) months;
(3) The user shall submit a progress report to the Director no later than fourteen (14) days
following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance, including, as a minimum,
whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if
appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the schedule; and
(4) In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the
Director.
(c) Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. Within ninety (90) days following
the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment
standards and requirements shall submit to the Director a report containing the information described in
subsections (a)(2)(D) through (F) of this section. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 367/505
established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure
of the user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards
expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this
report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports
must be signed and certified in accordance with section 13.03.004(f) of this article.
(d) Periodic compliance reports.
(1) All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the Director but in no case
less than twice per year (in June and December), submit a report indicating the nature and
concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the
measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic
compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 13.03.004(f) of this
article.
(2) All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring
and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good
working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order
shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge.
(3) If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more
frequently than required by the Director, using the procedures prescribed in subsection (k) of this
section, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report.
(e) Reports of changed conditions. Each user must notify the Director of any planned significant changes to
the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least twenty
(20) days before the change.
(1) The Director may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to
evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit
application under section 13.03.004(e) of this article.
(2) The Director may issue a wastewater discharge permit under section 13.03.004(g) of this article
or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under section 13.03.005(c) of this article in
response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions.
(3) For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow
increases of twenty (20) percent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants.
(f) Reports of potential problems.
(1) In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a
nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential
problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the Director at 214-521-
4161 and the Control Authority at 214-670-5700 of the incident. This notification shall include the
location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions
taken by the user.
(2) A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place
advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in subsection (1) above.
Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause such a discharge to occur are advised of
the emergency notification procedure.
(g) Reports from unpermitted users. All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall
provide appropriate reports to the Director as the Director may require.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 368/505
(h) Notice of violation; repeat sampling and reporting. If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation,
the user must notify the Director and the Control Authority within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of
the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to
the Director and the Control Authority within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is
not required to resample if the Director and/or the Control Authority monitors at the user's facility at least once a
month, or if the Director and/or the Control Authority samples between the user's initial sampling and when the
user receives the results of this sampling.
(i) Notification of discharge of hazardous waste.
(1) Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA
Regional Waste Management Division Director, and State hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of
any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous
waste under 40 CFR part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set
forth in 40 CFR part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous,
batch, or other). If the user discharges more than one hundred (100) kilograms of such waste per
calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following information to the
extent such information is known and readily available to the user: an identification of the hazardous
constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents
in the waste stream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of
constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months.
All notifications must take place no later than one hundred eighty (180) days after the discharge
commences. Any notification under this subsection need be submitted only once for each hazardous
waste discharged. However, notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under subsection
(e) of this section. The notification requirement in this subsection does not apply to pollutants already
reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring
requirements of subsections (a), (c) and (d) of this section.
(2) Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection (1) above during a calendar month
in which they discharge no more than fifteen (15) kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes
are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than
fifteen (15) kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute
hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification.
Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous
waste do not require additional notification.
(3) In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional
characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user
must notify the Director, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and State
hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within ninety (90) days of the
effective date of such regulations.
(4) In the case of any notification made under this subsection, the user shall certify that it has a
program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has
determined to be economically practical.
(5) This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be
discharged by this article, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable Federal or State law.
(j) Analytical requirements. All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted in a
wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques
prescribed in 40 CFR part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If
40 CFR part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and
analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 369/505
(k) Sample collection.
(1) Except as indicated in subsection (2) below, the user must collect wastewater samples using
flow-proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow-proportional sampling is
infeasible, the Director may authorize the use of time-proportional sampling or a minimum of four
(4) grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the
effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with
instantaneous discharge limits.
(2) Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic
compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques.
(l) Timing. Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which
are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of
receipt of the report shall govern.
(m) Recordkeeping. Users subject to the reporting requirements of this article shall retain, and make available
for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by
this article and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by
the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of
sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed
the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall
remain available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period shall be automatically extended for the
duration of any litigation concerning the user or the Town, or where the user has been specifically notified of a
longer retention period by the Director or Control Authority.
(1971 Code, sec. 16-36)
Sec. 13.03.007 Compliance monitoring
(a) Right of entry. The Director or the Control Authority or their authorized representative shall have the right
to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this article
and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the inspecting person ready
access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying,
and the performance of any additional duties.
(1) Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance
before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so
that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the inspecting person will be permitted to enter
without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.
(2) The Director or Control Authority shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or
require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the
user's operations.
(3) The Director or Control Authority may require the user to install monitoring equipment as
necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe
and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure
wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated annually to ensure their accuracy.
(4) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected
and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the Director
or Control Authority and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by
the user.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 370/505
(5) Unreasonable delays in allowing the inspecting person access to the user's premises shall be a
violation of this article.
(b) Search warrants. If the Director or Control Authority representative has been refused access to a building,
structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be
a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and
sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to
protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the Director or Control Authority
representative may seek issuance of a search warrant from an appropriate court. For purposes of this section, the
Director is designated as the Code Enforcement Official of the Town.
(1971 Code, sec. 16-37)
Sec. 13.03.008 Confidential information
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications,
wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from the inspection and sampling activities, shall
be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to
the satisfaction of the Director or Control Authority, that the release of such information would divulge
information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable State
law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and
demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a
report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the
public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the
NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the
report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other effluent data as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not
be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. (1971 Code,
sec. 16-38)
Sec. 13.03.009 Publication of list of users in significant noncompliance
The Director shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the municipality where the
POTW is located, a list of the users which, during the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant
noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term “significant noncompliance”
shall mean:
(1) Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty-six (66)
percent or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period exceed the daily
maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount;
(2) Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty-three (33)
percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month
period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the
applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except
pH).
(3) Any other discharge violation that the Director believes has caused, alone or in combination
with other discharges, interference or pass-through, including endangering the health of POTW
personnel or the general public;
(4) Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the
environment, or has resulted in the Director's exercise of his emergency authority to halt or prevent
such a discharge;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 371/505
(5) Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone
contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction,
completing construction, or attaining final compliance;
(6) Failure to provide, within thirty (30) days after the due date, any required reports, including
baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines,
periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
(7) Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
(8) Any other violation(s) which the Director determines will adversely affect the operation or
implementation of the local pretreatment program.
(1971 Code, sec. 16-39)
Sec. 13.03.010 Administrative enforcement remedies
(a) Notice of violation. When the Director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision
of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, the Director may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. An explanation of the violation
and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be
submitted by the user to the Director. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any
violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the
authority of the Director to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action,
without first issuing a notice of violation.
(b) Show cause hearing. The Director may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, to appear before the Director and show cause why the proposed enforcement action
should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the
proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the
proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by
registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Such notice may
be served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(c) Administrative orders. When the Director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, the Director may issue an administrative order to the user responsible for the discharge
directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance
within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or
other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Administrative orders also may contain other
requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring, management practices
designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer, and pretreatment or control of the
quantities and rates of discharge of wastewater to bring the discharge within the limits of this article. An order
may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does an
administrative order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of
an administrative order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(d) Cease and desist orders. When the Director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the Director may issue an order to
the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to:
(1) Immediately comply with all requirements; and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 372/505
(2) Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a
continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.
Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action
against the user.
(e) Emergency suspensions. The Director or Control Authority may immediately suspend a user's discharge,
after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge
which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare
of persons. The Director or Control Authority may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and
opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may
present, an endangerment to the environment.
(1) Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its
contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension
order, the Director or Control Authority may take such steps as deemed necessary, including
immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its
receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The Director or Control Authority may allow
the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the
Director or Control Authority that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination
proceedings in subsection (f) of this section are initiated against the user.
(2) A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent
endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful
contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the Director and the Control
Authority prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under subsection (b) or (f) of
this section.
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this
section.
(f) Termination of discharge. In addition to the provisions in section 13.03.005(e) of this article, any user who
violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination:
(1) Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
(2) Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge;
(3) Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and
characteristics prior to discharge;
(4) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or
sampling; or
(5) Violation of the pretreatment standards in section 13.03.002 of this article.
Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show
cause under subsection (b) of this section why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option
by the Director shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(1971 Code, sec. 16-40)
Sec. 13.03.011 Judicial enforcement remedies
(a) Injunctive relief. When the Director or Control Authority finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 373/505
pretreatment standard or requirement, the Director or Control Authority may petition the district court for the
issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific
performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this article on activities
of the user. The Director or Control Authority may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or
equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for
injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.
(b) Civil penalties.
(1) A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall
be liable to the Town for a civil penalty not to exceed the amount set forth in Texas Local
Government Code section 54.017, as amended. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average
discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation.
(2) The Director may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated
with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual
damages incurred by the Town.
(3) In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant
circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the
magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation,
corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice
requires.
(4) Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other
action against a user.
(c) Criminal prosecution; criminal responsibility.
(1) Violations generally. A user who violates any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge
permit, further regulations and procedures established by the Director and/or Control Authority or an
administrative order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof may be fined as provided in section
1.01.009 of this code.
(2) Causing personal injury or property damage. A user who introduces any substance into the
POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
misdemeanor and be subject to the same penalty. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause
of action for personal injury or property damage available under State law.
(3) False statements or reporting. A user who makes any false statements, representations, or
certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed or required to be
maintained pursuant to this article, or a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or
who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method
required under this article, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof
may be fined as provided in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(4) Criminal responsibility. A culpable mental state is not required to prove an offense under this
article. A person is criminally responsible for a violation of this article if:
(A) The person commits or assists in the commission of a violation, or causes or permits
another person to commit a violation; or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 374/505
(B) The person owns or manages the property or facilities determined to be the cause of the
illegal discharge under section 13.03.002(a), 13.03.002(b), 13.03.002(c), 13.03.003(c), or
13.03.004(b).
(d) Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. The Director may take
any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment
violations will generally be in accordance with the Town's enforcement response plan. However, the Director
may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the Director is empowered to
take more than one (1) enforcement action against any noncompliant user.
(e) Applicability of more stringent regulations.
(1) National pretreatment standards. If National pretreatment standards, categorical or otherwise,
more stringent than the discharge limits prescribed in this article are promulgated by the United
States Environmental Protection Agency for certain industries, the more stringent National
pretreatment standards will apply to the affected industrial user. A violation of the more stringent
National pretreatment standards will also be considered a violation of this article.
(2) Waste received and treated by another governmental entity. An industrial user within the Town
who discharges industrial waste ultimately received and treated by another governmental entity
pursuant to a wholesale wastewater contract or a reciprocal agreement with the Town is subject to the
following additional rules:
(A) If the governmental entity has more stringent discharge limits than those prescribed by
this article, or by a discharge permit issued hereunder, because the United States Environmental
Protection Agency requires the more stringent discharge limits as a part of the governmental
entity's wastewater pretreatment program, the more stringent discharge limits shall prevail.
(B) The Director is authorized to issue a discharge permit to an industrial user affected by
subsection (A), to insure notice of and compliance with the more stringent discharge limits. If
the industrial user already has a discharge permit, the Director may amend the permit to apply
and enforce the more stringent discharge limits. An industrial user shall submit to the Director
an expected compliance date and an installation schedule if the more stringent discharge limits
necessitate technological or mechanical adjustments to discharge facilities or plant processes.
(C) If the Director chooses not to issue or amend a permit under subsection (B), the Director
shall notify the affected industrial user in writing of the more stringent discharge limits and
their effective date. Regardless of whether or not a permit is issued or amended, an industrial
user shall be given a reasonable opportunity to comply with the more stringent discharge limits.
(D) The more stringent discharge limits cease to apply upon termination of the Town's
wholesale wastewater contract or reciprocal agreement with the governmental entity, or upon
modification or elimination of the limits by the governmental entity or the United States
Environmental Protection Agency. The Director shall take the appropriate action to notify the
affected industrial user of an occurrence under this subsection (D).
(3) Variances in compliance dates. The Director may grant a variance in compliance dates to an
industry when, in the Director's opinion, such action is necessary to achieve pretreatment or
corrective measures. In no case shall the Director grant a variance in compliance dates to an industry
affected by National categorical pretreatment standards beyond the compliance dates established by
the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
(4) Authority of Director. The Director may establish regulations, not in conflict with this article or
other laws, to control the disposal and discharge of industrial waste into the wastewater system and to
insure compliance of the Town's pretreatment enforcement program with all applicable pretreatment
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 375/505
regulations promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency. The regulations
established shall, where applicable, be made a part of any discharge permit issued to an industrial
user by the Director.
(1971 Code, sec. 16-41)
Sec. 13.03.012 Affirmative defenses to discharge violations
(a) Upset.
(1) For the purposes of this section, “upset” means an exceptional incident in which there is
unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of
factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the
extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment
facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
(2) An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of subsection (3) below are met.
(3) A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through
properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs or other relevant evidence, that:
(A) An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset;
(B) The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in
compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and
(C) The user has submitted the following information within twenty-four (24) hours of
becoming aware of the upset:
(i) A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance;
(ii) The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected,
the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and
(iii) Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of
the noncompliance.
(4) In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall
have the burden of proof.
(5) Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an
enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards.
(6) A user shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance
with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until
the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in
the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is
reduced, lost, or fails.
(b) Bypass.
(1) For the purposes of this section:
(A) Bypass. The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a user's treatment
facility.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 376/505
(B) Severe property damage. Substantial physical damage to property, damage to the
treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss
of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass.
Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
(2) A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or
requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient
operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of subsection (3) and (4) of this section.
(3) (A) If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to
the Director, at least ten (10) days before the date of the bypass, if possible.
(B) A user shall submit oral notice to the Director of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds
applicable pretreatment standards within twenty-four (24) hours from the time it becomes aware
of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five (5) days of the time the
user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the
bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times and, if the
bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or
planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The Director may waive
the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within twenty-four
(24) hours.
(4) (A) Bypass is prohibited, and the Director may take an enforcement action against a
user for a bypass, unless:
(i) Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property
damage;
(ii) There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary
treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods
of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment
should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a
bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive
maintenance; and
(iii) The user submitted notices as required under subsection (b)(3) of this section.
(B) The Director may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if
the Director determines that it will meet the three (3) conditions listed in subsection (b)(4)(A)
of this section.
(1971 Code, sec. 16-43)
ARTICLE 13.04 WATER CONSERVATION AND DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLAN*
Sec. 13.04.001 Adopted by reference
(a) The 2014 water conservation plan for the Town is hereby approved and adopted by reference and a true
copy of such plan shall be retained by the Town Secretary and be available for public inspection during all
business hours of the Town. (Ordinance 1948 adopted 4/9/14)
(b) The 2014 drought contingency plan for the Town is hereby approved and adopted by reference and a true
copy of such plan shall be retained by the Town Secretary and be available for public inspection during all
business hours of the Town. (Ordinance 1951 adopted 4/28/14)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 377/505
Sec. 13.04.002 Waste of water prohibited; implementation of water conservation requirements
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or negligently waste water in any manner whatsoever, and
any person having knowledge of any conditions whereby water is being wasted shall immediately notify the
Director of Public Works.
(b) Upon occurrence of the conditions listed in the water conservation and drought contingency plan between
the Town, the City of University Park, and the Dallas County Park Cities Municipal Utility District, the Town
Administrator is hereby authorized to implement all of the elements of the plan and is directed to publish notice
of such implementation in the Town's official newspaper or by direct mail to water customers of the Town.
(c) The Town Administrator is hereby authorized to implement the conservation measures set out in the plan
consistent with the conditions set out in the plan upon notification by the District that such conditions exist. The
plan requires the District to inform the Town and City by written notice of supply side or demand side conditions
requiring the various conservation means.
(1971 Code, sec. 16-55)
Sec. 13.04.003 Penalty; authority to terminate water service
Any person or entity violating any of the provisions or terms of this article or the water conservation and drought
contingency plan as implemented hereby and by specific order of the Town Administrator shall be deemed guilty
of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof may be fined as provided in section 1.01.009 of this code. If any
person or entity has violated this article or any other ordinances of the Town or the water conservation and
drought contingency plan as implemented by the Town Administrator on more than one occasion, in the event of
an additional violation, the Town Administrator or his designee shall have authority, after written notice to such
person or entity, to order that water service to such person or entity be discontinued during the period of the
water emergency. (1971 Code, sec. 16-56)
ARTICLE 13.05 SOLID WASTE*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 13.05.001 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them by this section:
Alley. Any public way, generally of less width than a street, used for public utility purposes and right-of-way and
as an alternate secondary or emergency route for vehicle and pedestrian traffic, generally situated at the rear or
alongside a tier of lots.
Apartment. A portion of a building used as a multiple dwelling for the purpose of providing three (3) or more
separate dwelling units.
Authorized commercial contractor. A person (as defined in this section) authorized under and by virtue of a
permit, contract or franchise agreement with the Town to collect recyclable and/or solid waste materials within
the corporate limits of the Town.
Brush. Nonputrescible solid waste consisting of tree, shrub and hedge clippings, provided that trunks and limbs
shall not exceed five feet (5') in length.
Bulky waste. Solid waste and/or landscape waste items (as defined in this section) of such size or quantity that
they cannot feasibly be kept and/or collected in a residential solid waste container (as defined in this section).
Bulky waste shall be placed on the parkway in a manageable pile for collection.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 378/505
Commercial account. Solid waste and recycling disposal and collection service provided in reusable containers
at any location other than a single-family residence, a two-family (duplex) residence, or a multifamily residence.
Commercial customer. All persons (as defined in this section) receiving solid waste and recycling collection
services from the Town at a location other than a single-family residence, a two-family (duplex) residence, or a
multifamily residence.
Commercial establishment. Any structure intended or used for the purpose of conducting a commercial business
enterprise.
Commercial solid waste container. All on-premises reusable receptacles designed to hold solid waste, and
specifically all roll-off open-top containers, roll-off closed-top containers, roll-off compaction containers, and all
receptacles with a volume of between two (2) cubic yards and ten (10) cubic yards, inclusive, provided however,
such receptacles shall not include:
(1) Any receptacle used for accumulating and/or holding materials to be recycled;
(2) Any receptacle provided by or through the Town for accumulating and/or holding solid waste.
Container. A receptacle for the deposit of waste.
Construction and demolition debris. Waste generated from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition of
structures, road building, and land clearing, including, but not limited to bricks, concrete, rebar and other
masonry material, soil, rock, lumber, metal, paving material, and tree and brush stumps.
Director. The Director of Sanitation of the Town or his designee.
Front building line. A line parallel or approximately parallel to the street line at a specific distance therefrom
marking the minimum distance from which a building may be erected.
Garbage. All decayable wastes, including vegetable, animal, and fish offal and carcasses of such animals and
fish, but excluding:
(1) Sewage wastes;
(2) Body wastes; and
(3) Industrial by-products.
Hazardous waste. Any waste identified or listed as a household hazardous waste by the administrator of the
United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) pursuant to Federal law. Household hazardous waste
includes, but is not limited to: ammonia-based cleaners, drain and oven cleaners, fire extinguishers, floor care
products, furniture and metal polishes, insect sprays, aerosol spray paint, antifreeze, automatic transmission and
brake fluids, diesel fuel, gasoline, car batteries, automotive cleaning products, kerosene, latex paint, oil-based
paint, motor oil, oil filters, paint stripper and thinner, propane tanks, turpentine, varnish, wood preservatives,
fertilizer, fungicide, herbicide, pesticide, alkaline additives, pool chlorine and cleaners, muriatic acid, and pool
shock treatment.
Landscape waste. Items such as yard trimmings, brush, clean wood material, tree trimmings, vegetative material,
leaves, grass clippings (no sod), mixed yard waste, leaf mulch, shrubbery, sawdust, Christmas trees, wood chips,
wood demolition debris (nonpainted), wood fence material (nonpainted), wood pallets, old corrugated
containers, tree limbs and tree trunks no greater than five feet (5') long, and any other landscape waste material
conducive to the composting process.
Manageable pile. Bulky waste (as defined in this section) that is staged for collection, stacked on the parkway in
an organized manner, and which is safe for a two-person crew to move by hand from the staging point into the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 379/505
rear of a collection vehicle.
Multiple-family dwelling. Any building or portion thereof which is designed, built, rented, leased, or let to be
occupied as three (3) or more dwelling units or apartments; or which is occupied as a home or residence of three
(3) or more families; and no portion of any such dwelling unit is used for commercial purposes.
Occupant. The person residing in a dwelling unit, specifically the head of such household.
Owner. The record title holder of real property.
Parkway. The area ordinarily intervening between the curbline of a street and the inside property line.
Person. Any individual, corporation, organization, partnership, or association, or any other legal entity.
Public way. Any street, alley, easement, or other right-of-way.
Recyclable materials, recyclables (or any form of that word). Materials that have been separated from other solid
waste materials and placed at a designated collection location for the purpose of collection and recycling,
including but not limited to newspapers, magazines, all paper, junk mail, telephone books, boxboard or
chipboard boxes, corrugated cardboard, aluminum and bi-metal cans including aerosol cans, glass, Polyethylene
(PET) and High Density Polyethylene (HDPE) plastic bottles bearing the “1” or “2” symbol, and such other
items as may be designated by the Sanitation Department.
Recycling collection service. The collection and removal of recyclables from single-family residences, twofamily
(duplex) residences, or multifamily residences made once weekly.
Recycling container. A receptacle furnished and designated by the Town to hold recyclable materials.
Residence. A structure intended for use and occupancy as a one-family or a two-family dwelling unit.
Resident. The owner or occupant (as defined in this section).
Residential customer. Persons (as defined in this section), including but not limited to owners, occupants,
tenants, or lessees receiving solid waste and recycling collection services from the Sanitation Department at
single-family residences, two-family (duplex) residences, or at multifamily residences.
Residential solid waste container. A reusable plastic container designated to hold solid waste (as defined in this
section) and furnished by the Town.
Roll-out. The manual collection of garbage by a Sanitation Department employee or an authorized solid waste
contractor from a collection point behind the front building line of a residence where said residence is not
contiguous to a paved alley.
Sanitation Department. The division of the Town responsible for environmental waste management, including
but not limited to the collection, transportation, and disposal of solid waste, landscape waste, bulky waste and
recyclable materials. The Sanitation Department is also responsible for enforcing the provisions of this article
and other related ordinances of the Town.
Sanitation Director. The head of the Sanitation Department of the Town or his designee.
Solid waste. Any and all garbage and trash (as defined in this section), refuse, and other discarded material held
or accumulated in containers, including but not limited to animal and vegetable waste materials resulting from
the preparation, processing or consumption of food; combustible waste material such as paper, rags, cartons,
boxes, and plastics; and noncombustible waste materials such as glass, crockery and metal cans. Solid waste
does not include hazardous, biomedical or body waste.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 380/505
Special paid collection. The removal of bulky waste items outside of the regularly scheduled bulky waste
collection as requested by the residential or commercial customer or as required by the Town.
Tenant or lessee. One who holds land or property of another by virtue of any type of legally recognized right,
whether evidenced by legal instrument or otherwise.
Trash. Rubbish such as tin cans, paper, ashes, dry trash, pieces of wood, boxes and crates.
Sec. 13.05.002 Rules and regulations governing containers and receptacles
With the approval of the Town Administrator, the Director of Sanitation or his designee is authorized to
promulgate and enforce rules and regulations administratively, not contrary to the provisions of this article
which govern the receptacles and containers to be used, the contents to be placed therein, and the method of
preparing them for collection; and every owner, occupant, tenant or lessee using or occupying any building,
house, or structure within the corporate limits of the Town for any purpose shall abide by such rules and
regulations.
Sec. 13.05.003 Penalty
Any person found to be violating any term or provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
and upon conviction thereof may be fined as provided in section 1.01.009 “General penalty for violations of
code; continuing violations,” of this code. Every day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Sec. 13.05.004 Removal of dead animals
Dead dogs, cats, or any other dead animals shall be removed from private property by the owner or occupant of
said property at said person's own expense.
Sec. 13.05.005 Unlawful accumulations of waste; littering
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to place or throw any solid waste of any kind or character upon any
street, sidewalk, alley, easement, public park, or private property in the Town, but all such solid waste shall be
placed in a receptacle or receptacles as provided for in this article, and it shall be unlawful and an offense for any
person or the person in charge of any residence, business, or commercial establishment to fail to place said solid
waste in said receptacle(s), such that it is piled, placed, or accumulated on any sidewalk, street, alley, easement,
public park, or private property within the Town.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to sweep, throw, or deposit any solid waste, landscape waste,
construction and demolition debris, stagnant water, or dead animal into, upon, or along any drain, gutter, alley,
sidewalk, parkway, easement, street, or vacant lot, or upon any public or private property within the corporate
limits of the Town.
Sec. 13.05.006 Obstructions in alleyways
The Director shall be responsible for the safe passage of collection vehicles through Town alleys to include tree
trimming and brush removal as necessary.
Sec. 13.05.007 Collection schedule
(a) The Sanitation Department of the Town shall be the exclusive provider of solid waste, recycling, and
landscape waste collection for residential and commercial customers in the Town.
(b) The frequency and schedule of residential collection of solid waste shall be twice weekly, and the
collection of recyclable material shall be weekly. The Director has the authority to revise the collection
schedules as deemed necessary for holidays or other compelling reasons.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 381/505
Sec. 13.05.008 Residential solid waste container
(a) Residential customers and commercial customers shall utilize a specified collection container for the
collection and removal of solid waste. One such container will be distributed to each residential customer and
commercial customer by the Town or by a representative of the Town. The container shall remain the property of
the Town and shall not be removed from the property when changing residences.
(b) The Town will replace the container, at no cost to the customer, if the assigned container is stolen or
damaged beyond repair by any reason other than the customer's own neglect or misuse. If the container is lost or
damaged beyond repair as a result of the customer's neglect or misuse, a fee to cover the cost for the replacement
of the container will be charged to the customer by the Town.
(c) The occupant shall promptly notify the Sanitation Department in the event the container is stolen or
damaged.
(d) When storing the container or when the container has been set out for collection, the lid must be kept
closed at all times to prevent any accumulation of water. No bags, boxes, or other items shall be placed on top of
the closed container lid so as to hinder servicing of the container.
(e) Solid waste placed in the residential solid waste container must be contained in either plastic or paper bags
to help prevent odors and to prevent the contents from blowing out of the container when the container is being
emptied.
(f) Residential customers and commercial customers are prohibited from putting hazardous waste,
construction and demolition debris, ashes, or ignited coals in the residential solid waste container.
(g) Any container containing more than two hundred (200) pounds of solid waste will not be serviced.
(h) If a residential customer serviced by the Town regularly generates more solid waste than can be placed in
the residential solid waste container for the twice-weekly collection, the Town will require the residential
customer to obtain an additional residential solid waste container and that customer will be charged a one-time
delivery fee as established by Town Council Resolution in the form of the Town's Miscellaneous Fee Schedule.
Said fee will be applied to the customer's utility bill.
(i) The residential or commercial customer shall be responsible for maintaining the residential solid waste
container in a clean condition.
(j) The residential solid waste container shall not be marked or defaced in any way without prior authorization
by the Director.
(k) No person other than the residential customer, the commercial customer, an employee of the Town or an
authorized solid waste contractor may remove, collect, or transfer solid waste materials that have been placed in
a residential solid waste container in the Town. Each violation of this provision shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense punishable as provided in section 13.05.003 of this article.
Sec. 13.05.009 Recycling container
(a) Residential customers and commercial customers shall utilize a specified collection container for the
collection and removal of recyclable materials as defined herein. The Town or the Town's designated
representative will distribute one recycling container to each residential customer or commercial customer. The
container shall remain the property of the Town and shall not be removed from the property when changing
residences.
(b) Customer use of the recycling container for residents shall be subject to the same regulations for storage,
repair, replacement, and care as specified herein for residential solid waste containers.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 382/505
(c) If a residential customer or commercial account serviced by the Town regularly generates more recyclables
than can be placed in the recycling container for the weekly collection, the Town will provide the residential or
commercial customer with a second recycling container for an additional fee as established by Town Council
Resolution in the form of the Town's Miscellaneous Fee Schedule. Said fee will be applied to the customer's
utility bill.
(d) No person other than the residential customer, the commercial customer, a Sanitation Department
employee, or an authorized recycling contractor may remove, collect, or transfer recyclable materials that have
been placed in a recycling container in the Town. Each violation of this provision shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense punishable as provided in section 13.05.003 of this article.
Sec. 13.05.010 Placement of containers for collection
(a) Placement of containers in alley. Residential solid waste and recycling containers set out for alley
collection should be aligned with the handles facing the house and located within two feet (2') of the paved alley.
The containers must also be located at least six inches (6") from any fence, and at least eighteen inches (18")
from any gas or electric meter, other containers, or other large objects so that the container is accessible to the
collection vehicle. Residential solid waste and recycling containers located behind fences, inside garages, or
outside the collection area described above will not be serviced. Under no circumstance will Town employees or
contractors leave the public rights-of-way to enter garages, breezeways, carports, or other structures to make
collections. If it is not practicable to place the containers for collection as specified above, the Director shall
determine where the containers will be placed for collection.
(b) Placement of containers for roll-out. Residential solid waste containers positioned for roll-out collection
should be set at a collection point behind the front building line that provides a Sanitation Department employee
or an authorized solid waste contractor safe and unrestricted access, with a minimum width of five feet (5') of
ground clearance to properly collect and remove the solid waste. If it is not practicable to place the container for
collection as specified above, the Director shall determine where the container will be placed for collection.
(c) Recycling containers should be set at a collection point on the parkway located within two feet (2') of the
paved curb.
Sec. 13.05.011 Blocking access to containers
It shall be unlawful to stop, stand, or park a vehicle or trailer on public or private property in a manner that
prevents access to a residential solid waste or recycling container by a collection vehicle that is attempting to
service the container. For the purposes of this article, it shall be presumed that the owner of record of any
violating vehicle or trailer is the person who stopped or parked the vehicle or trailer in the offending location.
Sec. 13.05.012 Household hazardous waste collection
(a) Dallas County, Texas operates a Household Hazardous Waste Program (the “Program”) as a means to
divert certain Household Hazardous Waste (“HHW”) from the landfill and make them available for reuse by
other citizens. Dallas County (the “County”) operates the Program in accordance with an interlocal agreement
with the Town.
(b) The Program is restricted to chemicals used in household quantities and is not intended for commercial
grade, quantities, and materials. Certain chemicals and products require special handling for safe disposal. The
following items will not be accepted by the HHW Program: expired medication, ammunition, arsenic, chemicals
not in their original containers with the exception of used motor oil, explosives, medical waste, mercury,
nuclear/radioactive waste, thermometers, chemical containers larger than five (5) gallons, and all unidentified
chemicals. The Dallas County HHW Program Manager can assist residents with the appropriate disposal of
HHW items.
Sec. 13.05.013 Regulated industrial and hazardous waste
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 383/505
It shall be unlawful for any individual, person, or organization to discard or otherwise dispose of any regulated
hazardous waste, as that term is defined and listed by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
under the Federal Solid Waste Act, Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) and Code of Federal
Regulations (CFR) with the Town, except through an approved method as defined and regulated by Title 30 of
the Texas Administrative Code (TAC), Chapter 335.
Sec. 13.05.014 Landscape waste collection
(a) The Town will promote and encourage its citizens to use lawnmowers with mulching blades rather than
bagging cut grass. By using mulching lawnmowers and leaving grass clippings on the lawn, the Town and its
citizens will divert significant quantities of bagged landscape waste from the landfill.
(b) Landscape waste such as leaves or grass clippings shall be placed in either plastic or paper bags of
sufficient strength and size to properly contain the material. The maximum weight per bag shall not exceed
thirty-five (35) pounds. Bagged landscape waste in such quantity that it cannot be kept and/or contained in a
residential solid waste container shall be placed on the parkway at the appropriate collection point, and in a
manageable pile.
Sec. 13.05.015 Bulky waste and special paid collections
(a) Bulky waste collection.
(1) The Town deems it beneficial to provide bulky waste collection to its residential customers
twice weekly. Bulky waste items shall be placed on the parkway in a manageable pile for collection.
(2) Large amounts of construction and demolition debris generated by a private contractor in
connection with a construction project or major renovation project will not be eligible for bulky
waste collection and must be scheduled for a special paid collection.
(3) An environmental fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) will be charged for each appliance
scheduled for collection and disposal to cover the Town's operational and administrative costs
associated with verifying that all refrigerants including but not limited to Freon, chlorinated
fluorocarbons (CFCs), or polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) have been removed from the appliance in
accordance with State-established guidelines. This fee will be added to the customer's monthly utility
bill.
(4) Due to the size and nature of bulky waste items, these items shall be placed on the parkway as
defined herein, as long as those items do not create an immediate health and/or safety hazard as
determined by the Director.
(b) Special paid collection.
(1) The Town deems it necessary to offer a special paid collection service to its citizens for offschedule
collection of bulky waste items, landscape waste, construction and demolition debris and
other large or cumbersome quantities of solid waste that have not been collected through normal
collection services. Such solid waste would include, but not be limited to, waste resulting from
construction, remodeling, or destruction by fire, the elements, acts of God, or other causes resulting
from a general cleanup of a vacant or improved property, or landscape waste cleared from property in
preparation for construction or occupancy.
(2) Special paid collections must be scheduled in advance and shall be coordinated through the
Sanitation Department.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 384/505
(3) An environmental fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) will be charged for each appliance
scheduled for collection and disposal to cover the Town's operational and administrative costs
associated with verifying that all refrigerants including but not limited to Freon, chlorinated
fluorocarbons (CFCs), or polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) have been removed from the appliance in
accordance with State-established guidelines. This fee will be added to the customer's monthly utility
bill.
(4) Due to the size and nature of the items set forth above in subsection (b)(1), these items shall be
placed on the parkway as defined herein, as long as those items do not create an immediate health
and/or safety hazard as determined by the Director.
Sec. 13.05.016 Waste to be drained; animal matter to be wrapped in paper
All solid waste, landscape waste, and/or construction and demolition debris that is mixed with water or any other
liquid shall be drained before being placed in a container or receptacle. All animal matter that is subject to
decomposition shall be wrapped in paper or other combustible material before being deposited in such container
or receptacle.
Sec. 13.05.017 All collections to be placed for collection by 7:30 a.m.
Failure to place solid waste containers, recyclable containers, landscape waste material, bulky waste, and special
paid collection waste at its proper collection point by 7:30 a.m. on the specified collection day may result in the
items not being collected.
(Ordinance 1722 adopted 1/14/08)
Sec. 13.05.018 Collection, transportation, and disposal of commercial solid waste, recyclable materials
and liquid waste
(a) Commercial solid waste. No person other than a solid waste services provider, as described in section
13.05.019(a), shall engage in the business of collecting, transporting, and disposing of solid waste materials for
commercial customers located within the Town, and no person shall use the public streets, alleys, or
thoroughfares within the corporate limits of the Town for the purpose of engaging in such business, other than a
person who has executed said permit with the Town.
(b) Commercial recyclable materials. No person other than the owner, his authorized agent, an employee of
the Sanitation Department, or a permitted recycling services provider, as described in section 13.05.019(a), may
collect or transport recyclable materials from the property of a commercial customer located in the Town. Each
violation of this provision shall constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable as provided in section
13.05.003 “penalty,” of this article.
(c) Liquid waste. No person other than the owner, his authorized agent, an employee of the Sanitation
Department, or a permitted liquid waste hauler may collect or transport liquid waste from the property of a
commercial customer located in the Town. Each violation of this provision shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense punishable as provided in section 13.05.003 “penalty,” of this article.
(Ordinance 2024 adopted 8/28/17)
Sec. 13.05.019 Registration of commercial service providers and transporters
(a) Prohibited without permit. No person shall provide commercial solid waste or recycling services in the
Town or operate a motor vehicle for the purpose of transporting commercial solid waste or recycling containers
on a public street or alley within the corporate limits of the Town without first registering and obtaining a permit
from the Town.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 385/505
(b) Permit within each vehicle. Each motor vehicle utilizing the public streets or alleys in the Town for the
purpose of collecting or transporting solid waste or recyclable materials from commercial customers shall at all
times carry a valid permit issued by the Town.
(c) Default. In the event a commercial solid waste or recycling services provider or transporter defaults under
any of the terms of their registration or permit with the Town, the Town will provide written notice of the areas
of default to the solid waste or recycling services provider or transporter. The solid waste or recycling services
provider or transporter shall then have ten (10) business days to correct the default and provide the Town with
evidence that the default has been cured.
(d) Revocation of permit. If the commercial solid waste or recycling services provider or transporter fails to
correct the noticed default within the time provided herein, the Town may revoke the registration and permit of
said solid waste or recycling services provider or transporter.
Sec. 13.05.020 Ownership of recyclable materials
Recyclable materials placed for collection in or adjacent to a residential recycling container shall become the
property of the Town.
Sec. 13.05.021 Right of individual to dispose of recyclable materials
Nothing in this article shall limit the right of an individual person, organization, or other entity to donate, sell, or
otherwise dispose of recyclable materials, provided that any such disposal is in accordance with the provisions
of this article.
Sec. 13.05.022 Inspections
It is the duty of the Sanitation Department to make inspection trips at regular intervals to determine whether or
not garbage, trash, and rubbish are being properly collected, removed, and disposed of as required by the
provisions of this article or any other applicable health ordinance of the Town, and in the event it is found that
this article is being violated, appropriate and timely action shall be taken to ensure full compliance with said
provisions.
Secs. 13.05.023–13.05.040 Reserved
Division 2. Rates, Charges, and Billing
Sec. 13.05.041 Billing generally; delinquent payments, discontinuance of water service for failure to pay
charges
The charges provided for herein shall be added to and made a part of the water bill for water users within the
Town and shall be paid in the same manner and at the same time as the water bill for services furnished by the
Water Department of the Town. A penalty of ten percent (10%) shall be added to all garbage collections bills
which are not paid by the sixteenth (16th) day of the month during which said bills are received. Failure on the
part of the consumer of water to pay the garbage removal charge shall be considered notice to the Water
Department to discontinue water service to such consumer, and to disconnect said consumer from the Town's
water mains; and the Town Administrator is hereby authorized to discontinue such water service on the failure of
the user to pay such charges.
Sec. 13.05.042 Person liable for charges
Where multiple occupants occupy premises within the Town, the person in whose name the water connection or
connections are maintained by the Town shall be liable for the charges for garbage collection services as
provided for in this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 386/505
Sec. 13.05.043 Collection charges
(a) For all bills rendered by the Town on or after October 1, 2010, for the removal of garbage and trash, the
Town shall charge for its services in removing garbage and trash as follows:
(1) The collection service for a single-family or duplex residence:
Alley service $21.45/dwelling unit per month
Pack-out collection service $42.57/dwelling unit per month
(2) The collection service charge for an apartment which receives collection services from the
Sanitation Collection Department per dwelling unit: $19.51/ per month.
(3) For business and commercial establishments, schools and churches:
No. of Poly Carts Monthly Charge
1 $106.30
2 $200.13
3 $291.67
5 $447.23
10 $760.00
11 $822.54
(b) Commercial sanitation collection charges shall be based on studies made by the Sanitation Department in
regard to volume, time necessary for collection, and days per week of collection.
(c) Periodic inspections will be made of all businesses falling under the commercial rates to assure that the
correct rate is being charged.
(d) Commercial service charges for annual mechanical collection with a maximum of one (1) truck load per
week average shall be two thousand seven hundred sixty-two dollars and eighty-one cents ($2,762.81) per
month.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 387/505
(e) For commercial or residential collection requests that do not fall into one of the above categories,
individuals may request a special one (1) time collection of brush, logs or bulky items. The Sanitation
Department shall charge for such request at a rate equal to the Town's cost plus thirty-eight percent (38%).
(Ordinance 1838 adopted 9/13/10)
Sec. 13.05.044 Charge for collection of recyclables
For all bills rendered by the Town after October 1, 2008, for the collection of recyclables, the Town shall charge
for its services in collecting recyclables as follows:
Collection service for a single-family, a two-family (duplex) or a multifamily residence:
$2.62/dwelling unit per month
(Ordinance 1762 adopted 9/8/08)
ARTICLE 13.06 MUNICIPAL DRAINAGE UTILITY*
Sec. 13.06.001 Penalty
Any person or entity that shall fail to comply with or that shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof may be fined as provided in section 1.01.009
of this code, as amended. (Ordinance 1572, sec. 5, adopted 11/17/03)
Sec. 13.06.002 Drainage utility declared public utility; adoption of State law
The provisions of subchapter C of chapter 402 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended, are hereby
adopted by the Town. Accordingly, the municipal drainage utility system of the Town is hereby declared to be a
public utility. (Ordinance 1572, sec. 1, adopted 11/17/03)
Sec. 13.06.003 Deposit not required
The Town shall not require a deposit for drainage charges as a precondition to accepting surface flow into the
Town's municipal drainage utility system. (Ordinance 1572, sec. 2, adopted 11/17/03)
Sec. 13.06.004 Conformance with State law
All billings, credits, exemptions and other procedures, including penalties for delinquent payments, shall be as
specified and as set forth in subchapter C of chapter 402 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended.
(Ordinance 1572, sec. 3, adopted 11/17/03)
Sec. 13.06.005 Adoption of charges
Drainage charges for all real property in the Town shall be in accordance with a schedule of charges adopted by
resolution of the Town Council following a public hearing as required by section 402.045 of the Texas Local
Government Code, as amended. Said resolution shall be placed on file at the office of the Town Secretary
following passage and made available upon request to the public. Such charges may be changed, adjusted or
readjusted by Town Council resolution as required, and a current copy of such drainage charges shall be kept
available at the office of the Town Secretary. (Ordinance 1572, sec. 4, adopted 11/17/03)
Sec. 13.06.006 Rates and billing
(a) Definitions.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 388/505
Calculated drainage area (CDA). The value determined for each commercial real property that is the product of
the respective total square feet of the lot or tract times the runoff percentage assigned to the lot or tract based
upon its use and/or characteristics.
Commercial real property. An improved lot or tract, platted or unplatted:
(1) To which municipal drainage service is made available;
(2) That eventually discharges into a street, storm sewer system, creek, river, slough, culvert, or
other channel that is part of the Town's municipal drainage utility system; and
(3) That is not residential or unimproved real property.
Customer. Has the meaning given that term in section 13.02.001 of this code.
Director. The Director of the Department designated by the Town Administrator to manage the municipal
drainage utility.
Improved lot or tract. A lot or tract of land that has a structure or other improvement on it that causes an
impervious coverage of the soil under the structure or improvement.
Owner. Has the meaning given that term in section 1.01.004 of this code.
Residential real property. An improved lot or tract:
(1) To which municipal drainage service is made available;
(2) That eventually discharges into a street, storm sewer system, creek, river, slough, culvert or
other channel that is part of the Town's municipal drainage utility system; and
(3) That contains or is platted to contain:
(A) A single-family or duplex dwelling unit; or
(B) More than two dwelling units, if each dwelling unit is individually metered for water
service from the Town.
Runoff percentage. That estimated percentage of rainfall that will run off a piece of property and into the Town's
municipal drainage system.
Unimproved real property. A lot or tract of land:
(1) To which municipal drainage service is made available;
(2) That eventually discharges into a street, storm sewer system, creek, river, slough, culvert, or
other channel that is part of the Town's municipal drainage utility system; and
(3) That is:
(A) Owned and maintained in its natural, undeveloped state; or
(B) Subdivided, but does not yet contain any structure or other improvement.
(Ordinance 1574, sec. 1, adopted 12/22/03)
(b) Charge for residential property. The monthly municipal drainage charge for residential real property for
each dwelling unit receiving water or wastewater service from the Town shall be at such rate as established and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 389/505
approved by the Town Council and included in the Town's adopted master fee schedule.
(c) Charge for commercial property and unimproved property. The municipal drainage charge for commercial
and unimproved real property shall be at such rate as established and approved by the Town Council and
included in the Town's adopted master fee schedule. If information regarding the square footage of a particular
lot or tract of commercial or unimproved real property is unavailable or inadequate, the Director may make a
reasonable estimate of square footage and levy the drainage charge on that basis.
(Ordinance 1898 adopted 9/10/12)
(d) Billing procedures. Municipal drainage charges will be billed and collected in accordance with the
following procedures:
(1) For municipal drainage service to commercial and residential real property, the Water Utilities
Department shall bill the customer in the regular water and wastewater service bill or, if no water or
wastewater service account exists, the owner as shown in the current Town tax rolls.
(2) For municipal drainage service to unimproved real property, the Water Utilities Department
shall bill the owner as shown in the current Town tax rolls or, if a water or wastewater service
account exists, the customer. For the purpose of assessing and billing municipal drainage charges,
adjoining tracts of unimproved real property that have the same owner, as shown in the current Town
tax rolls, will be treated as a single property.
(3) In cases involving occupancy of a lot or tract of commercial real property by two or more
tenants who are customers, the Water Utilities Department may either prorate the charges on an
equitable basis between all the customers or may instead bill the property owner for municipal
drainage service under a separate account. In addition, if a lot or tract of land receives water or
wastewater service under two or more service accounts and the service accounts are all in the name
of the same customer, the Water Utilities Department may bill the entire drainage charge due through
one service account.
(4) If more than one person is named in the current Town tax rolls as the owner of unimproved real
property, each person is jointly and severally liable for municipal drainage charges on the property.
The Water Utilities Department may bill any or all of the joint owners through one service account.
(e) Administration. The Water Utilities Department shall administer collection procedures and service
accounts under this section. An application for water or wastewater service is deemed to include application for
municipal drainage service.
(f) Additional regulations. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the provisions of sections 13.02.003
and 13.02.044 of this code will govern in all matters regarding the application for municipal drainage service,
payment and collection of municipal drainage charges, the liability of persons for charges, and the remedies of
the Town in the event of nonpayment.
(Ordinance 1574, sec. 1, adopted 12/22/03)
Sec. 13.06.007 Service area
The service area of the municipal drainage utility shall be defined by the corporate boundaries of the Town.
(Ordinance 1574, sec. 2, adopted 12/22/03)
ARTICLE 13.07 ILLEGAL DISCHARGES INTO MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM
Sec. 13.07.001 Intent of article
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 390/505
The intent of this article is to establish methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the Town's
separate storm sewer system and the Town's surface drain system in order to comply with the requirements of
the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality's (TCEQ's) Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(TPDES) permit process.
Sec. 13.07.002 Scope of authority
The provisions of this article apply: (1) to any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint-stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity (or their
legal representatives, agents or assigns), who or which owns, possesses, is in custody of, or exercises control
over premises (as defined below) within the Town; and (2) where water enters the Town's separate storm sewer
system. In this article, said individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, jointstock
company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity (or their legal representatives, agents
or assigns), shall be referred to individually and/or collectively as a “owner.”
Sec. 13.07.003 Definitions and abbreviations
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have
the meanings hereinafter designated.
Best management practice (BMP) or control measure. The schedule of activity, prohibition, maintenance
procedures, structural controls, and other management practices meant to prevent or reduce the discharge of
pollutants. BMP's or control measures also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices
to control site runoff, spills or leaks, waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage areas.
Construction site. Any clearing, grading, and excavating that result in land disturbance. A construction site also
includes but is not limited to any stockpiling or other activity that results in exposed soils. This includes the
construction of pools and the construction and maintenance of franchise utilities such as telephone, gas, electric,
etc. This excludes the disturbance of soils for emergency activities that are immediately necessary for the
protection of life, property, or natural resources.
Contaminated. Containing a harmful quantity of any substance.
Contamination. The presence of or entry into the public water supply system, the MS4, waters in the state, or
waters of the United States of any substance which may be deleterious to the public health and or the quality of
the water.
Facility. Any facility required by the Federal Clean Water Act to have a permit to discharge stormwater
associated with industrial activity or construction activity.
Hazardous materials. Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of
its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment
when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
Household hazardous waste. Any solid waste generated in a household by a consumer which, except for the
exclusion provided in 40 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) section 261.4(b)(1), would be classified as a
hazardous waste under 40 CFR part 261. The term has the same meaning as “hazardous household waste.” This
includes, but is not limited to, products, such as paints, cleaners, oils, batteries, and pesticides that contain
potentially hazardous ingredients that require special care when you dispose of them.
Illegal discharge. Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the Town's MS4 (as defined below), except
as exempted in section 13.07.008 of this article.
Illicit connection. Either of the following.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 391/505
(1) Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal
discharge to enter the Town's MS4 including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any
nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and washwater to enter the Town's
MS4 and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of
whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by the Town
and/or an authorized enforcement agency; or
(2) Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain
system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an
authorized enforcement agency.
Multi-sector general permit (MSGP). The Texas Multi-Sector General Permit, TXR050000, its successor, or any
other state regulation to control runoff from industrial sites issued by the TCEQ or the state regulatory authority.
Municipal separate storm sewer system (Town's MS4). The separate storm sewer system owned and operated by
the Town. The Town's MS4 includes all drainageways, stormwater conveyances, bar ditches, swales, and streets
owned and operated by the Town or any private drainageway that drains to or contributes flow to the Town's
public drainage system and conveys stormwater discharges to the surface water of the state.
Nonstormwater discharge. Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.
Operator. The person or persons who, either individually or taken together, meet either of the following two
criteria:
(1) Has operational control over the facility specifications (including the ability to make or direct
modifications in specifications); or
(2) Has day-to-day operational control over those activities at the facility necessary to ensure
compliance with pollution prevention requirements and any permit conditions.
Person. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint-stock
company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents or
assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental entities.
Pollutant. Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to:
paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard
wasted; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, so
that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous
substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes;
wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any
kind.
Premises. Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including
adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
Secondary containment. A structure designed to capture spills or leaks, as from a container or tank, and has the
capacity to hold 110 percent of the original container.
Site. A parcel of land or a contiguous combination thereof, where activities are performed as a single unified
operation.
Stormwater. Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural
precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation.
Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP). A document which describes the best management practices
and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 392/505
site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to the MS4, and/or receiving waters to the
maximum extent practicable.
Texas Surface Water Quality Standards. The standards set forth in title 30, chapter 307 of the Texas
Administrative Code, as amended.
Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (TPDES). The permit program that controls water pollution by
regulating point sources that discharge pollutants into waters in the state, delegated to the State by the EPA
pursuant to 33 USC section 1342(b).
Town. The Town of Highland Park, Texas, or the Town Council of Highland Park.
Town Engineer. The Town Engineer of Highland Park or his/her duly authorized representative.
Water in the State. Groundwater, percolating or otherwise, lakes, bays, ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs,
rivers, streams, creeks, estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, the Gulf of Mexico inside the territorial limits of the
State, and all other bodies of surface water, natural or artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or salt, navigable or
nonnavigable, and including the beds and banks of all watercourses and bodies of surface water, that are wholly
or partially inside or bordering the state or inside the jurisdiction of the state.
Waters of the United States. All waters which are currently used, were used in the past, or may be susceptible to
use in interstate or foreign commerce, including all waters which are subject to the ebb and flow of the tide; all
interstate waters, including interstate wetlands; all other waters the use, degradation, or destruction of which
would affect or could affect interstate or foreign commerce; all impoundments of waters otherwise defined as
waters of the United States under this definition; all tributaries of waters identified in this definition; all wetlands
adjacent to waters identified in this definition; and any waters within the federal definition of “waters of the
United States” at 40 CFR section 122.2; but not including any waste treatment systems, treatment ponds, or
lagoons designed to meet the requirements of the federal Clean Water Act.
Sec. 13.07.004 Discharge prohibitions
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged into the Town's MS4 or the Town's
watercourses any materials, including, but not limited to, pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that
cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, the Town's NPDES permit, or any stateissued
discharge permit for discharges from the Town's MS4, other than stormwater.
Sec. 13.07.005 Prohibited activities and conditions adversely affecting water quality
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(1) Operate a facility that is subject to stormwater discharge permitting without prior approval
from the TCEQ or other approving agency.
(2) Introduce or cause to be introduced into the Town's MS4 any harmful quantity of sediment, silt,
earth, soil, or other material associated with clearing, grading, excavation or other construction
activities, or associated with landfilling or other placement or disposal of soil, rock, or other earth
materials, in excess of what could be retained on site or captured by employing sediment and erosion
control measures to the maximum extent practicable under prevailing circumstances.
(3) Connect a line conveying sanitary sewage, domestic or industrial, to the Town's MS4, or allow
such a connection to continue.
(4) Install or maintain grease or sand traps that discharge to the Town's MS4 without prior approval
from the Town.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 393/505
(5) Permit polluted material, hazardous materials, liquid waste, semi-liquid waste, or chemical
waste or like material that would adversely affect water quality to:
(A) Discharge to the ground; or
(B) Discharge to or create a potential to discharge to the Town's MS4 through any of the
following activities:
(i) Discharge of washwater containing the material;
(ii) Dump, drain or introduce the material to the Town's MS4;
(iii) Store the material in such a manner that the material is exposed to the elements or
runoff; or
(iv) Dispose of the material in any area that may drain to the Town's MS4 or dispose or
store the material at any site other than one approved for that purpose.
(6) Permit cooling tower, compressor, or boiler blow-down that is not clean or uncontaminated to
flow to the Town's MS4;
(7) Permit washwater from any surface containing or having a substance on it that is a pollutant to
discharge to the Town's MS4;
(8) Permit unused materials from ready-mix concrete mortar, and asphalt base delivery trucks to be
dumped to any area that may drain to the Town's MS4;
(9) Purposefully dump, blow into, sweep into or otherwise dispose of excessive grass clippings,
leaves, brush, yard waste or any rubbish or debris to the curb, gutter, storm drain, or watercourse;
(10) Permit sewage wastes to flow to any area other than a sanitary sewer or approved septic tank;
(11) Dump, spill, leak, pump, pour, emit, empty, discharge, leach, dispose, or otherwise introduce
or cause, allow, or permit to be introduced any of the following substances into the Town's MS4:
(A) Any used motor oil, antifreeze, or any other motor vehicle fluid;
(B) Any industrial waste;
(C) Any hazardous waste, including hazardous household waste;
(D) Any grit trap waste;
(E) Any garbage, rubbish, or yard waste;
(F) Any wastewater from a commercial mobile power washer or from the washing or other
cleaning of a building exterior that contains any harmful quantity of soap, detergent, solvent,
degreaser, emulsifier, dispersant, or any other harmful cleaning substance;
(G) Any wastewater from floor, rug, or carpet cleaning;
(H) Any wastewater from the wash down or other cleaning of pavement that contains any
harmful quantity of soap, detergent, solvent, degreaser, emulsifier, dispersant, or any other
harmful cleaning substance; or any wastewater from the wash down or other cleaning of any
pavement where any spill, leak, or other release of oil, motor fuel, or other petroleum or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 394/505
hazardous substance has occurred, unless all harmful quantities of such released material have
been previously removed;
(I) Any effluent from a condenser, emissions scrubber, or emissions filter;
(J) Any ready-mixed concrete, mortar, ceramic, or asphalt base material or hydromulch
material, or material from the cleaning of vehicles or equipment containing, or used in
transporting or applying, such material;
(K) Any asphaltic or concrete slurry caused from cutting or coring activities;
(L) Any runoff or wash down water from any animal pen, kennel, or foul or livestock
containment area containing more than three animals;
(M) Any filter backwash from a swimming pool, fountain, or spa;
(N) Any swimming pool water containing any harmful quantity of chlorine, muriatic acid or
other chemical used in the treatment or disinfection of the swimming pool water or in pool
cleaning;
(O) Any discharge from water line disinfection by super chlorination or other means if it
contains any harmful quantity of chlorine or any other chemical used in water line disinfection;
(P) Any fire protection water containing oil or hazardous substances or materials that the fire
code requires to be contained and treated prior to discharge, unless treatment adequate to
remove pollutants occurs prior to discharge. (This prohibition does not apply to discharges of
flow from firefighting by the fire department);
(Q) Any water from a water curtain in a spray room used for painting vehicles or equipment;
(R) Any substance or material that will damage, block, or clog the Town's MS4; and/or
(S) Any release from a petroleum storage tank (PST), or any discharge of pumped, confined,
or treated wastewater from the remediation of any such PST release, unless the discharge
satisfies all of the following criteria:
(i) Compliance with all state and federal standards and requirements;
(ii) No discharge containing a harmful quantity of any pollutant; and
(iii) No discharge containing more than 50 parts per billion of benzene; 500 parts per
billion combined total quantities of benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, and xylene (BTEX);
or 15 mg/l of total petroleum hydrocarbons (TPH).
Sec. 13.07.006 Duty to notify Town Engineer
The person in charge of any vehicle, facility, or other source of any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring,
emitting, emptying, discharging, escaping, leaching, dumping, disposing, or any other release of any quantities
of any of the substances listed in section 13.07.005 above and that may flow, leach, enter, or otherwise be
introduced into the Town's MS4, shall telephone and notify the Town Engineer as soon as practicable, no later
than 24 hours, concerning the incident.
Sec. 13.07.007 Used oil regulations
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 395/505
(1) Discharge used oil into the Town's MS4 or a sewer drainage system, septic tank, surface water,
groundwater, or watercourse;
(2) Knowingly mix or commingle used oil with solid waste that is to be disposed of in a landfill or
knowingly directly dispose of used oil on land or in a landfill;
(3) Apply used oil to a road or land for dust suppression, weed abatement, or other similar use that
introduces used oil into the environment.
Sec. 13.07.008 Permissible activities and conditions
The following activities and/or conditions are allowed and lawful, provided that they do not significantly impact
water quality:
(1) Water line flushing (excluding discharges of hyper-chlorinated water, unless the water is first
dechlorinated and discharges are not expected to adversely affect aquatic life);
(2) Runoff or return from landscape irrigation, lawn irrigation, and other irrigation utilizing
groundwater or surface water resources (not from potable water system);
(3) Discharges from potable water sources;
(4) Diverted stream flows;
(5) Rising groundwaters and springs;
(6) Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration;
(7) Uncontaminated pumped groundwater;
(8) Foundation and footing drains;
(9) Air-conditioner condensation;
(10) Water from crawl space pumps;
(11) Individual residential vehicle washing;
(12) Occasional discharges of vehicle washwater from fundraising events, provided best
management practices are used;
(13) Flows from wetlands and riparian habitats;
(14) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges;
(15) Street washwater;
(16) Discharges or flows from firefighting activities;
(17) Stormwater discharges authorized by, and in full compliance with, a TPDES permit;
(18) Nonstormwater discharges that are specifically listed in the TPDES Multi-Sector General
Permit (MSGP) and the TPDES Construction General Permit (CGP);
(19) Other similar occasional, incidental nonstormwater discharges unless the TCEQ develops
permits or regulations addressing these discharges; and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 396/505
(20) Other allowable nonstormwater discharges listed in 40 CFR section 122.26(d)(2)(iv)(B)(1).
Sec. 13.07.009 Pesticide and fertilizer regulations
(a) Any sale, distribution, application, labeling, manufacture, transportation, storage, or disposal of a pesticide,
herbicide, or fertilizer must comply fully with all state and federal statutes and regulations including, without
limitation, the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA) and all federal regulations
promulgated pursuant to FIFRA; chapters 63, 75, and 76 of the Texas Agriculture Code and all state regulations
promulgated pursuant to it; and any other state or federal requirement.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to use or to cause to be used any pesticide, herbicide, or fertilizer in any
manner that the person knows or reasonably should know, is likely to cause, or does cause, a harmful quantity of
the pesticide, herbicide, or fertilizer to enter the Town's MS4.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of, discard, store, or transport a pesticide, herbicide, or
fertilizer or a pesticide, herbicide, or fertilizer container in a manner that the person knows or reasonably should
know is likely to cause or does cause a harmful quantity of the pesticide, herbicide or fertilizer to enter the
Town's MS4.
Sec. 13.07.010 Watercourse protection
Any person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and
maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, and other obstacles that would
pollute, contaminate, or retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall
maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not
become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. The property owner, or such
person's lessee, shall provide protection against stream bank erosion by maintaining existing vegetation or other
bank stabilization practices adjacent to watercourses.
Sec. 13.07.011 Prohibition of illicit connections
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, use, maintain, or continue the existence of illicit connections to
the Town's MS4.
(1) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past,
regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing
at the time of the connection.
(2) A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person connects a line conveying
sanitary sewage to the Town's MS4, or allows such a connection to continue.
Sec. 13.07.012 False statement, representation, or certification
It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to make a false statement, representation, or certification in any
application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed with the Town, or required to be maintained by the
Town, pursuant to this article, or any order issued hereunder, or who has falsified, tampered with, or knowingly
rendered inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article.
Sec. 13.07.013 Town's right of entry; inspection and sampling
The Town Engineer shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this article as
often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. If a person has security measures in force
which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the person shall make the
necessary arrangements to allow access to the Town Engineer or his/her authorized representatives as soon as
possible.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 397/505
Sec. 13.07.014 Search warrants
If the Town Engineer, or his/her authorized representative, has been refused access to any part of a site from
which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a
violation of this article or any state or federal discharge permit, limitation, or requirement, or that there is a need
to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the Town designed to verify
compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and
welfare of the community, then the Town Engineer may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of
competent jurisdiction. For purposes of this section, the Town Administrator, the Director of Town Services, the
Town Engineer, and/or any duly authorized representative of the Town's departmental directors are declared to
be “health officers,” as that term is used in the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, article 18.05.
Sec. 13.07.015 Warning notice
When the Town Engineer finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article,
or any order issued hereunder, the Town Engineer, or his/her authorized representative, may serve upon that
person a written warning notice, specifying the particular violation believed to have occurred and requesting the
owner or operator to immediately investigate the matter and to seek a resolution whereby any offending
discharge will cease. Investigation and/or resolution of the matter in response to the warning notice in no way
relieves the alleged violator of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the warning notice.
Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the Town Engineer to take any action, including emergency
action or any other enforcement action.
Sec. 13.07.016 Notification of violation
When the Town Engineer finds that any person has violated this article, continues to violate this article, failed to
meet a requirement of this article, or any order issued hereunder, the Town Engineer, or his/her authorized
representative, may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person(s).
Sec. 13.07.017 Remedies nonexclusive
The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies that the Town may have under
state or federal law or other Town ordinances. The Town may take any, all, or any combination of these actions
against a violator. The Town is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any violator. These
actions may be taken concurrently.
Sec. 13.07.018 Performance and maintenance bonds
The Town Engineer may, by written notice, order any owner or operator of a source of stormwater discharge
associated with construction or industrial activity within the territorial limits of the Town to file a satisfactory
performance and/or maintenance bond, payable to the Town, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the
Town Engineer to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance with this article, any order issued hereunder,
any required best management practice, and/or any SWPPP provision. The Town may deny approval of any
building permit, grading permit, subdivision plat, site development plan, or any other Town permit or approval
necessary to commence or continue construction or any industrial activity at the site, or to assume occupancy,
until such a performance and/or maintenance bond has been filed.
Sec. 13.07.019 Liability insurance
The Town Engineer may, by written notice, order any person or operator of a source of stormwater discharge
associated with construction or industrial activity within the territorial limits of the Town to submit proof that it
has obtained liability insurance, or other financial assurance, in an amount greater than or equal to a value
determined by the Town Engineer, that is sufficient to remediate, restore, and abate any damage to the Town's
MS4, the waters in the state, or any other aspect of the environment that is caused by the discharge.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 398/505
(Ordinance 1908, sec. 2, adopted 1/28/13)
ARTICLE 13.08 RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT
Division 1. General Provisions
Sec. 13.08.001 Title; policy and purpose
(a) This article may be known and cited as the right-of-way management ordinance for the Town of Highland
Park, Texas.
(b) The Town enacts these regulations to manage the public right-of-way, to ensure public health, safety and
welfare and to promote the most efficient use of the right-of-way first and foremost for the traveling public, and
also for water and sewer uses and for utility uses designed to benefit the citizens of the Town, including such
uses as have been recognized in statutory and common law in the State.
Sec. 13.08.002 Construction; governing law; venue
(a) This article shall be construed under and in accordance with the laws of the State and the Town Charter
and Town Code to the extent that such Charter and Codes are not in conflict with or in violation of the
Constitution and laws of the United States or the State of Texas. All obligations of the parties hereunder are
performable in the county.
(b) All provisions of this article shall apply to all persons involved with the right-of-way, all work performed
therein, any facilities maintained therein or any other matter as applicable.
Sec. 13.08.003 Scope
This article shall be effective within the geographical limits of the Town, including any areas subsequently
annexed by the Town.
Sec. 13.08.004 Definitions
The definitions in this section apply to all of this article.
Abandon and its derivatives. The facilities installed in the right-of-way (including by way of example but not
limited to: poles, wires, conduit, manholes, handholes, cuts, network nodes and node support poles, or portion
thereof) that have been left by provider in an unused or nonfunctioning condition for more than 120 consecutive
calendar days unless, after notice to provider, provider has established to the reasonable satisfaction of the Town
that the applicable facilities, or portion thereof, is still in active use.
Access line.
(1) Unless the commission adopts a different definition under section 283.003, a unit of
measurement representing:
(A) Each switched transmission path of the transmission media that is physically within a
public right-of-way extended to the end-use customer's premises within the municipality, that
allows the delivery of local exchange telephone services within a municipality, and that is
provided by means of owned facilities, unbundled network elements or leased facilities, or
resale;
(B) Each termination point or points of a nonswitched telephone or other circuit consisting of
transmission media located within a public right-of-way connecting specific locations identified
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 399/505
by, and provided to, the end-use customer for delivery of nonswitched telecommunications
services within the municipality; or
(C) Each switched transmission path within a public right-of-way used to provide central
office-based PBX-type services for systems of any number of stations within the municipality,
and in that instance, one path shall be counted for every 10 stations served; and
(2) May not be construed to include interoffice transport or other transmission media that do not
terminate at an end-use customer's premises or to permit duplicate or multiple assessment of access
line rates on the provision of a single service.
Ancillary. Secondary, supporting, or subordinate.
Antenna. Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in
the provision of wireless services.
Applicable codes.
(1) Uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes adopted by a recognized
national code organization; and
(2) Local amendments to those codes to the extent not inconsistent with this article.
Applicant. A person submitting an application or proposal to the Town for a license, franchise, permit or notice
to install facilities or equipment or work in the right-of-way.
Application or proposal are synonymous for the purposes of this article. An “application” or “proposal.” The
process by which the applicant submits a request and indicates a desire to be granted a license, permit or
franchise for all, or a part, of the Town. An “application” or “proposal” includes all written documentation, and
official statements and representations, in whatever form, made by an applicant to the Town.
Assignment of an authorization or transfer of an authorization. Any transaction or action which effectively or
actually transfers the authorization or franchise or changes operational or managerial control from one (1) person
or entity to another.
Authorization or agreement to use the right-of-way. A negotiated privilege pursuant to an agreement between the
Town in its discretion and a person, allowing a person to occupy any portion of a street, right-of-way, or
easement owned or controlled by the Town, and may be for a limited period of time or for a specific purpose.
Certificated telecommunications provider. A person who has been issued a certificate of convenience and
necessity, certificate of operating authority, or service provider certificate of operating authority by the
Commission to offer local exchange telephone service or a person who provides voice service.
Collocate and collocation. The installation, mounting, maintenance, modification, operation, or replacement of
network nodes in a public right-of-way on or adjacent to a pole.
Commission. The Public Utility Commission of Texas.
Communications network. A component or facility that is, wholly or partly, physically located within a public
right-of-way and that is used to provide video programming, cable, voice, or data services.
Consumer price index. The annual revised consumer price index for all urban consumers for the State, as
published by the Federal Bureau of Labor Statistics.
Concealment or camouflaged. Any wireless facility or pole that is covered, painted, disguised, or blended into
its environment or otherwise hidden or kept from sight such that the wireless facility blends into the surrounding
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 400/505
environment and is visually unobtrusive. A concealed or camouflaged wireless facility or pole also includes any
wireless facility or pole conforming to the surrounding area in which the wireless facility or pole is located and
may include, but is not limited to hidden beneath a facade, blended with surrounding area design, painted to
match the supporting area, or disguised with artificial tree branches.
DAS or distributed antenna system. Shall be included as a type of network node and have the same meaning as
“network node.”
Decorative pole or decorative streetlight. A streetlight pole specially designed and placed for aesthetic purposes
and on which no appurtenances or attachments, other than specially designed informational or directional
signage or temporary holiday or special event attachments, have been placed or are permitted to be placed
according to nondiscriminatory municipal codes.
Design district. An area that is zoned, or otherwise designated by municipal code, and for which the Town
maintains and enforces unique design and aesthetic standards on a uniform and nondiscriminatory basis.
Disaster emergency or disaster or emergency. An imminent, impending, or actual natural or humanly induced
situation wherein the health, safety, or welfare of the residents of the Town is threatened, and includes, but is not
limited to any declaration of emergency by Town, State or federal governmental authorities.
Easement. Refers to or shall include any public easement or other compatible use, whether created by dedication
or by any other means, for uses which include public utility purposes or any other purpose whatsoever.
“Easement” may include a private easement used for the provision of utilities, depending upon usage.
FCC or Federal Communications Commission. The Federal Administrative Agency, or lawful successor,
authorized to oversee cable television and other multi-channel regulation on a national level.
Fiber able or fiber optic cable. A form of communication transmission that uses light to send data, high quality
video and sound.
Franchise or franchise agreement. The initial authorization, or subsequent renewal granted by the Town in order
for a person to construct, operate, and maintain a system in all, or part, of the Town right-of-way.
Franchise expiration. The date of expiration, or the end of the term of a franchise.
Franchise fee. The user fee or charge that the Town requires as payment for using the streets, rights-of-way,
public ways, and easements of the Town.
Gross receipts. Any and all compensation which is derived from the operation of the system, and which is
attributable to the systems operations within the Town as allowed by law.
Highway right-of-way. Right-of-way adjacent to a State or federal highway.
Historic district. An area that is zoned or otherwise designated as a historic district under municipal, State, or
Federal law.
Law. Common law or a federal, State, or local law, statute, code, rule, regulation, order, or ordinance.
Local. Within the geographical boundaries of the Town of Highland Park, Texas.
Local exchange telephone service. Has the meaning assigned by section 51.002, Utilities Code.
Mayor. The Mayor for the Town of Highland Park, Texas.
Macro tower. A guyed or self-supported pole or monopole greater than the height parameters prescribed by
section 284.103 and that supports or is capable of supporting antennas.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 401/505
Micro network node. A network node that is not larger in dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width,
and 12 inches in height, and that has an exterior antenna, if any, not longer than 11 inches.
Municipally owned utility pole. A utility pole owned or operated by a municipally owned utility, as defined by
section 11.003, Utilities Code, and located in a public right-of-way.
Municipal park. An area that is zoned or otherwise designated by municipal code as a public park for the
purpose of recreational activity, and includes the various properties used for such purpose under the direction,
control and supervision of the Town.
MUTCD. Manual of Uniform Traffic-Control Devices.
Network node. Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and
a communications network. The term:
(1) Includes:
(A) Equipment associated with wireless communications;
(B) A radio transceiver, an antenna, a battery-only backup power supply, and comparable
equipment, regardless of technological configuration; and
(C) Coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is immediately adjacent to and directly associated with a
particular collocation; and
(2) Does not include:
(A) An electric generator;
(B) A pole; or
(C) A macro tower.
Network provider.
(1) A wireless service provider; or
(2) A person that does not provide wireless services and that is not an electric utility but builds or
installs on behalf of a wireless service provider:
(A) Network nodes; or
(B) Node support poles or any other structure that supports or is capable of supporting a
network node.
Node support pole. A pole as defined by chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government Code.
Park. Has the same meaning as “municipal park.”
Permit. A document issued by the Town authorizing installation, removal, modification and other work for
equipment or facilities in accordance with the approved plans and specifications.
Pole. A service pole, municipally owned pole, node support pole, or other utility pole, and shall include network
node support pole.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 402/505
Person. Any individual, corporation, business, trust, estate, trust, partnership, association of two (2) or more
persons having a joint common interest, governmental agency, or other legal entity. From context within sections
of this article, it refers to persons using, applying or seeking to use the right-of-way.
Provider. Has the same meaning as “network provider.”
Public right-of-way management ordinance. This article of the Code of Ordinances of the Town of Highland
Park and includes all other Highland Park ordinances that comply with chapter 284 of the Local Government
Code.
Right-of-way, public way or public right-of-way or public rights-of-way or rights-of-way or right-of-way.
(1) The surface of, and the space above and below a public street, road, highway, freeway, land,
path, public way or place, alley, court, boulevard, parkway, drive, or other easement now or hereafter
held by the Town (including any street, as defined, which is acquired by eminent domain) for the
purpose of public travel and shall include other easements or rights-of-way now or hereafter held by
the Town (including any easements or rights-of-way acquired by eminent domain) which shall, with
their proper use and meaning, entitle the Town or utility provider, with proper authorization, to use
thereof for the purpose of installing or transmitting utilities over poles, wires, cable, conductors,
ducts, conduits, viaducts, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as may
ordinarily be necessary.
(2) The term does not include a private easement or the airwaves above a public right-of-way with
regard to wireless telecommunications.
Service pole. A pole, other than a municipally owned utility pole, owned or operated by a municipality and
located in a public right-of-way, including:
(1) A pole that supports traffic-control functions;
(2) A structure for signage;
(3) A pole that supports lighting, other than a decorative pole; and
(4) A pole or similar structure owned or operated by a municipality and supporting only network
nodes.
Small cell. Shall be included as a type of network node and have the same meaning as “network node.”
State. The State of Texas.
Street. Only the portion of the right-of-way with a specially prepared surface used for vehicular travel, which
surface may be concrete, asphalt, or other material commonly used to prepare a surface for vehicular travel, and
is limited to the area between the inside of the curb (when there is a curb) to the inside of the opposite curb, and
does not include the curb area or the area between the two parallel edges of the surface used for vehicular travel
where there is no curb. A street is generally part of, but less than, or smaller in width than, the size or width of
the right-of-way. Right-of-way includes the sidewalks and utility easements and street does not include a
sidewalk or utility easement. A Street does not include the curb, sidewalk, ditch, if any or present either at time
of permitting or if added later.
SWPPP. Stormwater pollution prevention plan.
TAS. Texas Accessibility Standards.
Thoroughfare. Shall have the same meaning as “street.”
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 403/505
Town. The Town of Highland Park, Texas or its lawful successor, and includes the Highland Park Town Council.
Town Council or Council/franchising authority. The Town Council for the Town of Highland Park, Texas or its
lawful successor, which is the governing body for the Town.
Town Administrator. The Highland Park Town Administrator or designee.
Traffic signal. Any device, whether manually, electrically, or mechanically operated by which traffic is
alternately directed to stop and to proceed.
Transport facility. Each transmission path physically within right-of-way, extending with a physical line from a
network node directly to the network, for the purpose of providing backhaul for network nodes.
U.S.C. United States Code.
Underground district or underground requirement area or underground area. An area where poles, overhead
wires, and associated overhead or above ground structures have been removed and buried or have been approved
for burial underground pursuant to municipal ordinances, zoning regulations, State law, private deed restrictions,
or other public or private restrictions, that prohibit installing aboveground structures in a public right-of-way.
User. A person or organization that owns, places or uses facilities occupying the whole or a part of a public
street or right-of-way, depending on the context.
Utility pole. A pole that provides:
(1) Electric distribution with a voltage rating of not more than 34.5 kilovolts; or
(2) Services of a telecommunications provider, as defined by section 51.002 of the Utilities Code.
Voice service. Voice communications services provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the
public right-of-way, without regard to the delivery technology, including Internet protocol technology. The term
does not include voice service provided by a commercial mobile service provider as defined by 47 U.S.C.
section 332(d).
Wireless service. Any service, using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum, including the use of wi-fi,
whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided to the public using a network node.
Wireless service provider. A person that provides wireless service to the public.
Wireless facilities. “Micro network nodes,” “network nodes,” and “node support poles” as defined in Texas
Local Government Code chapter 284.
Sec. 13.08.005 Unauthorized use of public rights-of-way
(a) The Town may institute all appropriate legal action to prohibit any person from knowingly using the public
rights-of-way unless the person has complied with the terms of this article.
(b) This article shall not be construed as imposing upon the Town or any official or employee any liability or
responsibility for damages to any person injured by the performance of any work for which a permit is issued
hereunder, nor shall the Town or any official or employee thereof be deemed to have assumed any such liability
or responsibility by reason of inspections authorized hereunder, the issuance of any permit or the approval of any
work.
Secs. 13.08.006–13.08.030 Reserved
Division 2. Right-of-Way Management
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 404/505
Sec. 13.08.031 Right-of-way construction
No person shall commence or continue with the construction, installation or operation of facilities within the
right-of-way in the Town except as provided by the ordinances of the Town and the directives of the Town
Administrator. All construction activity in Town right-of-way will be in accordance with this article.
Sec. 13.08.032 Authorization; registration; compensation and fees
(a) Registration.
(1) In order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, all users of the right-of-way will
register with the Town.
(2) Registration and permits will be issued in the name of the person who will own the facilities.
(3) Registration and permits are not authorizations to install facilities in the rights-of-way, such
authorization must be through municipal franchise or license or municipal agreement, except when
otherwise required by State law.
(4) Registration must be renewed every five (5) years. For utilities with a current franchise or
license, the franchise or license will be evidence of renewal. If a registration is not renewed and
subject to sixty-day notification to the owner, the facilities of the user will be deemed to have been
abandoned.
(5) When any information provided for the registration changes, the user will inform the Town of
the change no more than thirty (30) days after the date the change is made.
(6) Registration shall include:
(A) The name of the user of the right-of-way;
(B) The name, address and telephone number of people who will be contact person(s) for the
user;
(C) The name, address and telephone number of any contractor or subcontractor, if known,
who will be working in the right-of-way on behalf of the user;
(D) The name(s) and telephone number of an emergency contact who shall be available
twenty-four (24) hours a day and said emergency contact shall be employed by and have
binding and decision-making authority for the owner of the facilities;
(E) Insurance:
(i) Prior to construction in the right-of-way, an applicant must provide, and users must
maintain, acceptable proof of liability insurance in the total amount of six million dollars
($6,000,000.00); one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) primary plus five million dollars
($5,000,000.00) umbrella if requested by the owner of the facilities, or other provisions as
acceptable to the Town Administrator. The Town reserves the right to review the
insurance requirements and to reasonably adjust insurance coverage and limits when the
Town Administrator determines that changes in statutory law, court decisions, or the
claims history of the industry or the applicant or user require adjustment of the coverage.
(ii) The coverage must be on an “occurrence” basis and must include coverage for
personal injury, contractual liability, premises liability, medical damages, underground,
explosion and collapse hazards.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 405/505
(iii) Each policy must include a cancellation provision in which the insurance company
is required to notify the Town in writing not fewer than thirty (30) days before canceling,
failing to renew, or reducing policy limits.
(iv) The applicant shall file the required original certificate of insurance prior to any
commencement of work. The certificate shall state the policy number; name of the
insurance company; name and address of the agent or authorized representative of the
insurance company; name, address and telephone number of insured; policy expiration
date; and specific coverage amounts. The Town may accept a certificate of insurance or
the Town may require another form of legally binding proof of insurance.
(v) An insurer has no right of recovery against the Town. The required insurance
policies shall protect the person and the Town. The insurance shall be primary coverage
for losses covered by the policies.
(vi) The policy clause “other insurance” shall not apply to the Town if the Town is an
insured under the policy.
(F) Bonds:
(i) Applicant or applicant's contractor, at Town's option, shall file an annual surety bond
which will be valid each year construction will occur through one (1) full year after the
completion of the construction from a surety company authorized to do business in the
State in the amount of the estimated amount of the cost to restore the right-of-way for the
work anticipated to be done in that year, in the event the applicant leaves a jobsite in the
right-of-way unfinished, incomplete or unsafe or other provisions as acceptable to the
Town Administrator.
(ii) The above requirements may be met by utilities with a current franchise or license if
their current franchise or license adequately provides for insurance or bonds or provides
an indemnity in favor of the Town.
(G) Indemnity:
(i) To the extent allowed by State law, each person placing facilities in the public rightsof-
way shall agree to promptly defend, indemnify and hold the Town harmless from and
against all damages, costs, losses or expenses (i) for the repair, replacement, or restoration
of Town's property, equipment, materials, structures and facilities which are damaged,
destroyed or found to be defective as a result of the person's acts or omissions, (ii) from
and against any and all claims, demands, suits, causes of action, and judgments for (a)
damage to or loss of the property of any person (including, but not limited to the person,
its agents, officers, employees and subcontractors, Town's agents, officers and employees,
and third parties); and/or (b) death, bodily injury, illness, disease, loss of services, or loss
of income or wages to any person (including, but not limited to the agents, officers and
employees of the person, person's subcontractors and Town, and third parties), arising out
of, incident to, concerning or resulting from the negligent or willful act or omissions of
the person, its agents, employees, and/or subcontractors, in the performance of activities
pursuant to this article.
(ii) This indemnity provision shall not apply to any liability resulting from the
negligence of the Town, its officers, employees, agents, contractors, or subcontractors.
(iii) The provisions of this indemnity are solely for the benefit of the Town and are not
intended to create or grant any rights, contractual or otherwise, to any other person or
entity.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 406/505
(7) The above requirements may be met by utilities with a current franchise or license if their
current franchise or license adequately provides for insurance or bonds or provides an indemnity in
favor of the Town.
(8) Failure to maintain registration requirements. In addition to all other legal penalties, including
criminal penalties; failure to register or to maintain and update registration information may result in
denial of a permit application or removal of facilities.
(b) Authorization.
(1) Municipal authorization or agreement shall be required, except when clearly preempted by
State law. Nothing in this article shall be considered to grant authorization to any user. When any
State law authorizing right-of-way use is struck down, pre-empted, declared to be invalid or void, in
whole or in part, the user relying upon said law for authorization shall seek separate authorization or
shall cease using the right-of-way.
(2) When municipal authorization or agreement is required, permit for construction work may not
be submitted until said authorization or agreement is obtained.
(3) Municipal authorization does not extend to the use of any property or facilities other than the
right-of-way.
(4) Municipal authorization does not address or allow the use of third-party facilities in the rightof-
way and is limited as described in the authorization.
(5) This article does not constitute or create authority to place, reconstruct, or alter facilities in, on,
or over the public rights-of-way, and said authority must be obtained by separate instrument in
accordance with this section or by operation of other laws.
(c) Compensation and fees.
(1) Municipal right-of-way use shall be compensated as required by the State Constitution, State
law, franchise, license or other agreement.
(2) The Town may structure due dates on payments in such a manner so as to be administratively
efficient.
(3) Application fees, as allowed by State law, for work or installations in the right-of-way shall be
the fees set by the Town Council. Such fees may be set by ordinance, resolution, in the budget or by
any other lawful means.
Failure to pay application fees, or failure of any payment to properly process shall result in the denial or
withdraw of a permit.
Sec. 13.08.033 Construction in the right-of-way
(a) No person shall perform any construction or installation of facilities in the right-of-way without first
obtaining a construction permit, except as provided herein. The permit will be in the name of the person who
will own the facilities to be constructed. The permit must be completed and signed by a representative of the
owner of the facilities to be constructed.
(1) Emergency responses related to existing facilities may be undertaken without first obtaining a
permit; however the Town should be notified in writing within two (2) business days of any
construction related to an emergency response; including a reasonably detailed description of the
work performed in the right-of-way and an updated map of any facilities that were relocated, if
applicable.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 407/505
(2) The phrase “construction or installation of facilities” does not include the installation of
facilities necessary to initiate service to a customer's property, or repair or maintenance of existing
facilities unless such repair or maintenance requires the breaking of pavement; the closure of a
nonresidential traffic lane; excavation or boring.
(b) The permit shall state to whom it is issued, location of work, location of facilities, dates and times work is
to take place and any other conditions set out by the Town Administrator or designee.
(c) The person requesting a permit will provide the Town Administrator or designee with documentation in
the format specified by the Town Administrator describing:
(1) The proposed, approximate location and route of all facilities to be constructed or installed and
the applicant's plan for right-of-way construction should be shown on a set of scaled dimensioned
construction plans, plan/profile sheet, a street view and an aerial map. Said plans should indicate the
current right-of-way lines and any existing Town facilities. Said plans shall show any proposed
underground conduit, type of casing pipe required, if applicable, overhead lines, network nodes,
ancillary equipment, or any other facilities to be installed. The drawings shall show a cross sectional
profile, identify all existing utilities and any existing or potential utility conflicts.
(2) For installation of any proposed pole applicant shall provide sectional detail showing depth of
anchor, scaled dimensional drawings of the proposed pole, as well as any other proposed equipment
associated with the proposed installation, and shall indicate spacing from existing curb, driveways,
sidewalk, light poles, and any other poles or appurtenances.
(3) All applications shall include a before and after street view image. The after image needs to
include any proposed poles and all proposed attachments, and any associated or ancillary equipment,
whether attached or stand alone.
(4) If the project is within the State right-of-way, the applicant must provide evidence of a permit
or permission from the State.
(5) If a Town pole or poles or light structure or structures will be used or will be in the area of the
proposed construction, the pole or poles or light structure or structures will be identified. No electric
meter shall be mounted on a Town pole or light structure.
(6) Provider/applicant shall use 240 voltage when connecting to any Town infrastructure and
provide key to meter upon installation.
(7) All plans shall reflect that no facilities to be installed will obstruct an existing or planned
sidewalk, walkway, bicycle lane or lane of vehicular traffic.
(8) Engineering plans which will be on a scale of one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet unless
otherwise approved by Town Administrator.
(9) Detail of the location of all right-of-way and utility easements which applicant plans to use.
(10) Detail of all existing Town utilities in relationship to applicant's proposed route.
(11) Detail of what applicant proposes to install, such as network nodes, poles, pipes, size, number
of innerducts, valves, or other facilities.
(12) Detail of plans to remove and replace asphalt or concrete in streets (include Town standard
construction details).
(13) Drawings of any bores, trenches, handholes, manholes, switch gear, transformers, pedestals,
network nodes, micro-network nodes, or other facilities, including depth located in public right-of7/
15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 408/505
way.
(14) Handhole and/or manhole typicals of type of manholes and/or handholes applicant plans to
use or access.
(15) Complete legend of drawings submitted by applicant.
(16) If paper copies are required, five (5) sets of engineering plans must be submitted with permit
application.
(17) The name, address and phone numbers of the contractor or subcontractor who will perform
the actual construction, including the name and telephone number of an individual with the contractor
who will be available at all times during construction. Such information shall be required prior to the
commencement of any work.
(18) The construction and installation methods to be employed for the protection of existing
structures, fixtures, and facilities within or adjacent to the right-of-way, and the dates and times work
will occur, all of which (methods, dates, times, and other applicable information) are subject to
approval of the Town Administrator or designee.
(19) A statement that the requirements of section 13.08.032 “authorization; registration;
compensation and fees” are met.
(20) A traffic-control plan approved by the Town Administrator, which shall specify the trafficcontrol
measures to be provided, SWPPP, and trench safety plan may also be required based on the
proposed scope of work. An approved traffic-control plan shall be required any time work will
require traffic lane closures or sidewalk closures, regardless of whether a permit is required.
(21) No projecting attachments shall be less than eight (8) feet above the ground, if not projecting
toward the street. If an attachment is projecting toward the street, the attachment shall be installed no
less than sixteen (16) feet above the ground.
(22) Any proposed work that involves the installation of facilities that will utilize radio frequencies
shall not cause any interference with Town public safety radio system, traffic signal light system or
other Town communications systems or components, regardless of whether or not a permit is
required. The right-of-way user shall provide evidence in a form acceptable to the Town that the
proposed installation will be compatible with said Town systems and will not cause any interference
with the Town public safety radio system, traffic signal light system or other Town communications
systems or components. No installation shall be allowed to be installed or to remain in the right-ofway
that causes any such interference.
(23) The plans shall demonstrate that all federal and State laws and Town ordinances will be
obeyed, and that all sections of this article, including division 3. “design manual” will be complied
with as applicable. Construction in right-of-way adjacent to a school shall be required to follow all
State law requirements, including the requirements in the Educational Code regarding work on
school grounds, including but not limited to chapters 21 and 22, as applicable.
(d) All construction and installation in the right-of-way shall be in accordance with the permit for the
facilities. The Town Administrator or designee shall be provided access to the work and to such further
information as he or she may reasonable require to ensure compliance with the permit.
(e) A copy of the construction permit and approved engineering plans shall be maintained at the construction
site and made available for inspection by the Town Administrator or designee at all times when construction or
installation work is occurring.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 409/505
(f) All construction or installation work authorized by permit must be completed in the time specified in the
construction permit. If the work cannot be completed in the specified time periods, the permittee may request an
extension from the Town Administrator or designee. The Town Administrator or designee will use best efforts to
approve or disapprove a request for permit as soon as possible.
(g) A copy of any permit or approval issued by federal or State authorities for work in federal or State rightof-
way located in the Town, if requested by the Town Administrator and a copy of written permission for work
in railroad right-of-way from the applicable railroad if requested by the Town Administrator.
(h) A request for a permit must be submitted at least ten (10) working days before the proposed
commencement of work in the request, unless waived by the Town Administrator or designee.
(i) Requests for permits will be approved or disapproved by the Town Administrator or designee within a
reasonable time or receiving all the necessary information. The Town Administrator or designee will use best
efforts to approve or disapprove a request for permit as soon as possible.
(j) The Town Administrator or the applicant can request a pre-construction meeting with the permittee and
their construction contractor.
(k) Permit applications are required for construction on new, replacement or upgrading of the company's
facilities in the right-of-way either aerial or underground.
(l) The failure of a person to request and obtain a permit from the Town prior to performing any of the above
listed activities in, or over any right-of-way, except in an emergency, will subject the person to a stop-work order
from the Town and enforcement action pursuant to the Town's Code of Ordinances.
(m) If the person receiving the permit fails to act upon the permit within one hundred eighty (180) calendar
days of issuance, the permit shall become invalid, and the person will be required to obtain another permit.
(n) If State or Federal law provides that a permit is not required for certain work to be done, then a person
proposing to do such work shall be required to provide notice two (2) working days prior to performing such
work. The following requirements must be met, even if no permit is required pursuant to State or Federal law:
(1) Certification of a State-registered professional engineer that the drawings, plans and
specifications submitted with the application comply with applicable technical codes, rules,
regulations, and publicly disclosed design specifications establishes in the Town's right-of-way
management requirements, including the design manual are required.
(2) Work shall follow all other requirements and directives from the Town Administrator, including
but not limited to the excavation ordinance, alley excavation drawing requirements, specifications for
utility excavation, requirements for approach-curb-walk, public walk detail, requirements for curbgutter,
circular driveway specifications, requirements in regard to basement driveway designs,
requirements regarding sewer taps, and the use of Town forms, including concrete and excavation
bond forms, excavation permit application (water/sewer tap) and the forms required under this article.
Sec. 13.08.034 Construction and maintenance standards
(a) The following shall be required when facilities are constructed in the right-of-way, regardless of whether a
permit is required, and, to the extent applicable, for as long as the facilities remain in the right-of-way.
(1) The Town must be notified twenty-four (24) hours in advance that construction is ready to
proceed by the right-of-way user, their contractor or representative. The right-of-way user or
contractor must previously called for any needed locations for right-of-way facilities. At the time of
notification, the right-of-way user will inform the Town Administrator of the number (or other
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 410/505
information) assigned from the one-call system. The provider must have previously contracted the
Town and obtained all needed locational information for Town utilities.
(2) All construction shall be in conformance with all Town codes and applicable local, State and
federal laws and must be done in a good and workmanlike manner and in accordance with all
applicable sections of this article.
(3) Three by three (3 x 3) feet information signs stating the identity of the person doing the work,
telephone number and permittee's identity and telephone number shall be placed at the location where
construction is to occur forty-eight (48) hours prior to the beginning of work in the right-of-way and
shall continue to be posted at the location during the entire time the work is occurring. An
informational sign will be posted on public right-of-way one hundred (100) feet before the
construction location commences and each one hundred (100) feet thereafter, unless other posting
arrangements are approved or required by the Town Administrator.
(4) Erosion control measures (e.g. silt fence) and advance warning signs, markers, cones and
barricades must be in place before work begins.
(5) Lane closures on major thoroughfares will be limited after 8:30 a.m. and before 4:00 p.m.
unless the Town Administrator grants prior approval. Arrow boards will be required on lane closures,
with all barricades, advanced warning signs and thirty-six (36) inch reflector cones placed according
to the specifications of the Town Administrator and must be in accordance with the filed lane closure
plan approved by the Town Administrator.
(6) Permittees are responsible for the workmanship and any damages by a contractors or
subcontractors. A responsible representative of the permittee will be available to Town staff at all
times during construction.
(7) Permittee shall be responsible for stormwater management erosion control that complies with
Town, State and federal guidelines. Requirements shall include, but not be limited to, silt fencing
around any excavation that will be left overnight, silt fencing in erosion areas until reasonable
vegetation is established, barricade fencing around open holes, and high erosion areas will require
wire backed silt fencing. Upon request permittee may be required to furnish documentation submitted
or received from federal or State government.
(8) Permittee or contractor or subcontractor will notify the Town Administrator immediately of any
damage to other utilities, either Town or privately owned.
(9) It is the Town's policy not to cut streets or sidewalks; however, when a street or sidewalk cut is
required, prior approval must be obtained by the Town Administrator and all requirements of the
Town Administrator shall be followed. Repair of all street and sidewalk removals must be made
promptly to avoid safety hazards to vehicle and pedestrian traffic.
(10) Installation of facilities must not interfere with Town utilities, in particular gravity dependent
facilities.
(11) New facilities must be installed to a depth approved by the Town Administrator.
(12) All directional boring shall have locator place bore marks and depths while bore is in
progress. The boring method and bore pit locations shall be identified. Locator shall place mark at
each stem with paint dot and depth at least every other stem.
(13) The working hours in the rights-of-way are 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.
Work that needs to be performed after 4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday must be approved in
advance. Any work performed on Saturday must be approved twenty-four (24) hours in advance by
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 411/505
the Town Administrator. Directional boring is permitted only Monday through Friday 9:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m., unless other hours are approved in advance. No work will be done on Sundays or Town
holidays, except for emergencies.
(14) People working in the right-of-way are responsible for obtaining line locates from all affected
utilities or others with facilities in the right-of-way prior to any excavation. Use of the geographic
information system or the plans of records does not satisfy this requirement.
(15) Permittee will be responsible for verifying the location, both horizontal and vertical, of all
facilities. When required by the Town Administrator, permittee shall verify locations by pot holing,
hand digging or other method approved by the Town Administrator prior to any excavation or boring
with the exception of work involving lane closures, as discussed above.
(16) Placement of all manholes and/or handholes must be approved in advance by Town
Administrator. Handholes or manholes will not be located in sidewalks, unless approved by the Town
Administrator.
(17) Locate flags shall not be removed from a location while facilities are being constructed.
(18) Construction which requires pumping of water or mud shall be contained in accordance with
Town of Highland Park ordinances and federal and State law and the directives of the Town
Administrator.
(19) All facilities installed in the right-of-way shall be in earth tone colors or in colors that blend
with the surroundings, or if on a service pole or municipally owned pole shall match the color and
finish of the pole, or must be approved by the Town.
(20) All facilities installed in the right-of-way shall be capable of being identified through a GIS
shape file or other means as acceptable to the Town Administrator or designee. Said identification
shall be provided at the time of application and shall be visible on the facilities when installed.
(21) Above ground wires shall be located on only one side of the right-of-way.
(22) The right-of-way user or contractor must obtain any needed permits for electrical work and
provide sealed engineered drawings for conduit size, circuit size, calculations for Amperage, or any
other required information. Provider shall be responsible for obtaining any required electrical power
service to any installation. Any such electrical supply must be separately metered and must match
Town infrastructure voltage.
(23) Right-of-way users shall complete construction as expeditiously as possible and lane closures
or work that inconveniences the traveling public shall be minimized. Lane closures shall not last
longer than four (4) hours, unless a different period of time is shown on the permit.
(24) Right-of-way work shall be completed in the amount of time shown on the permit; but if no
completion time is shown on the permit the work shall be complete in not more than one (1) year.
(25) All right-of-way work and facilities installed shall be done in a good workman like manner;
shall meet all applicable codes; shall be maintained and kept in good repair and shall be aesthetically
pleasing.
(26) All efforts shall be made to avoid or minimize negative visual impact to the surrounding area
and to enhance the safety requirement for vehicles and pedestrians, particularly in areas where small
children or other vulnerable members of the population may be located.
(27) Installations which require ancillary ground equipment with a footprint of twenty-five (25)
square feet or more shall be spaced at least 300 feet apart.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 412/505
(28) The name, address and phone numbers of the contractor or subcontractor who will perform
the actual construction, including the name and telephone number of an individual with the contractor
who will be available at all times during construction. Such information shall be required prior to the
commencement of any work.
(29) A statement that the requirements of section 13.08.032 “authorization; registration;
compensation and fees” are met.
(30) A traffic-control plan, which shall specify the traffic-control measures to be provided, SWPPP,
and trench safety plan may also be required based on the proposed scope of work. An approved
traffic-control plan shall be required any time work will require traffic lane closures or sidewalk
closures, regardless of whether a permit is required.
(31) A traffic-control plan approved by the Town Administrator, which shall specify the trafficcontrol
measures to be provided, SWPPP, and trench safety plan may also be required based on the
proposed scope of work. An approved traffic-control plan shall be required any time work will
require traffic lane closures or sidewalk closures, regardless of whether a permit is required.
(32) Any proposed work that involves the installation of facilities that will utilize radio frequencies
shall not cause any interference with Town public safety radio system, traffic signal light system or
other Town communications systems or components, regardless of whether or not a permit is
required. The right-of-way user shall provide evidence in a form acceptable to the Town that the
proposed installation will be compatible with said Town systems and will not cause any interference
with the Town public safety radio system, traffic signal light system or other Town communications
systems or components. No installation shall be allowed to be installed or to remain in the right-ofway
that causes any such interference.
(b) To the extent applicable, the above requirements shall continue during the entire time that the installed
facilities remain in the right-of-way.
Sec. 13.08.035 Plans of record
(a) Right-of-way users will provide the Town Administrator or designee with plans of record showing
installed and final location of facilities within ninety (90) days of completion of facilities in the right-of-way.
Users which have facilities in the right-of-way existing as of the date of this article who have not provided
“plans of record” plans shall provide one (1) quarter of the information concerning facilities in Town right-ofway
within one (1) year after the passage of this article and one (1) quarter each six (6) months thereafter. The
plans shall be provided to the Town with as much detail and accuracy as required by the Town Administrator.
All the requirements specified for the plans submitted for the initial permit, as set forth in section 13.08.033,
shall be submitted and updated in the plans of record. The detail and accuracy will concern issues such as
location, size of facilities, materials used, and any other health, safety and welfare concerns. The detail will not
include matters such as capacity of lines, customers, or competitively sensitive details. Submittal of “plans of
record” shall be in digital format.
(b) This requirement, or portions of this requirement, may be waived by the Town Administrator for good
cause.
(c) If the release of the location of any utilities, including water and sewer, or of plans of record submitted
under this section would jeopardize public safety, the information shall be considered confidential. In addition, if
plans of record submitted under this section include information expressly designated by the right-of-way user as
a trade secret or other confidential information protected from disclosure by State law, the Town may not
disclose that information to the public without the consent of the right-of-way user, unless otherwise compelled
by an opinion of the attorney general pursuant to the Texas Public Information Act, as amended, or by a court
having jurisdiction of the matter pursuant to applicable law. This subsection may not be construed to authorize a
right-of-way user to designate all matters in its plans of record as confidential or as trade secrets.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 413/505
(d) User shall maintain accurate maps and other appropriate records of its facilities and equipment as they are
actually constructed in the rights-of-way, including, upon request, the use of Auto CAD/GIS digital format. User
will provide additional maps to the Town upon request.
Sec. 13.08.036 Conformance with public improvements
Whenever by reasons of widening or straightening of streets, water or sewer line projects, or any other public
works or Town projects, (e.g. install or improve storm drains, water lines, sewer lines, or any other public works
or Town project) it shall be deemed necessary by the governing body of the Town to remove, alter, change,
adapt, or conform the underground or overhead facilities of a right-of-way user to another part of the right-ofway,
such alterations shall be made by the owner of the facilities at their expense (unless provided otherwise by
State law or a franchise in effect on August 26, 1999, until that franchise expires or is otherwise terminated or is
amended or the tariff is changed) within the time limits set by the Town Administrator working in conjunction
with the owner of the facilities, or if no time frame can be agreed upon, within ninety (90) days from the day the
notice was sent to make the alterations, unless a different schedule has been approved by the Town
Administrator or designee. Facilities not moved after ninety (90) days or the time set forth in the notice shall be
deemed abandoned and may be removed in accordance with section 13.08.042 “abandoned facilities.”
Sec. 13.08.037 Improperly installed facilities
(a) Any person doing work in the Town right-of-way shall properly install, repair, upgrade and maintain
facilities.
(b) Facilities shall be considered to be improperly installed, repaired, upgraded or maintained if:
(1) The installation, repairs, upgrade or maintenance endangers people;
(2) The facilities do not meet the applicable Town codes;
(3) The facilities are not capable of being located using standard practices;
(4) Underground facilities that are installed less than twenty-four (24) inches in depth;
(5) Facilities or construction in regard to placement of said facilities that remains incomplete or
hazardous after construction work is finished or time for completion has passed, including but not
limited to holes in paved areas or ground, handholes or manholes that are improperly sealed, and
broken equipment or any other incomplete or hazardous condition;
(6) The facilities are not located in the proper place at the time of construction in accordance with
the directions provided by the Town Administrator.
(c) Facilities will be considered improperly installed if said facilities utilize radio frequencies and cause any
interference with Town public safety radio system, traffic signal light system or other communications
components.
Sec. 13.08.038 Restoration of property
(a) Users of the right-of-way shall restore property affected by construction of facilities to a condition that is
equal to or better than the condition of the property prior to the performance of the work. Restoration must be
approved by the Town Administrator.
(b) Restoration must be to the reasonable satisfaction of the Town Administrator and the property owner. The
restoration shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) Replacing all ground cover with the type of ground cover damaged during work or better either
by sodding or seeding, as directed by the Town Administrator;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 414/505
(2) Installation of all manholes and handholes, as required;
(3) Backfilling all bore pits, potholes, trenches or any other holes shall be filled in daily, unless
other safety requirements are approved by the Town Administrator;
(4) Leveling of all trenches and backhoe lines;
(5) Restoration of excavation site to Town specifications; and
(6) Restoration of all landscaping, ground cover, and sprinkler systems.
(c) All locate flags shall be removed during the clean-up progress by the permittee or contractor at the
completion of the work.
(d) Restoration must be made in a timely manner as specified by approved Town schedules and to the
satisfaction of Town Administrator or designee. If restoration is not satisfactory and performed in a timely
manner all work in progress, except that related to the problem, including all work previously permitted but not
complete may be halted and a hold may be placed on any permits not approved until all restoration is complete.
(e) If a person fails to restore property as set out in this section, the Town shall give five (5) days written
notice to the person at the address shown on the permit. If the person does not initiate repairs during the five-day
period, or fails to complete the repairs within thirty (30) days thereafter the Town may elect to repair such
portion of the right-of-way as may have been disturbed by the person, its contractors, or agents at the cost of the
person performing the right-of-way work. These time periods may be shorten or waived in cases of a threat to
public health, safety or welfare. Upon receipt of an invoice from the Town, the person will reimburse the Town
for the costs so incurred no later than thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the Town invoice.
(f) Should the Town reasonably determine, within two (2) years from the date of the completion of the repair
work, that any of the said restoration work failed to meet the existing standards of the Town, the person shall
perform such additional restoration work to the satisfaction of the Town, subject to all Town remedies.
(g) Notwithstanding any of the above sections, if the Town determines that the failure of the person to
properly repair or restore the right-of-way constitutes a threat to the public health, safety or welfare, the Town
may undertake emergency repairs and restoration efforts. The Town may attempt to provide emergency notice to
the person responsible, but is not obligated to do so. The right-of-way user shall promptly reimburse the Town
for all costs incurred by the Town within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the Town invoice.
Sec. 13.08.039 Revocation or denial of permit
(a) If any of the provisions of this article are not followed, a permit may be revoked by the Town
Administrator or designee. If a person has not followed the terms and conditions of this article in work done
pursuant to a prior permit, new permits may be denied or additional terms required.
(b) If a permit is denied upon initial submission for incompleteness or for an issue which is capable of
correction, the applicant may complete or correct the application and resubmit the application. Applications not
resubmitted within thirty-one (31) calendar days shall be considered withdrawn.
Sec. 13.08.040 Appeal from denial or revocation of permit
(a) An applicant may appeal from denial or revocation of permit to the Town Administrator. Appeal shall be
filed with the Town Secretary within five (5) calendar days from the date of the decision being appealed.
(b) A denial or revocation will be upheld unless a person can show that there is an error and that the person
was following all of the requirements of this article and all right-of-way engineering requirements.
Sec. 13.08.041 Inspections
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 415/505
The Town may perform inspections of any right-of-way work, including installations, maintenance,
modifications or any other right-of-way work, whether such work is subject to permit requirements or allowed to
be done without a permit. The Town may perform visual inspections of any right-of-way work located in the
right-of-way as the Town deems appropriate without notice. If the inspection requires physical contact with
right-of-way work, the Town may provide the right-of-way user with notice prior to said inspection. Right-ofway
user may have a representative present during such inspection. In the event of an emergency situation, the
Town may, but is not required to, notify the right-of-way user prior to the inspection. The Town may take any
needed action to remediate an emergency. The Town shall notify the right-of-way user as soon as practical after
said remediation.
Sec. 13.08.042 Abandoned facilities
(a) Duty to remove. A person that has placed facilities in the right-of-way shall remove said facilities and
related equipment when such facilities are abandoned regardless of whether or not it receives notice from the
Town.
(b) Time for removal.
(1) The Town may notify the person that said facilities must be removed immediately when
necessary to ensure public health, safety, and welfare.
(2) If immediate removal is not required, the removal must be completed within the time set forth
in the written notice to remove from the Town and if no time is set out, then within ninety (90) days
for the facilities and related equipment being abandoned.
(3) If the facilities are not removed after the 90-day notice to remove, the Town may remove the
facilities thirty (30) days after notice of a final finding of abandonment.
(4) When a person removes, or abandons permanent structures in the right-of-way, the person shall
notify the Town Administrator in writing of such removal or abandonment and shall file with the
Town Administrator the location and description of each facility and ground equipment removed or
abandoned.
(5) The Town Administrator may require the person to complete additional remedial measures
necessary for public safety and the integrity of the right-of-way.
(c) Deemed abandoned. Facilities may be deemed abandoned as set out in this article. Additionally, facilities
may be deemed abandoned if:
(1) A person does not relocate facilities as set out in section 13.08.036 “conformance with public
improvements.”
(2) A person does not correct or abate improperly installed facilities as set out in section 13.08.037
“improperly installed facilities.”
(3) A person fails to maintain the registration requirements set forth in section 13.08.032
“authorization; registration; compensation and fees”
(4) A person utilizing the right-of-way cannot be found or contacted.
(5) A person utilizing the right-of-way fails to pay the required compensation.
(6) A person utilizing the right-of-way fails to comply with the requirements of this article after
being given due notice of any deficiencies. The notice requirement shall only apply to persons who
have maintained the required registration as set out in section 13.08.032 “authorization; registration;
compensation and fees” and are capable of being contacted.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 416/505
Sec. 13.08.043 Underground installation preferred
(a) The underground placement of facilities is encouraged.
(b) Facilities shall be installed underground where existing utilities are already underground.
(c) Underground conduits and ducts shall be installed in the public rights-of-way between the adjacent
property line and curb line unless otherwise directed by the Town.
(d) Conduits and ducts shall be installed parallel with the curbline and cross the public rights-of-way
perpendicular to the public rights-of-way centerline unless otherwise directed by the Town.
(e) Ducts and conduits shall be installed by trenchless excavation or directional boring whenever
commercially economical and practical. Trenchless excavation shall be used to place facilities under paved
public rights-of-way centerline unless otherwise directed by the Town.
Sec. 13.08.044 As-built maps and records
User shall maintain accurate maps and other appropriate records of its facilities and equipment as they are
actually constructed in the rights-of-way, including, upon request, the use of Auto CAD/GIS digital format. User
will provide additional maps to the Town upon request.
Sec. 13.08.045 Courtesy and proper performance
User shall make citizen satisfaction a priority in using the right-of-way. User shall train its employees to be
customer service-oriented and to positively and politely interact with citizens when dealing with issues
pertaining to its facilities and related ground equipment in the right-of-way. User's employees shall be clean,
courteous, efficient, and neat in appearance and committed to offering the highest quality of interaction with the
public. If, in the opinion of the Town Administrator or designee, user is not interacting in a positive and polite
manner with citizens, the Town Administrator may request user to take all remedial steps to conform to these
standards.
Sec. 13.08.046 Drug policy
It is the policy of the Town to achieve a drug-free workforce and workplace. The manufacture, distribution,
dispensation, possession, sale, or use of illegal drugs or alcohol by user's employees, contractors, subcontractors,
sub-network provider's, or vendors while on Town premises is prohibited.
Sec. 13.08.047 Tree maintenance
User, its contractors, and agents shall provide written notice to the Town Administrator before trimming trees
hanging in the right-of-way. The Town shall not be liable for any damages, injuries, or claims arising from user's
actions under this section.
Sec. 13.08.048 Signage
(a) User shall post and maintain legible identification showing its name, location identifying information, and
emergency telephone number in an area on a cabinet of a facility that is visible to the public. Signage required
under this section shall not exceed 4" x 6", unless otherwise required by law (e.g. RF ground notification signs)
or the Town Administrator.
(b) Except as required by law or by the utility pole owner, user shall not post any other signage or advertising
on the facilities or equipment.
Sec. 13.08.049 Graffiti abatement
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 417/505
As soon as practical, but not later than fourteen (14) calendar days from the date user receives notice thereof,
user shall remove all graffiti on any of its facilities and related ground equipment located in the right-of-way and
shall restore to the previous condition or better. The foregoing shall not relieve the user from complying with
any Town graffiti or visual blight ordinance or regulation.
Sec. 13.08.050 Alternate means or method; waiver
(a) A person may file a request with the Town Administrator to use alternate means or methods in right-ofway
construction or maintenance. In determining whether any requirement under this section may be waived or
if an alternate method or means may be used, the Town Administrator may consider all reasonable factors,
including but not limited to:
(1) Whether the requirement or the alternate means or method or waiving the requirement would
subject the person or persons or public to an unreasonable increase in risk;
(2) Whether the requirement or the alternate means or method or waiving the requirement would
subject the person or persons or public to an unreasonable increase of service interruption;
(3) Whether the requirement or the alternate means or method or waiving the requirement would
subject the person or persons or public to an unreasonable increase in potential for liability for
accidents;
(4) Whether the requirement or the alternate means or method or waiving the requirement would
subject the person or persons or public to an unreasonable delay in construction;
(5) Whether the requirement or the alternate means or method or waiving the requirement would
subject the person or persons or public to an unreasonable delay in availability of services; or
(6) To any other unreasonable technical or economic burden.
(b) There shall be no right to receive permission to use an alternative means or method and denial by the
Town Administrator shall be final.
Sec. 13.08.051 Orderly use of the right-of-way by multiple users
(a) In the exercise of governmental functions, the Town has first priority over all other uses of the rights-ofway.
Traffic uses shall be considered as the primary use and the Town reserves the right to lay sewer, water, gas
and other pipelines or cables and/or cables and conduits, and to do underground and overhead work, including
attachments, restructuring or changes in aerial or underground facilities in, across, along, over, or under a public
street, alley or right-of-way and to change the curb, sidewalks of the grade of streets. Uses should be designed so
as to cause the least interference with traffic, including signalization.
(b) The Town shall assign the location in or over the rights-of-way among competing users of the rights-ofway
with due consideration to the public health, safety and welfare considerations of each user type, and to the
extent the Town can demonstrate that there is limited space available for additional users, may limit new users or
require removal of abandoned or obsolete facilities, as allowed under State or federal law.
(c) If the Town authorizes abutting landowners to occupy space under the surface of any street, alley or rightsof-
way, the grant to an abutting landowner shall be subject to the rights of the previously authorized users of the
public rights-of-way. If the Town closes or abandons a public right-of-way that contains a portion of a person's
facilities, the Town may close or abandon such right-of-way subject to the right of the person, provided said
facilities have not been abandoned and provided the person is a registered user of the right-of-way.
Secs. 13.08.052–13.08.080 Reserved
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 418/505
Division 3. Design Manual
Sec. 13.08.081 Purpose
(a) This design manual is for the: (1) maintenance; (2) siting; and (3) criteria for the installation of wireless
facilities, including micro network nodes, network nodes, node support poles and related ground equipment and
applies to any and all maintenance, siting, installations, collocations, or other placement of, in, over or under the
public rights-of-way of network nodes, node support poles, micro network nodes, distributed antenna system(s),
microwave communications or other wireless facilities, by whatever nomenclature, whether they are installed
pursuant to chapter 284 of the Local Government Code or installed pursuant to an agreement to use the right-ofway
or authorization or installed as may otherwise be allowed by State law.
(b) The Town enacts these design requirements and guidelines in order to meet its fiduciary duty to its
citizens, and to give assistance and guidance to network providers in the safe, aesthetically pleasing, efficient,
and timely installation of facilities.
Sec. 13.08.082 Prohibited or restricted areas for wireless facilities in the right-of-way
(a) Prohibited: Municipal parks and residential areas. A network provider may not install a new node support
pole in the following locations:
(1) In a municipal park; or
(2) In right-of-way that is adjacent to a street that is:
(A) Not more than fifty (50) feet wide at average width, measuring vehicular traveled portion
only as set out in the definition of “street” and the measurement does not include intersection
and refers only to the main traveled portion measured at mid-block or mid-point between
intersections; and
(B) Adjacent to developed or undeveloped single-family residential lots, other multifamily
residential area or land that is designated for residential use by zoning or deed restrictions.
(3) Construction in right-of-way adjacent to a school is prohibited, unless all contractors, subcontractors,
or other workers follow all statutory requirements in the Educational Code regarding
work on school grounds, including but not limited to chapters 21 and 22.
(b) Prohibited: Undergrounding district.
(1) Above ground structures shall not be installed in an underground district or underground
requirement area, except as provided herein.
(2) A network provider shall comply with nondiscriminatory undergrounding requirements,
including municipal ordinances, zoning regulations, State law, private deed restrictions, and other
public or private restrictions, that prohibit installing aboveground structures in a public right-of-way
without first obtaining the appropriate zoning, land use approval or other required approval.
(3) In addition to areas designated in this article, future areas may be designated from time to time
by the Town as underground required areas by any means, including but not limited to means such as
ordinances, resolutions, or filed plats. If an area is converted from an area that allows overhead lines
to one that prohibits overhead lines, all subsequent installations shall meet the requirements for an
underground district.
(4) If a location is designated by the Town to be underground required area, then a network
provider's permit for the location of the micro network node, network node, node support pole, and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 419/505
related ground equipment at such location will be automatically revoked, with removal of said the
micro network node, network node, node support pole, and related ground equipment at such location
within 90 days of such designation, or as otherwise allowed for the transition of other overhead
facilities.
(c) Restricted: Historic district and design districts.
(1) A network provider must obtain advance written approval from the Town before collocating
network nodes or installing node support poles in a design district with decorative poles or in an area
of the Town zoned or otherwise designated as a design district or historic district.
(2) Concealment required:
(A) As a condition for approval of network nodes or node support poles in design districts
with decorative poles or in a historic district, concealment measures are required for network
nodes or node support poles or related ground equipment or any portion of the nodes, poles, or
equipment.
(B) Said concealment measures shall minimize the impact to the aesthetics in a historic
district or design district.
(3) Network provider shall comply with and observe all applicable Town, State, and federal laws
and requirements, including historic preservation laws and requirements.
(d) Collocation will not be allowed on decorative poles in any area of the Town.
(e) Historic landmarks. Network provider is discouraged from installing a network node or node support pole
within 300 feet of a historic site or structure or historic landmark recognized by the Town, State or Federal
government (see, for example, and not limited to §442.001(3) of the Texas Government Code, and 16 U.S.C.
§470), as of the date of the submission of the permit.
(f) Designated areas.
(1) The Council may designate an area as a historic district, design district or underground district
at any time.
(2) Underground district. Any area that meets the definition of underground district or underground
requirement area may be designated as such an area. An area does not need to be designated by this
article to be considered to be within an underground district. Such designation does not require a
zoning case. Any area declared to be an underground district by Town Council or any area that meets
the definition of underground district or underground requirement area shall be subject to all
requirements and protections for an underground district.
(3) Design district. The Town Council may designate an area as a design district at any time. An
area does not need to be designated in this article to be considered to be within a design district. Such
a designation does not require a zoning case. Any area designated by Town Council as a design
district or any area that meets the definition of a design district shall be subject to all requirements
and protections for a design district.
(4) Historic district. The Town Council may designate an area as a historic district at any time. An
area does not need to be designated by this article to be considered to be within a historic district.
Such designation does not require a zoning case. Any area declared to be a historic district by Town
Council or any area that meets the definition of historic district shall be subject to all requirements
and protections for a historic district.
(g) Defense.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 420/505
(1) It shall be a defense to the above requirements prohibiting or restricting location of facilities in
a park, residential area, historic district, design district, underground district or collocating on a
decorative pole that the network provider obtained advance written approval or waiver of restrictions
from the Town before collocating new network nodes or installing new node support poles or ground
equipment in a prohibited or restricted location. In any prosecution herein for such prohibition or
violation of any restrictions, it shall be an affirmative defense to have an Agreement with the Town
that approved such location or waived the applicable restriction.
(2) If an agreement is granted to locate in a prohibited location, the network provider shall be
required, as a condition for approval of new network nodes or new node support poles in a prohibited
location, to install reasonable design or concealment measures for the new network nodes or new
node support poles. Therefore, any request for installations in a prohibited location, must be
accompanied with concealment measures in the permit applications.
(3) The Town requests that a network provider explore the feasibility of using certain camouflage
measures to improve the aesthetics of the network nodes, node support poles, or related ground
equipment, or any portion of the nodes, poles, or equipment, to minimize the impact to the aesthetics
in all locations of the Town.
(h) Private deed restrictions and property owners association rules. A network provider installing a network
node or node support pole in a public right-of-way described above shall comply with private deed restrictions
and other private restrictions in the area that apply to those facilities.
(i) Ground equipment.
(1) Ground equipment shall be minimal and the least intrusive at all sites.
(2) In order to maximize line of sight at street corners and intersections and minimize hazards at
those locations, ground equipment may not be installed within 250 feet of a street corner or street
intersection.
(3) Ground equipment may not be installed at street corners or intersections within a visibility
triangle.
(4) Ground equipment shall not be installed near a driveway.
(j) Each permit application shall designate if the requested area for installation is within one a residential area,
a municipal park, an underground district or underground requirement area or a historic district or a design
district.
Sec. 13.08.083 Preferred location
(a) The following locations, in the order listed, are the preferred locations for installation of poles or wireless
facilities:
(1) Industrial areas.
(2) Areas designated by the Town as a highway rights-of-way area, provided that such areas are not
adjacent to a municipal park, residential area, historic district, design district or any prohibited area
set out above.
(3) Retail and commercial areas, provided such areas are not in a prohibited location, such as an
underground district, design district or historic district.
(b) In the absence of State law or an agreement or municipal authorization providing otherwise, network
nodes shall be restricted to preferred locations set out in this section.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 421/505
Sec. 13.08.084 Order of preference regarding attachment to existing facilities
(a) The following shall be the order of preference for the attachment of network nodes to existing facilities,
beginning with most preferred location and ending with least preferred location. In addition to the preference set
out by the Town, existing facilities may be owned by third parties and may not be available for attachment of
facilities or may require authorization from other parties.
(b) Order of preference from most preferable to least preferable.
(1) Most preferable. Existing telephone or electrical lines between existing utility poles. micro
network nodes shall only be lashed on existing telephone or electrical lines between existing utility
poles (electric poles or telephones poles), with notice to the pole owner as required by the Federal
Pole Attachment Act, and not placed on utility poles, node support poles or service poles.
(2) Preferable. Existing utility poles (electric poles or telephones poles), shall be the preferred
support facility for network nodes and related ground equipment.
(3) Least preferable. Municipal service poles, which shall require an agreement with the Town.
Municipal service poles includes (in order of preference):
(A) Nondecorative streetlights.
(B) Traffic signal structures - Network nodes may only be attached to traffic signal structures
when such installation will not interfere with the integrity of the facility and will not interfere
with the safety of the public. Any installation of network node facilities on any traffic signal
structures shall:
(i) Be encased in a separate conduit than the traffic light electronics;
(ii) Have a separate electric power connection than the traffic signal structure;
(iii) Shall not puncture or drill into the structure; and
(iv) Have a separate access point than the traffic signal structure.
(C) Other municipal service pole use is discouraged.
(4) New node support poles shall also be least preferred. Collocation shall generally be preferred
over new poles. New poles shall not be installed in prohibited areas and shall only be allowed in
restricted areas to the extent all requirements are followed or a waiver is granted. Any new poles
shall be camouflaged to the extent allowed by law as set out in this article.
(c) Ground equipment should be minimal and the least intrusive.
(d) In the absence of State law or an agreement or municipal authorization providing otherwise, network
nodes, if allowed, shall be restricted to most preferable locations set out in this section and shall be prohibited in
the least preferable.
Sec. 13.08.085 Placement requirements
(a) A network provider shall construct and maintain network nodes and node support poles in a manner that
does not:
(1) Obstruct, impede, or hinder the usual travel or public safety on a public right-of-way;
(2) Obstruct the legal use of a public right-of-way by other utility providers;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 422/505
(3) Violate nondiscriminatory applicable codes;
(4) Violate or conflict with the municipality's publicly disclosed public right-of-way management
ordinance or this design manual.
(5) Violate the federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. section 12101 et seq.).
(b) Network node facilities shall be installed in accordance with section 13.08.089 and all other applicable
requirements of this article.
(c) Right-of-way.
(1) Network nodes installation shall follow all applicable requirements of this article, including
section 13.08.034.
(2) Network node facilities, node support poles and related ground equipment shall be placed, as
much as possible, within two (2) feet of the outer edge of the right-of-way line.
(3) Node support poles and related ground equipment shall not impede pedestrian or vehicular
traffic in the right-of-way.
(4) No protrusion from the outer circumference of the existing structure or pole shall be more than
two (2) feet.
(d) Parks. For the safety of park patrons, particularly small children, and to allow full line of sights near park
property, the network provider shall not install ground equipment in a right-of-way that is within a park or within
250 feet of the boundary line of a park. The network provider may request a waiver of the requirement that such
equipment not be within 250 feet of a park from the board of adjustment.
(e) There shall be no more than one (1) network node on any one pole.
Sec. 13.08.086 Camouflage required when possible
(a) Camouflage is required by the Town when wireless facilities are allowed, as set forth above, in design
districts with decorative poles or in historic districts.
(b) It is the Town's preference that all new node support poles be camouflaged, except those located in an area
zoned or predominantly industrial or in a designated highway district area.
(c) Companies shall submit their proposal for camouflage with the permit application.
Sec. 13.08.087 General requirements
(a) Confirmation of noninterference with Town safety communication networks.
(1) The network provider shall provide analysis that the proposed network node shall not cause any
interference with Town public safety radio system, traffic signal light system, or other Town safety
communications components.
(2) It shall be the ongoing responsibility of the network provider to evaluate, prior to making
application for permit and while network nodes remain in the right-of-way, the compatibility between
the existing Town infrastructure and provider's proposed network node. A network node shall not be
installed in a location that causes any interference and any network node that causes destructive
interference post-installation shall correct such interference or be removed and shall follow all federal
regulations regarding interference.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 423/505
(3) Network nodes shall not be allowed on Town's public safety radio infrastructure.
(b) Size limits.
(1) Network providers shall provide detailed drawings, with calculations to show strict conformity
to the size limitations as set forth in this article.
(2) To the extent authorization is provided by franchise or license, the franchise or license controls.
(3) To the extent authorization is provided by State law which sets out size limits, the size limits in
the State law control.
(4) If authorization is provided through a State law with no size limits, or other authorization with
no size limits, the size limits of this section shall control.
(5) Unless otherwise provided by State law or municipal authorization, license, franchise or
agreement, the following maximum size limits are applicable (required):
(A) Micro network node dimensions - Maximum length: 24 inches; maximum width 15
inches; maximum height 12 inches.
(B) Network node shall not exceed the size limits set out in chapter 284 of the Local
Government Code, without specific Town authorization, regardless of whether or not the
provider claims authority under chapter 284 or a different State statute.
(C) Pole height not higher than ten feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole within
500 linear feet of a new pole or fifty-five (55) feet, whichever is least.
(D) Ground equipment, separate from the pole, may not be higher than three feet six inches
(3'6") from grade, wider than three feet six inches (3'6").
(E) When not otherwise set out in this article or in a municipal authorization, the size limits
shall be less than or equal to the size limits set forth for structures or equipment in chapter 284
of the Local Government Code, where applicable.
(F) Size limits may be reduced when necessary for public health, safety or welfare.
(c) Size limits provided by State law are only applicable for so long as required by State law. If said State law
is found to be repealed, struck down, pre-empted or invalid, in whole or in part, the standards required by the
Town, either in the municipal authorization or an amendment to the municipal authorization or the directives of
the Town or this article, shall be required and such standards shall be subject to individualized review.
(d) Concealment. The network node facilities shall be concealed or enclosed as much as possible in an
equipment box, cabinet, or other unit that may include ventilation openings. External cables and wires hanging
off a pole shall be sheathed or enclosed in a conduit, so that wires are protected and not visible or visually
minimized to the extent possible.
(e) New node support pole spacing.
(1) New node support poles shall be at a minimum 300 feet from a utility pole or another node
support pole to minimize the hazard of poles adjacent to road ways and to minimize effect on
property values and aesthetics on the area, unless a lesser distance is approved by the Town
Administrator.
(2) New poles shall be placed a minimum of 5 feet from a street curb or travel lane and 18 inches
from a sidewalk to minimize the potential of being struck by a motor vehicle or bicycle.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 424/505
(3) New poles shall be placed on breakaway anchor bolt supports or bases to minimize the impact
severity to motor vehicles that strike the pole.
(f) Minimize ground equipment concentration. In order to minimize negative visual impact to the surrounding
area, the Town's designee may deny a request for a proposed location if the network provider installs network
node ground equipment where existing ground equipment already occupies a footprint of 25 sq. ft. or more.
(g) Allowed colors. Colors shall meet the requirements set out in section 13.08.034(a)(19).
(h) If any network node facilities, node support poles or ground equipment is installed in a location that is not
in accordance with the plans approved by the Town Administrator and impedes pedestrian or vehicular traffic or
does not comply or otherwise renders the right-of-way noncompliant with applicable laws, including the
American Disabilities Act, then network provider shall remove the network node facilities, node support poles or
ground equipment.
(i) Ground equipment.
(1) Ground equipment should be minimal and the least intrusive. To minimize any obstruction,
impediment, or hindrance to the usual travel or public safety on a public right-of-way the maximum
line of sight required to add to safe travel of vehicular and pedestrian traffic and in order to maximize
that line of sight at street corners and intersections and to minimize hazards at those locations, ground
equipment may not be installed within 250 feet of a street corner or a street intersection.
(2) Ground equipment near municipal parks. For the safety of municipal park patrons, particularly
children, and to allow full line of sights near municipal park property, the network provider shall not
install ground equipment in a right-of-way that is within a park or within 250 feet of the boundary
line of a park, unless approved by the Town Administrator in writing.
(3) To enhance the safety requirements of line of sight of pedestrians, particularly small children,
the Town's designee may deny a request for a proposed location if the network provider installs
network node ground equipment where existing ground equipment within 300 feet already occupies a
footprint of twenty-five (25) square feet or more.
(4) Ground equipment shall not be installed in such a manner as to interfere with a sight visibility
triangle.
(j) Municipal service poles.
(1) An agreement shall be required for all installations on municipal service poles and all such
installations shall be in accordance with the agreement.
(2) Installations on all service poles shall have an industry standard pole load analysis completed
and submitted to the municipality with each permit application indicating that the service pole to
which the network node is to be attached will safely support the load.
(3) Height of attachments:
(A) All attachments on all service poles shall be at least 8 feet above grade;
(B) If a network node attachment is projecting toward the street, for the safety and protection
of the public and vehicular traffic, the attachment shall be installed no less than sixteen (16) feet
above the ground; and
(C) Meet all applicable requirements of State law and this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 425/505
(4) Installations on all traffic signal structures must not interfere with the integrity of the facility in
any way that may compromise the safety of the public and must be in accordance with the agreement
with the Town. Installation of network node facilities on any traffic signal structures shall:
(A) Be encased in a separate conduit than the traffic light electronics;
(B) Have a separate electric power connection than the traffic signal structure;
(C) Have a separate access point than the traffic signal structure;
(D) Shall not puncture or drill into the structure;
(E) Shall not be installed on the mast arm; and
(F) Meet all other requirements of State law and this article.
(5) Installations on street signage: Installations on all street signage structures must not interfere
with the integrity of the facility in any way that may compromise the safety of the public and must be
in accordance with the agreement with the Town. Installation of network node facilities on any street
signage structures that has electrics shall:
(A) Be encased in a separate conduit than any Town signage electronics;
(B) Have a separate electric power connection than the signage structure;
(C) Have a separate access point than the signage structure;
(D) Meet all other requirements of State law and this article.
Sec. 13.08.088 Electrical supply
(a) Network provider shall be responsible for obtaining any required electrical power service to the micro
network node, network node facilities, node support poles and ground equipment. The Town shall not be liable
to the network provider for any stoppages or shortages of electrical power furnished to the micro network node,
network node facilities, node support poles or ground equipment, including without limitation, stoppages or
shortages caused by any act, omission, or requirement of the public utility serving the structure or the act or
omission of any other tenant or network provider of the structure, or for any other cause beyond the control of
the Town.
(b) Network provider shall not allow or install generators or back-up generators in the right-of-way.
Sec. 13.08.089 Installation and inspections
(a) Installation.
(1) Network provider shall, at its own cost and expense, install the micro network node, network
node facilities, node support poles and related ground equipment in a good and workmanlike manner
and in accordance with the requirements promulgated by the Town Administrator, as such may be
amended from time to time. Network provider's work shall be subject to the regulation, control and
direction of the Town Administrator.
(2) All work done in connection with the installation, operation, maintenance, repair, modification,
and/or replacement of the micro network node, network node facilities, node support poles and
related ground equipment shall be in compliance with any agreement with the Town as applicable
and all applicable laws, ordinances, codes, rules and regulations of the Town, County, State, and the
United States (“laws”).
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 426/505
(b) Standard pole load analysis on attachments to a service pole. All applications for permits to collocate
and/or attach to any service pole must have included in its permit application a completed industry standard
individual pole load analysis performed and sealed by an engineer licensed by the State that indicates that the
service pole to which the network node is to be attached will safely support the load. Such analysis shall also
address safety of pole and attachments in regard to wind loads, collision with motor vehicle.
(c) Inspections. The Town Administrator may perform visual inspections of any micro network node, network
node, node support pole or related ground equipment located in the right-of-way as the Town Administrator
deems appropriate without notice. If the inspection requires physical contact with the micro network node,
network node, node support poles or related ground equipment, the Town Administrator shall provide written
notice to the network provider within five (5) business days of the planned inspection. Network provider may
have a representative present during such inspection.
(d) No installations shall be placed on the mast arm of a traffic-control signal.
Sec. 13.08.090 Requirements in regard to removal, replacement, maintenance and repair
(a) Removal or relocation by network provider.
(1) If the network provider removes or relocates a micro network node, network node facilities,
node support pole or related ground equipment at its own discretion, it shall notify the Town
Administrator in writing not less than ten (10) business days prior to removal or relocation. Network
provider shall obtain all permits required for relocation or removal of its micro network node,
network node facilities, node support poles and related ground equipment prior to relocation or
removal.
(2) The Town shall not issue any refunds for any amounts paid by network provider for micro
network node, network node facilities, node support poles or related ground equipment that have
been removed.
(3) Any abandoned or obsolete micro network node, network node, node support pole or other
related equipment shall be removed in strict accordance with this article and all other applicable
ordinances and State law.
(4) Network provider shall remove micro network node, network node facilities, node support pole
or related ground equipment when such facilities are abandoned regardless of whether or not notice is
received from the Town. Such removal must occur within ninety (90) days from the date of
abandonment, unless additional time is allowed by the Town. The network provider shall provide
advance written notice of such removal which must be received by the Town at least two (2) working
days prior to the removal, except in case of emergency. Such notice shall specify the location and
description of each micro network node, network node facilities, node support pole or related ground
equipment to be removed.
(5) The Town Administrator may require the network provider to complete additional remedial
measures necessary for public safety and the integrity of any Town facilities and the right-of-way.
(b) Removal or relocation required for Town project.
(1) A network provider shall relocate or adjust micro network node, network node, node support
pole and related ground equipment in a public right-of-way in a timely manner in accordance with
section 13.08.036 and without cost to the municipality managing the public right-of-way.
(2) Pursuant to State law and as a condition for occupancy of the right-of-way, the network
provider may be required by the Town to remove or relocate any of its facilities, including but not
limited to, its micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment,
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 427/505
or any portion thereof from the right-of-way, and network provider shall, at the Town Administrator's
direction, remove or relocate the same at network provider's sole cost and expense, whenever the
Town Administrator reasonably determines that the relocation or removal is needed as set out in
section 13.08.036.
(3) If network provider fails to remove or relocate the micro network node, network node, node
support pole or related ground equipment, or portion thereof as requested by the Town Administrator
within 90 days of network provider's receipt of the request, then the Town shall be entitled to remove
the micro network node, network node, node support pole or related ground equipment, or portion
thereof at network provider's sole cost and expense, without further notice to network provider, and
network provider shall, within 30 days following issuance of invoice for the same, reimburse the
Town for its reasonable expenses incurred in the removal (including, without limitation, overhead
and storage expenses) of the micro network node, network node, node support pole or related ground
equipment, or portion thereof.
(c) Removal required by Town for safety or due to imminent danger; or for improper permitting or licensing.
(1) Network provider shall, at its sole cost and expense, promptly disconnect, remove, or relocate
the applicable micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment
within the time frame and in the manner required by the Town Administrator if the Town
Administrator reasonably determines that the disconnection, removal, or relocation of any part of a
micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment: (A) is
necessary to protect the public health, safety, welfare, or Town property, (B) the micro network node,
network node, node support pole and related ground equipment, or portion thereof, is adversely
affecting proper operation of streetlights or Town property, or (C) network provider fails to obtain all
applicable licenses, permits, and certifications required by law for its micro network node, network
node, node support pole and related ground equipment, or use of any location under applicable law. If
the Town Administrator reasonably determines that there is imminent danger to the public, then the
Town may immediately disconnect, remove, or relocate the applicable micro network node, network
node, node support pole and related ground equipment at the network provider's sole cost and
expense.
(2) The Town Administrator shall provide 90 days written notice to the network provider before
removing a micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment
under this section, unless there is imminent danger to the public health, safety, and welfare.
(3) Network provider shall reimburse Town for the Town's actual cost of removal of micro network
node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment within 30 days of receiving the
invoice from the Town.
(d) Restoration. Network provider shall repair any damage to the right-of-way, or any facilities located within
the right-of-way, and the property of any third party resulting from network provider's removal or relocation
activities (or any other of network provider's activities hereunder) within 10 calendar days following the date of
such removal or relocation, at network provider's sole cost and expense, including restoration of the right-of-way
and such property to substantially the same condition as it was immediately before the date network provider
was granted a permit for the applicable location or did the work at such location (even if network provider did
not first obtain a permit), including restoration or replacement of any damaged trees, shrubs or other vegetation.
Such repair, restoration and replacement shall be subject to the sole, reasonable approval of the Town
Administrator.
(e) Network provider responsible. Network provider shall be responsible and liable for the acts and omissions
of network provider's employees, temporary employees, officers, directors, consultants, agents, affiliates,
subsidiaries, sub-network provider's and subcontractors in connection with the installations of any micro
network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment, as if such acts or omissions were
network provider's acts or omissions.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 428/505
Sec. 13.08.091 Requirements upon abandonment
(a) Upon abandonment or upon being deemed abandoned, network provider has a duty to promptly remove its
facilities from the right-of-way. Notice from the Town is not a prerequisite to the requirement for removal.
(b) If the network provider does not promptly remove its facilities removal procedures as set out in section
13.08.042 may be followed.
Sec. 13.08.092 General provisions
(a) All requirements of this division, including division 2, shall be met as applicable.
(b) No Town allocation of funds for removal and storage. All costs of any removal or storage of micro
network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment, as authorized under this article,
shall be the responsibility of the network provider and the Town is not required to expend no funds to meet the
requirements of the network providers. Any funds expended by the Town due to an emergency or failure of a
person to abide by these requirements shall be reimbursed to the Town.
(c) Ownership. No part of a micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground
equipment erected or placed on the right-of-way by network provider will become, or be considered by the Town
as being affixed to or a part of, the right-of-way. All portions of the micro network node, network node, node
support pole and related ground equipment constructed, modified, erected, or placed by network provider on the
right-of-way will be and remain the property of network provider and may be removed by network provider at
any time, provided the network provider shall notify the Town administrator prior to any work in the right-ofway.
(d) Size limits.
(1) Network providers shall provide detailed drawings, with calculations to show strict conformity
to the size limitations as set forth in this article or State law with each application, notice of work to
be performed or request for a permit for each location; provided, however, where possible providers
are encouraged to reduce the size of installed facilities.
(2) The size limits in this article are only applicable for so long as required by State law. If chapter
284 of the Local Government Code is found to be repealed, struck down, pre-empted or invalid, in
whole or in part, the standards required by the Town, either in the municipal authorization or an
amendment to the municipal authorization or the directives of the Town or this article then such
standards shall be subject to individualized review.
Sec. 13.08.093 Insurance, indemnity, bonding and security deposits
Insurance, indemnity, bonding and security deposits shall be in strict accordance with the Town's rights-of-way
management ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with State law.
Sec. 13.08.094 Design manual - updates
Placement or modification of micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground
equipment shall comply with the Town's design manual at the time the permit for installation or modification,
and as said design manual may be approved or amended from time to time.
Secs. 13.08.095–13.08.120 Reserved
Division 4. Right-of-Way Construction for Utility Connections
Sec. 13.08.121 Purpose
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 429/505
This article is enacted in order to provide clear guidance to abutting landowners, residents, or businesses and
their contractors in regard to individual utility connections, driveway constructions and related right-of-way
construction that presents a lesser burden on the right-of-way than utility construction.
Sec. 13.08.122 Permit required; compliance
(a) Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person or any of their agents, contractor, servants or
employees to cut, remove, alter, construct, reconstruct or repair any street, alley, sidewalk, curb, gutter or
driveway approach in the Town without having first obtained a permit from the Town as herein required or
without complying with the provisions of this article.
(b) Compliance with additional sections of right-of-way management article. If it is determined by the Town
that the proposed scope of work does not fit within the provisions of this article or that it is necessary for the
contractor or person performing the work to follow the requirements of other sections of this article, the person
performing the work will comply with all such requirements.
(c) Application; permittee's assumption of responsibility for work.
(1) By accepting an excavation permit, the permittee assumes complete responsibility for all
phases of the excavation and thereby accepts responsibility for removal and replacement of
unsatisfactory work.
(2) Any application for a permit shall be made at the Town on forms furnished by the Town. The
application for the permit must be made at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to beginning any work
pursuant thereto, except in the case of an emergency as described in section 13.08.132 of this article,
and the applicant shall furnish prior to issuance the following:
(A) Surety bond as described in this section;
(B) Certificate of insurance as described in this section;
(C) Certificate of worker's compensation as required by State law;
(D) Evidence that a paving bond has been issued by the Town to the contractor responsible
for replacing the pavement removed during the course of excavation;
(E) A plan of the proposed work. When requested, the application shall be accompanied by
plans showing the extent of the proposed excavation work, the dimensions and elevations of
both the existing ground prior to said excavation and of the proposed excavated surfaces, the
location of the excavation work, and such other information as may be prescribed by the Town.
(d) Surety bond.
(1) Before an excavation permit is issued by the Town, the applicant shall deposit with the Town a
surety bond in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) payable to the Town and executed on
the forms provided by the Town.
(2) The required surety bond must be:
(A) With a good and sufficient surety;
(B) By a surety company authorized to transact business in the State;
(C) Conditioned upon the permittee's compliance with this article and to secure and hold the
Town and officials harmless against any and all claims, judgments or other costs arising from
the excavation or any work covered by the excavation permit or for which the Town, the Town
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 430/505
Council or any other Town officer may be made liable by reason of any accident or injury to
persons or property through the fault of the permittee, either in not properly guarding the
excavation or for any other injury resulting from negligence of the permittee; further, that the
permittee assures the Town that the excavation shall be filled, restored and placed in a good and
safe condition, as near as possible to its original condition and to the satisfaction of the Town,
and to maintain the property where excavation is made in as good condition for a period of two
(2) years after said excavation work shall have been completed and accepted by the Town, usual
wear and tear excepted.
(2) Recovery on such bond for any injury or accident shall not exhaust the bond, but it shall in its
entirety cover any and all future accidents or injuries during the term for which it is given. In the
event of any suit or claim against the Town by reason of negligence or default of the permittee, upon
the Town's giving written notice to the permittee and surety of such suit or claim, any final judgment
against the Town requiring it to pay for such damage, including its legal fees and court costs, shall be
conclusive upon the permittee and his surety.
(e) Insurance. The permittee, prior to the issuance of the excavation permit, shall furnish to the Town
satisfactory evidence in writing that the permittee has in force and will maintain in force during the performance
of the excavation work and the period of the excavation permit public liability insurance of not less than one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for any one (1) person and three hundred thousand dollars
($300,000.00) for any one (1) accident and property damage insurance of not less than fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00), duly issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the State. However, if the
Building Inspector determines that the cost of the excavation to be performed by the permittee exceeds fifty
thousand dollars ($50,000.00), then the Town, at its discretion, may require the permittee to maintain in force
during the performance of the excavation work and the period of the excavation permit public insurance not less
than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for any one (1) person and three hundred thousand dollars
($300,000.00) for any one (1) accident and property damage insurance not less than five hundred thousand
dollars ($500,000.00), duly executed by an insurance company authorized to do business in the State.
(f) Fee. The fee for the permit described in this section shall be the amount shown on the Town's current
master fee resolution for each pavement cut, excavation, bore or embankment. Public utility companies which
have a franchise with the Town to utilize streets, alleys and easements of the Town shall be exempt from the
requirement to pay a fee.
(g) Revocation.
(1) In addition to the penalty provisions of section 1.01.009 of the Town Code, the Town, in its
discretion, may revoke the permit issued hereunder upon the following grounds:
(A) Failure of the permittee to diligently do work permitted after beginning the excavation;
(B) Violation of any terms or provisions of this article;
(C) Giving false information upon the application;
(D) Changing of persons responsible for the paving repair without first notifying the Town
Administrator and obtaining the necessary approval.
(3) Whenever the permittee has failed to comply with provisions of this article, the permittee shall
be notified in writing of such violations. In the event such violations are not corrected upon written
notice to the permittee and surety, the Town Administrator may revoke the excavation permit without
further notice.
(h) Expiration. A permit shall expire for work not started within thirty (30) days or completed within sixty
(60) days after issuance, and a new permit shall be required before beginning or completing the work. The
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 431/505
request for an extension of a permit shall be made in writing to the Town Administrator.
Sec. 13.08.123 Traffic-control plan; excavations; restoration of property
All work requiring pavement excavations, closure of a traffic lane, or routing of traffic shall follow all
requirements of division 3 in regard to such work.
Sec. 13.08.124 Protection of utilities
(a) Prior to beginning excavation, the permittee shall notify all affected utility companies and have all
underground utilities located. The permittee shall not interfere with any existing utility without the written
consent of the utility company or the person owning the utility. If it becomes necessary to remove an existing
utility, this shall be done by its owner. No utility owned by the Town shall be moved to accommodate the
permittee unless the cost of such work be borne by the permittee. The cost of moving privately owned utilities
shall be similarly borne by the permittee unless other arrangements are made with the utility company.
(b) The permittee shall support and protect all water mains and lines, sewer mains and connections, gas mains
and services, electric conduit or other utilities which may be in any way affected by the excavation work and do
everything necessary to support, sustain and protect them during said work. Should any of said water mains and
lines, sewer mains and connections, gas mains and services, electric conduit or other utilities be damaged, they
shall be repaired by the agency or person owning them, and the expense of such repairs shall be charged to the
permittee, and his or its bond shall be liable therefor. The permittee shall inform itself as to the existence and
location of all underground utilities and protect the same against damage.
Sec. 13.08.125 Protection of adjoining property
(a) The permittee shall at all times and at permittee's own expense, preserve and protect from injury any
adjoining property by providing proper foundations and taking other measures suitable for the purpose. The
permittee shall, at permittee's own expense, shore up and protect all buildings, walls, fences or other property
likely to be damaged during the progress of the excavation work and shall be responsible for all damage to
public or private property resulting from its failure to properly protect and carry out said work.
(b) The permittee shall not remove, even temporarily, any trees or shrubs which exist on public property
without having first notified and obtained the consent of the Town Administrator. Whenever it may be necessary
for the permittee to trench through any park area, the sod shall be carefully cut and rolled and replaced with live
sod after ditches have been backfilled as required in this article.
Sec. 13.08.126 Prompt completion of work
(a) The permittee shall prosecute with diligence and expedition all excavation and paving replacement as is
consistent with high-quality workmanship and materials. Use of water pumps, high-strength concrete and similar
techniques is permitted, insofar as possible without sacrifice to the quality of the work. Completion of the job,
including replacement of the pavement and cleanup, shall be accomplished within five (5) working days after the
right-of-way becomes impassable.
(b) Permittee may only work on Saturday if specifically permitted to do so. For every Saturday on which the
contractor chooses to work, one (1) day will be charged to the time permitted by this article. Nothing in this
article shall be construed as prohibiting the contractor from working on Saturdays if he so desires. Extensions of
time to complete shall only be with the approval of the Town.
Sec. 13.08.127 Construction requirements
The permittee shall protect the street, alley surface or easement, drainage facilities, adjacent property and all
existing improvements from excavated materials, equipment operations and other construction operations.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 432/505
Adequate provisions must be made to minimize inconvenience for traffic and to adjacent property owners. The
following construction requirements shall be met by the permittee:
(1) Limits of work. Property and easement lines shall be indicated on the plan of excavation
submitted to the Town with the application for the excavation permit, and it shall be the permittee's
responsibility to confine excavation work within these limits and, if necessary, secure written
authorization from adjacent property owners to utilize their property.
(2) Protection of watercourses. The permittee shall provide for the flow of all watercourses, sewers
or drains intercepted during the excavation work and shall replace the same in as good condition as it
found them or shall make such provisions for them as the Town may direct. The permittee shall not
obstruct the gutter of any street but shall use all proper measures to provide for the free passage of
surface water. The permittee shall make provision to remove all surplus water, muck, silt, slickings or
other runoff pumped from excavations or resulting from sluicing or other operations and shall be
responsible for any damage resulting from its failure to so provide.
(3) Inspection of work. All work shall be subject to inspection by the Town. The Town shall be
notified by the permittee before starting work, before starting backfill, prior to pouring concrete and
upon completion of work. The permittee shall not proceed with any further work in each instance
without authorization by the Town Administrator.
(4) Noise, dust and debris. The permittee shall conduct and carry out the excavation work in such a
manner as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to the Town and occupants of
neighboring property. The permittee shall take appropriate measures to reduce, to the fullest extent
practicable in the performance of the excavation work, noise, dust and unsightly debris. During the
hours between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and all day on Sundays and holidays, the permittee shall not
use, except with the express written permission of the Town or in case of an emergency as defined in
section 13.08.132 any tool, appliance or equipment producing noise of sufficient volume to disturb
the sleep or repose of occupants of the neighboring property.
(5) Preservation of monuments. The permittee shall not disturb any surface monuments or hubs
found on the line of excavation work until approved to do so by the Town.
(6) Maintenance of drawings of underground structures. Users of all subsurface street, alley and
easement space in the Town shall maintain accurate drawings and plans showing the location and
character of all underground structures. Copies of such plans shall be furnished to the Town as each
revision is made.
(7) Breaking through pavement. Steel reinforcement bars shall be preserved. Existing concrete
base shall be removed and replaced a minimum of one (1) foot beyond the trench width. The removal
and replacement of portions of existing concrete pavement shall require breakout grooves to be
sawed by the use of an appropriate power-driven concrete saw, subject to the approval of the Town.
Where designated locations of breakout fall within (3) feet of tool joints, construction joints or
expansion joints, breakout shall be to the existing joint. The grooves shall be cut perpendicular to the
surface and shall be sawed to a minimum depth of one and one-half (1-1/2) inches. The concrete shall
be sawn down to and around the existing reinforcing bars; the bars shall be bent clear of the
excavation but not removed from the concrete.
(8) Jacking, boring or tunneling. Where encasement or carrier pipe is required to be installed under
public property by jacking, boring or tunneling methods, the applicant must submit detailed plans for
prior approval by the Town. Except for public utilities, the plans must be designed by and display the
seal of a professional engineer registered in the State.
(9) Minimum size of cut. On concrete pavement, no horizontal dimension of any cut made for the
purpose of installing water or sewer services shall be less than three (3) feet.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 433/505
(10) Cleanup. As the work progresses, all streets and alleys shall be thoroughly cleaned of all
rubbish, excess dirt, mud and other debris. If necessary, the Town may require cleanup to be done by
the permittee on a daily basis. All cleanup operations shall be at the expense of the permittee.
(11) Care of excavated material. All material excavated or other materials stored next to trenches
and piled adjacent to the trench or in any street shall be piled and maintained in such a manner as not
to endanger those working in the trench, pedestrians or users of the streets, and so that as little
inconvenience as possible is caused to those using streets, alleys, easements and adjoining property.
Where the confines of the area being excavated are too narrow to permit the piling of excavated
material beside the trench, or other circumstances should deem it necessary, the Town Administrator
shall have the authority to require that the permittee haul the excavated material to a storage site and
then rehaul it to the trench site at the time of backfilling. It shall be the permittee's responsibility to
secure the necessary permission and make all necessary arrangements for all required storage and
disposal sites within the Town.
(12) Utility connections. When the excavation is made by the permittee for the purpose of
connecting private sewer or water lines to the Town mains, it shall be the responsibility of the
permittee to prepare the trench and expose the main to the satisfaction of the Town. The request for
an inspection shall be made for a time that the permittee or his authorized agent will be on the jobsite.
Upon approval by the Town, the Town will normally make the connection within twenty-four (24)
hours, excluding weekends, holidays and emergency repairs. Backfilling and concrete replacement
shall be the responsibility of the permittee.
(13) Repairs. Repairs are to be made as rapidly as is consistent with high-quality workmanship and
materials. Use of high-strength concrete and similar techniques is encouraged, insofar as possible
without sacrifice of the quality of repair. All concrete replacement procedures, including, but not
limited to, backfilling, compaction, reinforcement, inspections and concrete placement, are the
responsibility of the bonded concrete contractor.
(14) Trench safety. Any excavation which will exceed a depth of five (5) feet shall meet all current
OSHA safety standards and any applicable Town ordinances.
(15) Backfilling. Backfill will be in accordance with the permit requirements and Town standards.
(16) Replacement of pavement. The existing pavement shall be sawed in accordance with
subsection (7) herein and removed to a line at least twelve (12) inches back from the firm banks of
the trench. The backfill shall be brought up to the elevation of the existing subgrade and satisfactorily
densified in accordance with subsection (15) herein. Reinforcement shall be no. 3 steel bars on
twelve-inch centers, both directions. New reinforcement shall be tied to existing steel exposed during
removal or shall be dowelled eight (8) inches into the existing concrete base. Reinforcing bars shall
be lapped eighteen (18) inches on splices. The concrete pavement shall be replaced with 3500 psi
concrete of not less than five (5) sacks of cement per cubic yard and match the finish and thickness of
the existing pavement but not less than six (6) inches thick. Concrete shall be brush finished. The
Town shall have the right to require testing to determine concrete strength, and such testing shall be
at the expense of the bonded concrete contractor.
(17) Concrete base. The existing pavement shall be removed and compacted in accordance with
the above specifications, and the concrete base shall be replaced in accordance with above
specifications to a line one and one-half (1-1/2) inches below the asphaltic concrete surface of the
street. Concrete shall cure for a minimum of four (4) days before placing asphalt.
(18) Asphalt. Surface pavement shall consist of type D hot-mix asphaltic concrete unless otherwise
specified by the Town. Asphalt shall be placed at a minimum temperature of two hundred fifty (250)
degrees and shall be immediately compacted and rolled to obtain maximum density. The roller shall
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 434/505
be a self-propelled, flat-wheel roller and shall produce a uniform surface with no deviation in excess
of one quarter (1/4) inch per foot, as measured with a straight edge.
Sec. 13.08.128 Final cleanup
Immediately upon completion of the work authorized, the permittee shall remove from the work area all unused
material, dirt, rock, debris and loose concrete. The entire work area shall be thoroughly washed down, broom
cleaned and usable. Upon failure to do so within twenty-four (24) hours after having been notified by the Town,
said work may be done by the Town and the cost thereof charged to the permittee, and the permittee shall also be
liable for the cost thereof under the surety bond provided hereunder. Excavations in easements will be graded to
provide for drainage.
Sec. 13.08.129 Town's right to restore surface
If the permittee fails to restore all surfaces to their original and proper condition upon the expiration of the time
fixed by such permit or shall otherwise have failed to complete the excavation work covered by such permit, the
Town reserves the right to do all work necessary to restore surfaces and to complete the excavation work. The
permittee shall be liable for the actual cost thereof plus fifteen (15) percent of such cost for general overhead and
administrative expenses. The Town shall have a cause of action against the permittee for all fees, expenses and
amounts paid out and due it for such work. The Town shall also enforce its rights under the permittee's surety
bond provided pursuant to this article.
Sec. 13.08.130 Applicability to work by Town, Town contractors and utility companies
The provisions of this article shall not be applicable to excavation work performed by the Town and its
employees. Any contractor of the Town, performing work for or in behalf of the Town necessitating openings or
excavations on public property, shall comply with this article unless the Town, in writing, waives compliance
with the requirements of this article upon terms and conditions it deem necessary.
Sec. 13.08.131 Unlawfully damaging utility lines
It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, deface, or destroy unlawfully, willfully or maliciously any pipes,
cables or lines belonging to the Town or public utilities, including, but not limited to, water, sewer, gas, electric,
telephone and cable television.
Sec. 13.08.132 Emergency work
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent emergency excavation on public property when the same is
necessary for the preservation of life or property. However, no emergency repair shall be done without
immediately notifying the Town Administrator. If such emergency occurs at night, or on weekends or holidays,
such notification shall be directed to the Town Department of Public Safety before work is done. Thereafter, it
shall be necessary to obtain a permit from the Town Administrator on the earliest working day immediately
following such emergency.
Secs. 13.08.133–13.08.160 Reserved
Division 5. Exemption Process
Sec. 13.08.161 Administrative hearing - request for exemption
(a) Should any person utilizing or proposing to utilize the right-of-way desire to request an exemption from a
specific standard set forth in this article, and section 13.08.050 is not applicable, the person may request an
administrative hearing before a Board of Appeals. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act as the Board of
Appeals for a request for exemption under this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 435/505
(b) Any person requesting an exemption from any of the requirements shall file such a request with the Town
Administrator within fifteen (15) calendar days from the time that need for an exemption arose. If an exemption
is requested prior to construction, the request should be submitted prior to filing for a permit.
(c) An exemption shall only be granted if:
(1) Such exemption is not contrary to the public interest;
(2) Such exemption will not increase the burden on the right-of-way or other right-of-way users;
(3) Such exemption shall not increase the right-of-way management or administrative duties for
Town staff;
(4) The exemption shall fit within the spirit of this article; and
(5) The application of this article in the particular circumstances would create an unnecessary
hardship.
(d) It shall take an affirmative vote of four (4) members of the Board to grant the exemption.
(Ordinance 2025 adopted 8/28/17)
CHAPTER 14
ZONING
ARTICLE 14.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 14.01.001 Fee for application to zone or rezone property
Any person desiring to have any lot, lots, tract or tracts of land zoned, rezoned or reclassified under the zoning
ordinance of the Town, shall, concurrently with the filing of written application therefor and as a condition
precedent to the hearing of such application, pay to the Town Secretary a fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00).
(1971 Code, sec. 5-4)
Sec. 14.01.002 Fee for appeals under building code and zoning ordinance
Any person desiring to appeal to the Board of Adjustment action of the Building Inspector in refusing to grant a
permit or refusing to act in any manner for which an appeal may be taken to the Board of Adjustment under the
provisions of section 17 of the zoning ordinance of the Town shall, as a condition precedent to such appeal and
in addition to filing a written request, pay to the Town Secretary a fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00). (1971
Code, sec. 5-3)
ARTICLE 14.02 ZONING ORDINANCE
Sec. 14.02.001 Adopted
The comprehensive zoning ordinance, Ordinance 676, adopted by the Town on November 3, 1965, as amended,
is included at the end of this chapter as exhibit A. Due to the nature of the zoning ordinance and the
technicalities involved in adopting or amending it, such ordinance is printed herein as it appeared in appendix A
to the 1971 Code of Ordinances, with only nonsubstantive formatting and style changes. Punctuation and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 436/505
numbering of articles, sections and subsections have been retained as printed in appendix A to the 1971 code. At
the request of the Town, capitalization has been changed so that titles of officers, commissions, departments,
etc., are consistent with the remainder of the code. Except for that change, capitalization as it appeared in
appendix A to the 1971 code has been retained. Subsequent amendments will be inserted in their proper place
and denoted by a history note following the amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates the
material is unchanged from the original. Obviously misspelled words have been corrected without notation. Any
other material added for purposes of clarification is enclosed in brackets.
EXHIBIT A
ZONING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 676
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND ORDINANCE NO. 293, KNOWN AS THE ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE
TOWN OF HIGHLAND PARK, TEXAS, PASSED BY THE TOWN COUNCIL ON THE 3RD DAY OF JULY,
1929, ENTITLED: “AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF HIGHLAND PARK, TEXAS, ESTABLISHING A
ZONE PLAN DIVIDING THE TOWN OF HIGHLAND PARK INTO DISTRICTS FOR THE PURPOSE OF
REGULATING THE LOCATION OF TRADES, AND OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES, DESIGNS FOR
DWELLINGS, APARTMENT HOUSES, AND OTHER SPECIFIED PURPOSES; REGULATING THE
HEIGHT AND BULK OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES AND THE ALIGNMENT THEREOF ON
STREET FRONTAGES; REGULATING THE AREAS AND DIMENSIONS OF YARDS, COURTS AND
OPEN SPACES SURROUNDING BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES; CREATING A BOARD OF
ADJUSTMENT TO HEAR APPEALS ON ADMINISTRATION OF THE ORDINANCES, AND
PRESCRIBING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION OF THE ORDINANCE”, AS AMENDED BY
ORDINANCE NO. 377, ADOPTED THE 5TH DAY OF OCTOBER, 1936; ORDINANCE NO. 463,
ADOPTED THE 6TH DAY OF AUGUST, 1945; ORDINANCE NO. 558, ADOPTED THE 10TH DAY OF
JANUARY, 1955; ORDINANCE NO. 560, ADOPTED THE 9TH DAY OF MAY, 1955; ORDINANCE NO.
570, ADOPTED THE 7TH DAY OF MAY, 1956; ORDINANCE NO. 578, ADOPTED THE 3RD DAY OF
DECEMBER, 1956; ORDINANCE No. 594, ADOPTED THE 8TH DAY OF JULY, 1958; AND ORDINANCE
NO. 595, ADOPTED THE 8TH DAY OF JULY, 1958; ADOPTING A ZONING DISTRICT MAP, AND
ZONING STANDARDS; AND PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION; AND DECLARING AN
EMERGENCY.
WHEREAS, the Town of Highland Park is a mature and completely developed residential community consisting
primarily of single-family residences, and
WHEREAS, the Town Council of Highland Park determined that the Zoning Ordinance as enacted on the 3rd
day of July, 1929, with all amendments thereto, no longer afforded full protection to properties as developed and
did not fully encourage the most appropriate use of the land.
WHEREAS, the Town Council did, by resolution passed on January 14, 1965, provide the Town Zoning
Commission with technical assistance and directed that a study of the needed zoning revisions be made.
WHEREAS, the Town Zoning Commission did, after eight months of study, recommend to the Town Council
the revisions recommended in the Zoning Ordinance and requested that a date for a public hearing be set.
WHEREAS, the Town Council and Town Zoning Commission did, on the 4th day of October, 1965, conduct a
joint public hearing, after giving due notice to all owners of real property in writing, and at which all property
owners and interested persons desiring to be heard concerning any provision of the proposed Ordinance
revisions were afforded an opportunity to be heard, and
WHEREAS, the Town Zoning Commission after the conclusion of the hearing considered each and all requests
and comments and did, on the 14th day of October, 1965, make a final report to the Town Council
recommending that the Zoning Ordinance and Zoning District Map in the revised form be adopted.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 437/505
WHEREAS, the Town Council after considering the final report of the Town Zoning Commission was of the
opinion that the Zoning Ordinance and the Zoning District Map in its revised form should be adopted.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE TOWN COUNCIL OF THE TOWN OF HIGHLAND
PARK, DALLAS COUNTY, TEXAS:
This Ordinance shall be known as and referred to as the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Highland Park, Texas.
SECTION 1. ENACTING CLAUSE
1-100 That Ordinance Number 293, known as the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Highland Park, Texas,
passed by the Town Council on the 3rd day of July, 1929, together with all amendments thereto, is hereby
amended in its entirety to read as follows:
SECTION 2. PURPOSE
2-100 The Zoning Regulations and Districts as herein established have been made in accordance with a
Comprehensive Plan for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the Town.
They have been designed to lessen the congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic and other
dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land, to avoid undue concentration of
population; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other
public requirements. They have been made with reasonable consideration, among other things for the character
of the district, and its peculiar suitability for the particular uses specified; and with a view to conserving the
value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the Town consistent with a
Comprehensive Plan.
SECTION 3. ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED
3-100 THE TOWN OF HIGHLAND PARK, TEXAS, IS HEREBY DIVIDED INTO ELEVEN (11) ZONING
DISTRICTS. THE USE, HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS AS SET OUT HEREIN ARE UNIFORM IN
EACH DISTRICT. THE ELEVEN (11) DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED HEREIN SHALL BE KNOWN AS:
Abbreviated Designation Zoning District Name
A One-Family Residence District
B One-Family Residence District
C One-Family Residence District
D One-Family Residence District
E One-Family Residence District
F Two-Family Residence District
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 438/505
G Multifamily Residence District
H Multifamily Residence District
CS Community Service District
CC Country Club-Golf Course District
FH Flood Hazard District
GR General Retail District
PD Planned Development District
(Ordinance 847, sec. 1, adopted 3/1/76; Ordinance 972, sec. 1, adopted 12/28/81)
SECTION 4. ZONING DISTRICT MAP
4-100 THE BOUNDARIES OF THE ZONING DISTRICTS SET OUT HEREIN ARE DELINEATED UPON
THE ZONING DISTRICT MAP OF THE TOWN OF HIGHLAND PARK, SAID MAP BEING A PART OF
THIS ORDINANCE AS FULLY AS IF THE SAME WERE SET FORTH HEREIN IN DETAIL.
4-101 Two (2) original, official and identical copies of the Zoning District Map, as adopted on 3rd day of
November, 1965, and bearing the signature of the Mayor and the attestation of the Town Secretary, shall be filed
and maintained as follows:
a. One copy shall be filed with the Town Secretary and retained as the original record and shall not
be changed in any manner.
b. One copy shall be filed with the Building Inspector and shall be maintained up to date by
posting thereon all changes and subsequent amendments for observation in issuing Building Permits,
Certificates of Compliance and Occupancy and enforcing the Zoning Ordinance.
c. Reproductions for information purposes may from time to time be made of the official Zoning
District Maps.
SECTION 5. ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
5-100 THE DISTRICT BOUNDARY LINES SHOWN ON THE ZONING DISTRICT MAPS ARE USUALLY
ALONG STREETS, ALLEYS, PROPERTY LINES OR EXTENSIONS THEREOF. WHERE UNCERTAINTY
EXISTS AS TO THE BOUNDARIES OF DISTRICTS AS SHOWN ON THE OFFICIAL ZONING MAPS,
THE FOLLOWING RULES SHALL APPLY.
5-101 Boundaries indicated as approximately following the right-of-way lines of streets, highways or alleys shall
be construed to follow such lines.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 439/505
5-102 Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot
lines.
5-103 Boundaries indicated as approximately following Town limits shall be construed as following Town
limits.
5-104 Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in 5-101 through 5-103 above shall
be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the Zoning District Map shall be determined by use of
the scale on the map.
5-105 Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action of the Town Council or
whenever such area is franchised for building purposes, the zoning district line adjoining each side of such
street, alley or other public way shall be automatically extended to the centerline of such vacated street, alley or
way and all areas so involved shall then and henceforth be subject to all regulations of the extended districts.
5-106 Where physical features on the ground are at variance with information shown on the Official Zoning
District Map or when there arises a question as to how or whether a parcel of property is zoned and such
question cannot be resolved by the application of subsections 5-101 through 5-105, the property shall be
considered as Classified A, One-Family Dwelling District temporarily and the determination of permanent
zoning shall be in accordance with the procedure herein established for amending this ordinance.
SECTION 6. COMPLIANCE REQUIRED
6-100 ALL LAND, BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES OR APPURTENANCES THEREON LOCATED WITHIN
THE TOWN OF HIGHLAND PARK, TEXAS, WHICH ARE HEREAFTER OCCUPIED, USED, ERECTED,
ALTERED OR CONVERTED SHALL BE USED, PLACED AND ERECTED IN CONFORMANCE WITH
THE ZONING REGULATIONS PRESCRIBED FOR THE ZONING DISTRICT IN WHICH SUCH LAND OR
BUILDING IS LOCATED.
SECTION 7. USE OF LAND AND BUILDINGS
7-100 LAND AND BUILDINGS IN EACH OF THE FOLLOWING CLASSIFIED DISTRICTS MAY BE
USED FOR ANY OF THE FOLLOWING LISTED USES BUT NO LAND SHALL HEREAFTER BE USED,
AND NO BUILDING OR STRUCTURE SHALL HEREAFTER BE ERECTED, ALTERED OR
CONVERTED WHICH IS ARRANGED OR DESIGNED OR USED FOR OTHER THAN THOSE USES
SPECIFIED FOR THE DISTRICT IN WHICH IT IS LOCATED AS SET FORTH BY THE FOLLOWING
SCHEDULE:
7-101 The following symbols are applicable to the interpretation of the SCHEDULE OF USES, 7-102 through
7-107.
LEGEND
X
Designates use permitted in district indicated.
Designates use prohibited in district indicated.
S
Indicates use may be approved as Specific Use Permit (See Section 11)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 440/505
Note: Symbols applicable to following Use Schedule Charts 7-102 through 7-107.
7-102 PRIMARY RESIDENTIAL USES
TYPE USE DISTRICTS
A B C D E F G H CC CS GR PD
One-Family Residence
(Detached)
(2) X X X X X X X X
X X X
One-Family Residence
(Attached), Townhouse
(1)
X X
X X X
Two-Family Residence
Duplex
X X X
X X X
Multiple-Family
Residence Apartment
Building
X X
X X X
Community Unit
Development
(3)
S S S S S S
S S S
7-103 SPECIAL AND ACCESSORY USES
TYPE USE DISTRICTS
A B C D E F G H CC CS GR PD
Accessory Building (4) X X X X X X X X X X X X
Accessory Food Service
S X S S S
Church and Rectory (6) X X X X X X X X
X X X
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 441/505
Country Club with Golf
Course
(7) X X X
Home Occupation (8) X X X X X X X X
X X X
Off-Street Parking
Incidental to Main Use
(9) X X X X X X X X X X X X
Park, Playground or
Community Center
(Public)
(10) X X X X X X X X
X X X
School, Public (11)
X
Servants or Caretakers
Quarters
(12) X X X X X X X X X X X X
Swimming Pool (Private) (13) X X X X X X X X X X X X
Tennis Court (Private) (13a) X X X X X
X
S
Tennis Court (Lighting)
S
S
Multi-purpose Game
Court
(no lighting)
(13b) X X X X X X X X X X X X
Multi-purpose Game
Court (lighting)
(13a)
[(13c)]
S S S S S S S S S S S S
7-104 UTILITY AND SERVICE USES
TYPE USE DISTRICTS
A B C D E F G H CC CS GR PD
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 442/505
Electrical Substation S S S S S S S S X X X
Electrical Transmission
Line
X X X X X X X X
X X X
Fire Station
X X X X X X
X X X
Local Utility Distribution
Lines
(14) X X X X X X X X
X X X
Telephone Lines and
Telephone Exchange
(15) X X X X X X X X
X X X
Water Reservoir, Well or
Pumping Station
X X X X X X X
X X X
Town Hall or Municipal
Building or Service Center
(16) S S S S S S S S
X X X
Public or Private Utility
(Not Listed)
(17) S S S S S S S S
S S S
7-105 AUTOMOBILE RELATED USES
TYPE USE DISTRICTS
A B C D E F G H CC CS GR PD
Auto Sales or Repair
Garage
(18)
X
Gasoline Service Station (19)
X X X
Parking Lot or Area
Related to Adjacent
Business
S S S S
X X X
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 443/505
7-106 RETAIL AND SERVICE TYPE USES
TYPE USE DISTRICTS
A B C D E F G H CC CS GR PD
Bank or Savings and Loan
Office
X X X
Bakery or Candy Shop
(Retail)
(20)
X X X
Barber or Beauty Shop
X X X
Cafeteria or Restaurant
without Drive-In Service
(21)
X X X
Custom Personal Service
Establishment
(22)
X X X
Florist, Garden Shop,
Greenhouse or Plant Sales
in Building
(23)
X X X
Household Appliance,
Service or Repair Shop
(24)
X X X
Offices, Professional and
General Administrative
X X X
Retail Stores and Shops (25)
X X X
Studio for Photographer,
Musician, Artist or
Decorator
X X X
Studio for Radio or
X X
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 444/505
Television
Theater (25a)
S S S
7-107 RESERVED
7-108 CLASSIFICATION OF NEW AND UNLISTED USES It is recognized that new types of land use will
develop and forms of land use not anticipated may seek to locate in the Town of Highland Park. In order to
provide for such changes and contingencies and [any] determination as to the appropriate classification of any
new or unlisted form of land use shall be made as follows:
a. The Building Inspector shall refer the question concerning any new or unlisted use to the Town
Zoning Commission requesting an interpretation as to the zoning classification into which such use
should be placed. The referral of the use interpretation question shall be accompanied by a statement
of facts listing the nature of the use and whether it involves dwelling activity, sales, storage, and
amount and nature thereof[,] enclosed or open storage, anticipated employment, transportation
requirements, the amount of noise, odor, fumes, dust, toxic material and vibration likely to be
generated and the general requirements for public utilities such as water and sanitary sewer.
b. The Town Zoning Commission shall consider the nature and described performance of the
proposed use and its compatibility with the uses permitted in the various districts and determine the
zoning district or districts within which such use should be permitted.
c. The Town Zoning Commission shall transmit its findings and recommendations to the Town
Council as to the classification proposed for any new or unlisted use. The Town Council shall by
resolution approve the recommendation of the Town Zoning Commission or make such
determination concerning the classification of such use as is determined appropriate based upon its
findings.
7-200 SPECIAL DEFINITIONS AND EXPLANATIONS NOTED IN USE REGULATIONS
7-201 The following definitions and explanatory notes supplement, restrict and define the meaning and intent of
the use regulations as set forth in the Use Schedule and Provisions 7-101 through 7-107 inclusive.
(1) One-Family Residence (Attached)–A dwelling designed and constructed for occupancy by one
family which is joined to another dwelling or dwellings at one or more sides by a party wall or
abutting separate wall and which is located on a separately identified building site (lot) which has
separate access and utility service and which can be identified and conveyed as a separate building
and building site. (Same as townhouse.)
(2) One-Family Residence (Detached)–A dwelling designed and constructed for occupancy by one
family and located on a separate building site and having no physical connection to other buildings
located on any other adjacent lot or building site and providing the normal front, side and rear yards.
(3) Community Unit Development–An area of unsubdivided land or a tract being subdivided and
planned as a single integral residential development with yard setback and open space standards
differing from the district in which it is located but which observes the over-all density standards set
forth in such district and for which the standards and physical plan are approved by the Town
Council.
(4) Accessory Building or Structure–In a residence district, a subordinate building or structure,
attached or detached and used for a purpose customarily incidental to the main structure such as a
private garage for automobile storage, air conditioning structure, tool house, lath or greenhouse as a
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 445/505
hobby, home workshop, children's playhouse, storage house or garden shelter, but in no case shall an
accessory building involve the conduct of a business or the creation of a condition adverse to the use
and enjoyment of adjacent residential property.
(5) Accessory Food Service–In an “H,” Multifamily Residence District, a dining room with
accessory kitchen facilities of the building only, limited in area and size to one seating
accommodation, not to exceed more than thirty (30) square feet per seat in a contiguous area, for
each four (4) dwelling units available for rental in the structure and not constituting a private club,
cafe or cafeteria and not involving the use of any exterior sign or the sale of or the serving of any
alcoholic beverages except beer or wine or the presentation of any entertainment. Such use may also
be approved by Specific Use Permit in the CS, GR, and PD Districts.
(6) Church or Rectory–A structure designed and used as [a] place of worship by a recognized and
organized religious group, having an ordained minister or equivalent title and may include the place
of residence of the minister or priest such as a rectory, manse or parsonage, when all facilities are
located on a single integral site.
(7) Country Club–A golf course and club house with related recreation facilities such as tennis
courts, having a private and restricted membership and operated for the sole benefit of the
membership. Such country club may contain incidental social and entertainment facilities for the sole
use or enjoyment of the membership.
(8) Home Occupations–A home occupation is an occupation customarily carried on in the home by
a member of the occupant's family, without the employment of additional persons, without the use of
a sign to advertise the activity, without storing or offering any commodity or service for sale on the
premises and which does not create obnoxious noise or other obnoxious conditions to abutting
residential property such as odor, increased traffic, parking or noise and which does not involve any
customer, client or potential customer visiting the premises.
(9) Off-Street Parking Incidental to Main Use–An enclosed or unenclosed, all-weather-surfaced
area for the storage of motor vehicles which are owned or used by the occupant of the premises or
their guests. In the case of legal business uses, incidental parking includes the storage of vehicles
used by customers, clients and visitors as well as the customary loading and unloading activities
incidental to the use. In all cases the parking shall be located without encroachment into a public
street and in residential areas all parking facilities shall be located behind the front yard line.
(10) Park, Playground or Community Center (Public)–A municipally owned or sponsored open
area for recreation use and enjoyment of the public including buildings, shelters, swimming pools
and accessory facilities related thereto.
(11) School, Public–A school under the sponsorship of a State-approved public school board
having a curriculum approved for public elementary or secondary schools, but not including private,
parochial, trade or commercial schools or day nurseries.
(12) Servants' or Caretakers' Quarters–An accessory building, either separate from or attached to
the main building, designed and used as a place of abode for bona fide servants or caretakers,
regularly employed on the premises and not including a kitchen or kitchen equipment such as a sink,
stove or other facilities which would create a separate dwelling unit.
(13) Swimming Pool (Private)–A pool and related equipment located on a building site and which
is an accessory use designed and used only in relation to the occupancy of the premises. See section
13-103 for location requirements.
(13a) Tennis Court–A detached accessory structure open and unobstructed to the sky designed and
constructed with adequate drainage for playing the game of tennis and having a minimum area of
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 446/505
seven thousand two hundred (7,200) square feet and minimum dimensions of sixty (60) feet by one
hundred twenty (120) feet and enclosed and properly screened on all sides exposed to any street,
alley, or lot line by a wall or fence having a minimum height of ten (10) feet. No tennis court shall be
lighted for play.
(13b) Multi-Purpose Game Court (no lighting)–An all-weather surface designed for use in playing
a variety of games including but not limited to basketball, volleyball, tennis with restricted flight
balls, and badminton. Game courts may vary in size but will not provide lighting for play at night.
(13c) Multi-Purpose Game Court (lighting)–The installation of lighting to provide for nighttime
use of multi-purpose courts. Lighting shall be designed and installed to illuminate the playing surface
only.
(14) Local Utility Distribution Line–The customary lines, pipes, poles and wires necessary to
provide the Town with municipal services. Local utility lines include the usual water, sewer and gas
distribution lines, electrical and telephone lines, either above or below the ground surface when such
facilities are owned or franchised by the municipality. Other utility-type facilities such as close
[closed] circuit television, are not considered as local utility distribution lines as herein defined.
(15) Telephone Line and Exchange, but not including public business facilities, storage or repair
facilities.
(16) Town Hall, Municipal Building or Service Center–The administrative office structure of the
municipality along with such meeting rooms, library, museums, service facilities and maintenance
center and related facilities which the governing body may deem appropriate to serve the community.
(17) Public or Private Utility (Not Listed)–Any service which in the future may seek to use the
streets, alley, open spaces, air or subsurface area of the community, other than those specifically
mentioned in paragraph 15 and exemplified by a close [closed] circuit television system.
(18) Auto Sales or Repair Garage–An establishment for the repair and sale of motor vehicles, but
excluding the display or offering for sale of vehicles in open unenclosed space and not involving the
repair or storage of vehicles or parts outside a building.
(19) Gasoline Service Station–An establishment primarily for the dispensing of motor fuel, oil and
minor service to vehicles, but excluding the operation of a garage for the overhaul or major repair of
vehicles and excluding the sale of new or used vehicles.
(20) Bakery or Candy Shop–A retail shop for the sale or the making and sale of baked items, candy
or similar food items for sale on the premises only and not involving processing, manufacturing or
baking on a commercial scale for sale or delivery off the premises.
(21) Cafeteria or Restaurant (Without Drive-In Service)–The customary cafeteria or restaurant
where guests are served at tables within a building, but excluding any establishment or operation
wherein food is ordered from a vehicle or served to customers in a vehicle.
(22) Custom Personal Service–Establishments offering specific and specialized services to persons
or apparel, such as shoe repair shop, tailor, or travel consultant.
(23) Florist, Garden Shop, Greenhouse or Plant Sales–The growing and offering for sale of plant
materials and flowers, but only when the display, storage and sale is located within a building.
(24) Household Appliance Service and Repair–Including radio and television, but not involving
the use of equipment which generates noise, odor or electrical frequencies so as to interfere with the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 447/505
use and enjoyment of adjacent property and only when all activity, storage, sales or display is housed
within a building.
(25) Retail Stores and Shops–Offering all types of consumer goods for sale, but excluding the
display and sale of new or used automobiles, heavy machinery, building materials, used appliances,
used furniture or salvage materials, and excluding the sale or offering for sale of commodities
displayed outside of a building.
(25a) Theater–An indoor establishment charging admission to the general public for the privilege
of observing a televised or motion-picture performance. Theater shall include multiple theaters
contained in the same building, and operating as a single business.
(26) Business Signs–A panel structure or graphic display placed or arranged for the purpose of
directing attention to the occupant, building, service or product existing or offered on the premises on
which such sign is located, but excluding poster panels and billboards.
(27) Signs, Real Estate–Temporary signs pertaining to the sale or rental of property not exceeding
eight (8) square feet in area and advertising property only for a use for which it is legally zoned.
(28) Name plate–An accessory sign not exceeding seventy-two (72) square inches in exposed
surface, which is used only to identify the name and address of the owner or occupant of a premises
and which is not illuminated or lighted.
7-300 PD, PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT USES PERMITTED
7-301 The Town Council of the Town of Highland Park, Texas, after public hearing and proper notice to all
parties affected and after recommendation from the Zoning Commission, may authorize the creation of the
following types of planned development districts:
a. Shopping center on tracts of three (3) acres or more.
b. Housing development on tracts of three (3) acres or more or a community unit development.
c. Civic center and community center.
d. Office center.
e. Recreation center.
f. School, public.
g. Church. As part of a planned development district for a church only, the Town Council may
approve such use to include the operation of denominational or private schools and day care centers
or nurseries, which are defined as follows:
School, denominational or private: A school under the sponsorship of a private
agency, corporation, or religious agency having a curriculum generally equivalent to
public elementary or secondary schools, and accredited or licensed by the State of
Texas or a nationally recognized accreditation agency; but excluding private trade or
commercial schools.
Day care center or nursery: A facility where seven (7) or more children under
fourteen (14) years of age are left for care, training, education, custody, or
supervision during the day or any portion thereof. Such facility shall be operated in a
manner as required by Chapter 42 of the Human Resources Code of the State of
Texas, as amended, and in accordance with such standards as may be promulgated
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 448/505
by State and federal law. The term “day care center” or “nursery” shall not include
overnight lodging, health care, counseling, or rehabilitative services.
7-302 In establishing a planned development district in accordance with this section, the Town Council shall
require a comprehensive site plan of the development. Such site plan shall be approved and filed as part of the
ordinance prior to the issuance of any building permit in a planned development district. Such required plan and
ordinance shall set forth the requirements for ingress and egress to the property, public or private streets or
drives, with adequate right-of-way, sidewalks, utilities, drainage, parking space, height of building, maximum lot
coverage, yards and open spaces, screening walls or fences and other development and protective requirements
considered necessary to create a reasonable transition to and protection of the adjacent property.
7-303 Every planned district approved under the provisions of this ordinance shall be considered as an
amendment to the ordinance as applicable to the property involved. In approving the planned development
district, the Town Council may impose conditions relative to the standard of development and such conditions
shall be complied with before a certificate of occupancy is issued for the use of the land or any structure which is
part of the planned development district and such conditions shall not be construed as conditions precedent to
the approval of the zoning amendment, but shall be construed as conditions precedent to the granting of a
certificate of occupancy.
7-400 FLOOD HAZARD PREFIX TO DISTRICT DESIGNATION. TO PROVIDE FOR THE APPROPRIATE
USE OF LAND WHICH HAS A HISTORY OF INUNDATION OR IS DETERMINED SUBJECT TO A
FLOOD HAZARD AND TO PROMOTE THE GENERAL WELFARE AND PROVIDE PROTECTION
FROM FLOODING, PORTIONS OF CERTAIN DISTRICTS ARE DESIGNATED WITH A FLOOD
HAZARD, FH PREFIX. AREAS DESIGNATED ON THE ZONING DISTRICT MAP BY A FH PREFIX
SHALL BE SUBJECT TO THE FOLLOWING PROVISIONS:
7-401 USES PERMITTED:
The uses permitted in that portion of any district having a flood hazard FH prefix shall be limited to the
following:
1. Lawns, gardens, landscaped areas and related private open space not involving buildings.
2. Off-street parking as an accessory use to a primary use.
3. All types of local utilities including those requiring specific use permits when approved as
provided in section 11.
4. Public parks, playgrounds and public or private golf courses.
7-402 No building or structure shall be erected in that portion of any district designated with a Flood Hazard FH
prefix until and unless such building or structure has been approved by the Town Council after study and
recommendation by the Town Engineer who will ascertain that any such building or structure is not subject to
damage by flooding and would not constitute an encroachment hazard or obstacle to the movement of flood
waters and that such construction would not endanger the value or safety of other property or would not
adversely affect the public health, safety and welfare.
7-403 Any excavation, filling or storage of material within that portion of a district having a Flood Hazard FH
prefix shall be reviewed by the Town Council after a study and report by the Town Engineer and approval
obtained before any such operation is begun.
7-404 An area may be removed from the Flood Hazard FH prefix designation when by the provision of
approved drainage works or as the result of specific drainage study it is determined by the Town Council, after
report and recommendation by the Town Engineer, that the flood hazard has been alleviated. Removal of the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 449/505
Flood Hazard FH prefix from any parcel of land may be accomplished by the Town Council as an amendment to
the zoning district map after review, public hearing and recommendation by the Zoning Commission.
7-405 The fact that land is or is not within a district having a Flood Hazard FH prefix shall not be interpreted as
assurance that such land is or is not subject to periodic flooding due to local conditions.
(Ordinance 740, secs. 1–6, adopted 5/4/70; Ordinance 847, sec. 1, adopted 3/1/76; Ordinance 884, secs. 2, 3,
adopted 2/6/78; Ordinance 937, sec. 1, adopted 8-25-80; Ordinance 960, secs. 1, 2, adopted 9/8/81; Ordinance
965, sec. 1, adopted 12/7/81; Ordinance 972, sec. 2, adopted 12/28/81; Ordinance 1008, sec. 1(1), adopted
9/6/83; Ordinance 1246, secs. 1, 2, adopted 4/5/93; Ordinance 1258, secs. 1, 2, adopted 7/12/93; Ordinance
1422, sec. I, adopted 11/1/99; Ordinance 1631, sec. 1, adopted 8/22/05; Ordinance 1873, sec. 2, adopted
10/24/11)
SECTION 8. AREA REGULATIONS
8-100 EXCEPT AS HEREINAFTER PROVIDED, NO BUILDING OR STRUCTURE OR PART THEREOF
SHALL BE ERECTED, ALTERED OR CONVERTED FOR ANY USE PERMITTED IN THE DISTRICT IN
WHICH IT IS LOCATED UNLESS IT IS IN CONFORMITY WITH ALL THE MINIMUM REGULATIONS
HEREIN SPECIFIED FOR LOT AREA, LOT WIDTH, LOT DEPTH, LOT COVERAGE AND FRONT, SIDE
AND REAR YARDS.
8-101 LOT AREA:
The minimum required residential building lot and building site area for the various districts shall be in
accordance with the following schedule, except that a vacant, unused lot of record which has less area than
herein required which was an official lot of record and separately owned from any adjacent lot prior to the
adoption of this ordinance may be used for a one-family dwelling but no building site consisting of a lot or
combination of lots existing in single ownership as an occupied building site at the time of passage of this
ordinance shall be reduced in area without first filing a plat for consideration and action by the Town Council in
accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Regulations and obtaining approval. In no case shall a
building site be reduced below the minimum requirements set forth herein.
8-102 IN THE FOLLOWING ZONING DISTRICTS THE MINIMUM LOT AREA FOR RESIDENTIAL USE
SHALL BE IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE FOLLOWING SCHEDULE:
Schedule–Minimum Required Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit
TYPE USE DISTRICTS
A B C D E F G H CS GR PD
One-Family
Dwelling
Detached
5 acres 25,000
sq. ft.
15,000
sq. ft.
9,500
sq. ft.
6,500
sq. ft.
6,500
sq. ft.
6,500
sq. ft.
6,500
sq. ft.
6,500
sq. ft.
6,500 sq.
ft.
*
One-Family
Dwelling
Attached
2,500
sq. ft.
2,500
sq. ft.
2,500
sq. ft.
2,500 sq.
ft.
2,500
sq. ft.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 450/505
Two-Family
Dwelling
3,600
sq. ft.
3,600
sq. ft.
3,600
sq. ft.
3,600
sq. ft.
3,600 sq.
ft.
3,600
sq. ft.
Multiple-Family
Dwelling
One to Three
Stories
1,500
sq. ft.
1,200
sq. ft.
1,200
sq. ft.
1,200 sq.
ft.
1,200
sq. ft.
Multiple-Family
Dwelling
Over Three
Stories
200
sq. ft.
300
sq. ft.
*As specified in amending ordinance.
8-103 CC COUNTRY CLUB-GOLF COURSE DISTRICT AREA REQUIREMENT:
Minimum area requirement for CC Country Club-Golf Course District shall be one hundred (100) acres.
8-200 LOT WIDTH:
The minimum residential building lot or building site width for the various districts shall be in accordance with
the following schedule, except that a vacant, unused lot of record which has less width than herein required
which was an official lot of record and separately owned from any adjacent lot prior to the adoption of this
ordinance may be used for a one-family dwelling, but no lot or combination of lots existing in single ownership
as an occupied building site at the time of passage of this ordinance shall be reduced in width without first filing
a plat for consideration and action by the Town Council in accordance with the provision of the Subdivision
Regulations and obtaining approval. In no case shall a building site be reduced in width below the minimum
requirements set forth herein. (See Appendix Illustration 1 for lot width interpretation)
8-201 IN THE FOLLOWING ZONING DISTRICTS THE MINIMUM REQUIRED LOT WIDTH FOR
RESIDENTIAL USES SHALL BE IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE FOLLOWING SCHEDULE:
Schedule–Minimum Required Lot Widths
TYPE USE DISTRICTS
A B C D E F G H CS GR PD
One-Family
Dwelling
Detached
200' 100' 70' 60' 55' 55' 55' 55' 55' 55' 55'
One-Family
20' 20' 20' 20' 20'
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 451/505
Dwelling
Attached
Two-Family
Dwelling
60' 60' 60' 60' 60' 60'
Multiple-Family
Dwelling,
One to Three
Stories
60' 60' 60' 60' 60'
Multiple-Family
Dwelling
Over Three
Stories
70'
70'
Minimum required width of lot in feet
8-300 LOT DEPTH:
The minimum required residential building lot or building site depth for the various districts shall be in
accordance with the following schedule, except that a vacant, unused lot of record which has less depth than
herein required and which was an official lot of record and separately owned from any adjacent lot prior to the
adoption of this ordinance may be used for a one-family dwelling but no lot or combination of lots existing in
single ownership as an occupied building site at the time of passage of this ordinance shall be reduced in depth
without first filing a plat for consideration and action by the Town Council in accordance with the provisions of
the Subdivision Regulations and obtaining approval. In no case shall a building site be reduced in depth below
the minimum requirements set forth herein. (See Appendix Illustration 2 for lot depth interpretation)
8-301 IN THE FOLLOWING ZONING DISTRICTS THE MINIMUM REQUIRED LOT DEPTH FOR
RESIDENTIAL USES SHALL BE IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE FOLLOWING SCHEDULE:
Schedule–Minimum Required Lot Depth
TYPE USE DISTRICTS
A B C D E F G H CS GR PD
One-Family
Dwelling
Detached
250' 180' 150' 140' 130' 120' 120' 120' 120' 120' 120'
One-Family
100' 100' 100' 100' 100'
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 452/505
Dwelling
Attached
Two-Family
Dwelling
120' 120' 120' 120' 120' 120'
Multiple-Family
Dwelling
150'
150'
Minimum required depth of lot in feet
8-400 FRONT YARD:
8-401 MINIMUM REQUIRED FRONT YARD:
In all zoning districts except Planned Development Districts the minimum required front yard shall be the
average front setback for the entire block as determined by measuring the setbacks of the main buildings on one
side of the street.
8-402 SPECIAL FRONT YARD REGULATIONS:
(1) Where the frontage on one side of a street between two (2) intersecting streets is divided by two
(2) or more zoning districts, the front yard shall comply with the requirements of the most restrictive
district for the entire frontage.
(2) Where a building line has been established by plat approved by the Town Council or by
ordinance, and such line requires a greater or lesser front yard setback than is prescribed by this
ordinance for the district in which the building line is located, the minimum required front yard shall
comply with the building line so established by such ordinance or plat.
(3) The front yard shall be measured from the front property line to: (1) the front face of the
building, (2) covered porch or covered terrace where the cover is supported by columns or (3)
attached accessory building. Covered porches not supported by columns shall not extend more than
four (4) feet into the required front yard. Every part of a minimum required front yard shall be open
and unobstructed to the sky except that eaves and roof extensions may project into the minimum
required front yard for a distance not to exceed four (4) feet and window sills, bay windows, and
chimneys may project a maximum of twelve (12) inches into the required front yard.
(4) Where lots have double frontage, running through from one street to another, a minimum
required front yard shall be provided on both streets unless a building line for accessory buildings has
been established along one frontage on the plat or by ordinance, in which event only one required
front yard need be observed. (See Appendix Illustration 5)
(5) Where the frontage on one side of a street between two (2) intersecting streets in any residential
district is improved with buildings prior to the effective date of this ordinance and has a front yard
line which has a variation in depth, then the average front yard shall be observed; provided, however,
that this regulation shall not be interpreted as permitting a front yard of less than twenty (20) feet in
depth.
(6) In the “H” District, a minimum front yard of twenty (20) feet shall be required; provided,
however, that in no case shall the distance from the center line of the street on which a building fronts
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 453/505
to the front face of the building be less than one-half (1/2) the height of the building.
(7) Gasoline service station pump islands may not be located nearer than eighteen (18) feet to the
front property line in the districts where such use is permitted nor shall any canopy over such island
be located nearer than ten (10) feet to any front property line.
(8) On any corner for which front and side yards are required herein, no fence, wall, structure,
sign, screen, hedge, shrub or tree, slope, terrace or embankment shall be located, planted, constructed
or maintained so as to cause danger or hazard to traffic by obstructing the view at any street or alley
intersection within the sight visibility easement. No such fence, wall, structure, screen, hedge, shrub
or tree shall be located so as to interfere with the line of sight at an intersection from a distance of
twenty-four (24) inches to a distance of eight (8) feet above the curb. The sight visibility easement
(See Appendix Illustration 10) shall extend as follows:
A. At the intersection of two (2) public streets - a distance of twenty-five (25) feet back from
the intersection in each direction as measured along the street curbline.
B. At the intersection of a public street and an alleyway - a distance of fifteen (15) feet back
from the intersection in each direction as measured along the street curbline and the edge of
alley paving.
(9) In PD Planned Development District, the minimum required front yard shall be established by
the ordinance establishing the “PD” District, but in no case shall a front yard of less than twenty (20)
feet be provided.
(10) In the CC Country Club-Golf Course District, a minimum setback from the property line shall
be fifty (50) feet for all structures except uncovered tennis courts.
(11) In the C, D, E, F and G Districts, all basements and cellars shall observe the same front yard
setback standards applicable to the primary structure.
(12) Balustrades, walls, and railings surrounding front porches within the required front yard
setback in residential districts with residential uses are permitted with the following requirements:
(a) shall be constructed of brick, stone, concrete, or metal;
(b) may not exceed thirty-eight (38) inches in height measured from the natural grade; and
(c) may not extend more than five (5) feet from the face of the building into the required
front yard or ten (10) percent of the front yard setback, whichever is greater.
(13) Handrails for safety at steps in the front yard of residential districts with residential uses are
permitted with the following requirements:
(a) shall be constructed of metal;
(b) shall have at least three (3) inches clear vision between vertical posts, with a maximum
post width of two (2) inches; and
(c) shall not exceed thirty-eight (38) inches in height measured from the adjacent natural
grade.
(14) Permanently installed recreational sports equipment (including, but not limited to, basketball
goals) shall be prohibited in the front yard of residential districts. Permanently installed recreational
sports equipment attached to the residential structure shall be set back a minimum of fifteen (15) feet
behind the front building line.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 454/505
Exception: Detached, portable recreational sports equipment is excluded from this regulation.
8-500 SIDE YARD:
8-501 IN THE FOLLOWING ZONING DISTRICTS THE MINIMUM AND MAXIMUM REQUIRED SIDE
YARD SHALL BE IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE FOLLOWING SCHEDULE AND NO BUILDING,
STRUCTURE OR USE SHALL HEREAFTER BE LOCATED SO AS TO HAVE A SMALLER SIDE YARD
ON EITHER SIDE OF SUCH
BUILDING THAN HEREIN SPECIFIED.
SCHEDULE–MINIMUM AND MAXIMUM REQUIRED SIDE YARDS
TYPE USE DISTRICTS
A B C D E F G H CS GR PD
(a) Minimum Side
Yard Required
10% of Lot Width
10 Percent of Lot Width But Not Less Than Width Shown Below
20' 12' 7' 5' 5' 5' See
8-502
(2)(3)(6)
See
8-502
(4)(6)(2)
See
8-
502(8)
See
8-
502(8)
See
8-502(7)
(b) Maximum
Side Yard
Required*
25' **
15'
**
10'
**
10'
**
8'
**
8'
See
8-502
(2)(3)(6)
See
8-502
(4)(6)(2)
See
8-
502(8)
See
8-
502(8)
See
8-502(7)
* Side yard need not exceed the dimension specified in (b) even though 10% of lot width may exceed the
maximum side yard dimension shown by the Schedule.
** The maximum side yard requirements of this Section shall not apply to combined building sites. See Section
8-502(11).
8-502 SPECIAL SIDE YARD REGULATIONS:
(1) Every part of a minimum required side yard shall be open and unobstructed except for
accessory buildings, fences and other appurtenances as permitted herein and the ordinary projections
of window sills, belt courses, cornices, chimneys and other architectural features projecting not to
exceed twelve (12) inches into the required side yard, and roof eaves projecting not to exceed thirtysix
(36) inches into the minimum required side yard.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 455/505
(1a) Air-conditioning condensing units may be located in the required side yard with the following
conditions:
(a) Air-conditioning condensing units adjacent to residential building sites shall be screened
by a solid wood fence or wall. Air-conditioning condensing units abutting a street, alley, or
easement can be screened by landscaping, but shall not exceed the height of the screening;
(b) No more than five (5) air-conditioning condensing units can be located in one side yard.
A minimum clearance of twenty-four (24) inches shall be maintained between the airconditioning
condensing unit and the side property line, or at least one (1) required side yard
shall be kept clear of all air-conditioning condensing units; and
(c) Placement of new air-conditioning condensing units associated with the renovation,
addition, and/or construction of a new residential structure shall comply with the regulations set
forth herein. Replacement of existing air-conditioning condensing units that maintain a
nonconforming status will be allowed to continue until the building site is redeveloped.
(2) Multiple-family dwellings not exceeding three (3) stories in height shall provide a minimum
side yard of fifteen (15) feet between any building wall containing openings for windows, light and
air and any side lot line except that any such building face or wall not exceeding thirty-five (35) feet
in width may provide a minimum side yard of ten (10) feet. Where a building wall contains no
openings for windows, light or air, a minimum required side yard of ten (10) feet shall be provided
between such wall and the side lot line.
(2a) Multiple-family dwellings not exceeding three (3) stories in height located on fifty (50) feet
wide building sites shall provide a minimum side yard of ten (10) feet.
(3) A multifamily dwelling not exceeding three (3) stories in height located on a corner lot shall
provide a side yard adjacent to the side street of not less than ten (10) percent of the width of the lot
but not less than ten (10) feet or more than fifteen (15) feet.
(4) Where apartment buildings or structures are constructed to exceed three (3) stories in height, a
side yard equal to one foot for each two (2) feet of building height for all building faces or walls
having openings for light, air or access shall be provided except that such side yard need not exceed
fifty (50) feet. In all districts permitting the construction of apartment buildings exceeding three (3)
stories in height, a minimum side yard of twenty (20) feet shall be required for any building face or
wall which contains no openings for windows, light or air.
(5) On a corner lot used for one-family or two-family dwellings both street exposures shall be
treated as front yards on all lots platted after the effective date of this ordinance, except that where
one street exposure is designated as a side yard by a building line shown on a plat approved by the
Town Council containing a side yard of ten (10) feet or more the building line provisions on the plat
shall be observed. On lots which were official lots of record prior to the effective date of this
ordinance the minimum required side yard adjacent to a side street shall comply with the minimum
required side yard for the respective districts as specified in 8-501, “Minimum and Maximum
Required Side Yard Schedule.”
(6) A one-family attached dwelling shall provide a minimum required side yard adjacent to a side
street of ten (10) feet and no complex of attached one-family dwellings shall exceed two hundred
(200) feet in length. A minimum required side yard of five (5) feet shall be provided at the end of
each one-family attached dwelling complex so that the end of any two (2) adjacent building
complexes shall be at least ten (10) feet apart. (See Appendix Illustration 7)
(7) The minimum required side yards in a Planned Development District shall be established on
the site plan which shall be made a part of the amending ordinance.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 456/505
(8) No side yards is [are] specified for nonresidential use in the CS or GR Districts except where a
commercial, retail or other nonresidential use abuts upon a district boundary line dividing such
districts from a residential district in which event a minimum ten-foot side yard shall be provided on
the side adjacent to such residential district, and whenever a lot or tract is utilized for nonresidential
use and one side lot line abuts a street a minimum side yard of ten (10) feet shall be provided.
(9) Gasoline service station pump islands may not be located nearer than eighteen (18) feet to the
side property line of any tract or lot in the district where such use is permitted nor shall any canopy
over such island be located nearer than ten (10) feet to any side property line.
(10) Whenever existing dwellings have failed to provide the minimum side yard as herein required,
such structures may be altered and added to; provided, that such alteration, addition, or change does
not reduce the nonconforming side yard below the dimension existing prior to such alteration,
addition, or change. The provisions of Subsection (11), not the provisions of this Subsection (10),
apply to any alteration or change of, or addition to, a combined building site.
(11) The minimum side yard required for a main building located on a combined building site
within a B, C, D, E, or F district shall be 10% of the lot width of the combined building site with no
maximum side yard limitation. See Section 26-101 a. and b. for applicability.
(12) An existing main building located on a combined building site within a B, C, D, E, or F
district need not comply with setback requirements; however, any addition to the existing main
building, or any replacement of the existing main building, shall conform to the requirements of
Section 8-502(11).
(13) In the C, D, E, F and G Districts, all basements and cellars shall observe the same side yard
setback standards applicable to the primary structure. No openings shall be allowed from the
basement or the cellar to the side yard, except for vehicular access to authorized underground
parking.
8-600 REAR YARD:
8-601 NO BUILDING OR STRUCTURE SHALL HEREAFTER BE LOCATED, ERECTED OR ALTERED
TO HAVE A REAR YARD SMALLER THAN HEREIN REQUIRED:
(1) In all districts permitting residential structures, no main residential building, including any
basement or cellar, may be constructed nearer than ten feet (10') to the rear property line. In the B, C,
D, E, and F Districts, any structure, or portion thereof, located within forty feet (40') of the rear
property line, shall not exceed twenty-five feet (25') in height, nor have a plate height exceeding
twelve feet, six inches (12' 6"). Roof height shall be measured to the roof ridge, or projected roof
ridge, whichever is higher, and the slope shall not exceed twelve (12) vertical units in twelve (12)
horizontal units (12:12 pitch maximum). In all districts permitting residential structures, a main
residential building shall not cover more than fifty percent (50%) of that portion of the lot lying to the
rear of a line erected joining the midpoint on one side of the lot line with the midpoint of the opposite
side lot line. For accessory buildings, see section 12. (See Appendix Illustration 3.)
(2) In the CS and GR Districts, no rear yard is specified except where retail or commercial uses
back upon a common district line, whether separated by an alley or not, dividing the district from any
of the residential districts listed herein, a minimum rear yard of ten (10) feet shall be provided.
(3) Every part of a required rear yard shall be open and unobstructed to the sky, except for
accessory buildings or structures, fences as permitted in section 15 and the ordinary projections of
window sills, belt courses, cornices and roof overhangs and other architectural features projecting not
to exceed four (4) feet into the required rear yard and normal lawn appurtenances and landscaping.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 457/505
(4) The minimum rear yard requirement in a Planned Development District shall be established on
the site plan which shall be made a part of the amending ordinance.
(5) No accessory building, fence or other structure shall be located or erected so as to extend into
or obstruct any alley or utility easement.
(6) Whenever existing dwellings have failed to provide the minimum rear yard as herein required,
such structures may be altered or added to, provided that such change or addition does not further
reduce the nonconforming rear yard.
(6a) In B, C, D, E, and F districts, any addition and/or change to structures within forty feet (40') of
the rear property line, shall comply subsections (1), (7), (8), (9), and (10).
(7) In B, C, D, E, and F residential districts, gables, dormers, windows, or doors located above the
twelve-foot, six-inch (12' 6") plate line and within forty feet (40') of the rear property line, shall not
face the side yards unless located a minimum distance twenty feet (20') from the side property line.
Face shall mean a line of site directed perpendicular of the window glazing towards the referenced
property line. Dormers or windows facing a side street on a corner lot shall not be required to meet
this requirement. Dormers and windows cannot exceed four feet (4') in width, must be separated by a
minimum of four feet (4'), and must be set back a minimum of thirty inches (30") from the top plate.
(8) In the B, C, D, E, and F residential districts, windows above the twelve-foot, six-inch (12' 6")
plate line facing and within twenty feet (20') of the rear property line, shall be fixed and
nontransparent.
(9) In B, C, D, E and F districts, a deck and/or porch more than thirty inches (30") above grade and
a roof terrace and/or balcony shall not be located within forty feet (40') of the rear property line.
(10) In the B, C, D, E and F districts, fixed skylights that are flush-mounted with the roof are
allowed above the twelve-foot, six-inch (12' 6") top plate line of the first floor within forty feet (40')
of the rear property line. The lowest portion of such skylight shall be a minimum of six feet (6') high,
measured vertically from the finished floor above the top plate.
8-700 LOT COVERAGE AND FLOOR AREA RATIO:
8-701 THE MAXIMUM PERCENTAGE ON ANY LOT AREA WHICH MAY HEREAFTER BE COVERED
BY THE MAIN BUILDING AND ALL ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND THE MAXIMUM RATIO OF
FLOOR AREA TO THE TOTAL AREA OF THE LOT OR TRACT ON WHICH A BUILDING IS LOCATED
SHALL NOT EXCEED THE FOLLOWING SCHEDULE FOR THE ZONING DISTRICTS DESIGNATED.
SCHEDULE–MAXIMUM BUILDING COVERAGE
TYPE USE DISTRICTS
A B C D E F G H CS GR PD
Maximum Percent of
Lot Which May be
Covered by Buildings
20% 30% **
40%
**
40%
**
40%
**
35%
*
40%
*
40%
*
40%
*
40%
*
30%
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 458/505
Maximum Floor
Area-Lot Area Ratio
2:1 1:2 1:1 1:1
* See 8-702. (See Appendix Illustration 6)
** The maximum building coverage for a combined building site shall be governed by Section 8-706.
8-702 In the G, H, CS and GR districts where apartment buildings are constructed having covered vehicle
parking facilities an additional ten (10) percent of the total lot area may be covered by the combined main
building and covered parking facilities, but in no case shall the combined coverage exceed fifty (50) percent of
the total area of the lot or tract upon which the main building is constructed.
8-703 Structures designed and used for off-street parking of vehicles incidental to the main use need not be
included in the floor area when computing floor area ratio. Off-street parking structures constructed in
connection with retail or service buildings in the CS or GR districts need not be computed as site building
coverage.
8-704 In the CC country club-golf course district the maximum building coverage shall not exceed ten (10)
percent of the total acreage.
8-705 In a planned development district for a church the maximum percent of a lot that may be covered is fifty
(50) percent and the maximum floor area-lot area ratio is 1.25:1.
8-706 The maximum building coverage permitted for a combined building site within a B, C, D, E, or F district
shall be 30%.
Editor's note–Ordinance 1631, sec. 5, amended section 8-700 by adding a new section 8-705. Section 8-700 already contained a
section 8-705; therefore, on advice from the Town, the new provisions have been included herein as section 8-706.
(Ordinance 740, sec. 7, adopted 5/4/70; Ordinance 847, sec. 1, adopted 3/1/76; Ordinance 972, secs. 3–5,
12/28/81; Ordinance 1008, sec. 1(2)–(6), adopted 9/6/83; Ordinance 1015, sec. 1, adopted 9/26/83; Ordinance
1335, sec. 1, adopted 7/1/96; Ordinance 1422, sec. I, adopted 11/1/99; Ordinance 1631, secs. 2–5, adopted
8/22/05; Ordinance 1634, sec. 1, adopted 9/26/05; Ordinance 1780, secs. 2–4, adopted 1/26/09; Ordinance 1873,
sec. 4, adopted 10/24/11; Ordinance 1927, secs. 1–3, adopted 9/9/13)
SECTION 9. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACE REGULATIONS
9-100 OFF-STREET PARKING SHALL BE PROVIDED ON THE LOT OR TRACT ON WHICH THE USE
IS LOCATED SUFFICIENT TO PROVIDE THE FOLLOWING RATIO OF VEHICLE SPACES FOR THE
USES SPECIFIED IN THE DISTRICTS DESIGNATED.
9-101 IN THE FOLLOWING ZONING DISTRICTS THE MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES
FOR RESIDENTIAL USES SHALL BE:
(1) A and B, One-Family Residence Districts
Two (2) spaces for each dwelling unit.
C, D and E, One-Family Residence Districts
Three (3) spaces for each dwelling unit.
Two parking spaces shall be enclosed and
shall be located behind the front building
line.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 459/505
F, Two-Family Residence Districts
Three (3) spaces for each dwelling unit.
Two parking spaces shall be enclosed and
shall be located behind the front building
line.
G and H, Multifamily Residence Districts
Two (2) spaces for each dwelling unit.
(2) CS Community Service District, GR,
General Retail District
Two (2) spaces for each dwelling unit.
Other requirements in accordance with 9-
102, “Parking Space Schedule” following
(3) PD, Planned Development District
Residential uses–Two (2) spaces for each
dwelling unit
(4) G and H, Multiple-Family Residence
District
Two (2) spaces for each dwelling unit
(5) CS Community Service District, GR,
General Retail District
Two (2) spaces for each dwelling unit.
Other requirements in accordance with 9-
102 Parking Space Schedule following
(6) PD, Planned Development District
Residential Uses–Two (2) spaces for each
dwelling unit
9-102 PARKING SPACE SCHEDULE, NONRESIDENTIAL USES IN ALL DISTRICTS WHERE THE
SPECIFIED NONRESIDENTIAL USE IS PERMITTED.
(1) Automobile service facilities–One space for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of building
area.
(2) Clinics or doctors' offices–One space for each two hundred and fifty (250) square feet of floor
area.
(3) Offices, general–One space for each three hundred (300) square feet of floor area.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 460/505
(4) Recreational use, private or commercial–One space for every two (2) persons to be normally
accommodated in the establishment.
(5) Restaurant or cafeteria–One space for every four (4) seats under maximum seating
arrangement.
(6) Retail or personal service–One space for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor area.
(7) Theaters, meeting rooms and places of public assembly–One space for every three (3) seats.
(8) Banks, savings and loans, and other financial institutions–One space for each two hundred
(200) square feet of floor area.
9-103 SPECIAL OFF-STREET PARKING REGULATIONS:
(1) In computing the parking requirements for any building or development, the total parking
requirements shall be the sum of the specific parking space requirements for each class of use
included in the building or development.
(2) Any lights used to illuminate a parking area shall be so arranged as to reflect away from any
adjacent residential uses or residential districts.
(3) In the A, B, C, D, E, F, G and H Districts, no off-street parking of any truck, truck trailer, van,
house trailer, or mobile home shall be permitted except that one panel or pickup truck not exceeding
one ton capacity, owned and operated by the owner or occupant, may be stored at any one residential
unit.
(4) In the A, B, C, D, E, F, G and H Districts, a boat or recreational vehicle including a motor
home or travel trailer may be stored at any residential unit provided that such boat, vehicle or motor
home may be stored only within an accessory structure or within that portion of any residential lot or
building site designated as the rear yard.
(5) In B, C, D, E, F, and G districts, a garage facing a side property line with a front or rear entry
driveway shall provide a driveway with a minimum distance from the face of the garage to the side
property line of twenty-three feet (23'). The minimum interior turning radius shall be fifteen feet
(15'). Building sites fifty feet (50') in width in “G” Zoning Districts are permitted to provide a
minimum of thirteen feet (13') interior turning radius, provided that the garage is a minimum of
twenty feet (20') wide and twenty-one feet (21') deep, both interior wall-to-wall dimensions with a
minimum opening width of eighteen feet (18') for two-vehicle doors and nine feet (9') for one-vehicle
doors.
(6) In G, H, CS, GR, CC, and PD districts parking lots and parking structures shall be designed in
accordance with the following standard (See Figure C):
Parking
Angle1,3
Stall Depth2 Min. Aisle
One-Way2
Min. Aisle
Two-Way2
Module
One-Way2
Width
Two-Way2
(A) (B) (C) (D) (E) (F)
Parallel 9.0 12.0 20.0 30.0 38.0
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 461/505
30 15.0 11.0 20.0 41.0 50.0
45 17.5 12.0 20.0 47.0 55.0
60 19.0 16.0 20.0 54.0 58.0
90 20.0 20.0 20.0 NA 60.0
1. Angle measurements shown in degrees maximum, i. e. 30°[.]
2. Dimensional measurements shown in feet, i.e. 9.0'[.]
3. Dimensional measurements shall apply to each maximum angle increment as listed. If the angle
increment is exceeded, then next greater angle increment shall apply.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 462/505
9-104 OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE SHALL BE PROVIDED ON EACH LOT IN ACCORDANCE WITH
THE FOLLOWING:
(1) All retail and service structures shall provide and maintain off-street facilities for the loading
and unloading of merchandise and goods within the building or on an area adjacent to a public alley
or private service drive. Such space shall consist of a minimum area of ten (10) feet by twenty-five
(25) feet for each twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of floor space or fraction thereof in excess of
three thousand (3,000) square feet in the building or on the lot.
(Ordinance 740, sec. 8, adopted 5/4/70; Ordinance 847, sec. 1, adopted 3/1/76; Ordinance 1008, sec. 1(7), (8),
adopted 9/6/83; Ordinance 1780, sec. 5, 6, adopted 1/26/09; Ordinance 1873, sec. 5, adopted 10/24/11)
SECTION 10. HEIGHT REGULATIONS
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 463/505
10-100 NO BUILDING OR STRUCTURE SHALL BE LOCATED, ERECTED, OR ALTERED SO AS TO
EXCEED THE HEIGHT LIMIT HEREINAFTER SPECIFIED FOR THE DISTRICT IN WHICH THE
BUILDING IS LOCATED.
10-101 IN THE FOLLOWING ZONING DISTRICTS THE MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS AND
STRUCTURES SHALL BE:
(1) A, One-Family Residence
Districts
Three (3) stories not to exceed forty-five (45)
feet, except as noted in 10-102 following.
(2) B, One-Family Residence
Districts
Two and one-half (2-1/2) stories not to exceed
thirty-five (35) feet, except as noted in 10-102
following.
(3) C, D, and E, One-Family
Residence Districts and F,
Two-Family Residence
Districts
A. Two (2) stories not to exceed twenty-six
(26) feet for mansard roofs, roofs with a
flat surface, or roofs with a slope less
than 3:12, except as noted in 10-102
following.
B. Two (2) stories not to exceed thirty-five
(35) feet to the roof ridge or projected
roof ridge, whichever is higher for
sloped roofs or roofs with a pitch of
3:12 or greater, except as noted in 10-
102 following.
(4) G, Multifamily Residence
Districts
A. Three (3) stories not to exceed fortythree
(43) feet to the roof ridge or
projected roof ridge and thirty-five (35)
feet to the top of the top plate.
B. On fifty (50) feet wide building sites,
height is limited to thirty-five (35) feet
for mansard roofs or roofs with a flat
surface, except as noted in 10-102
following.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 464/505
(5) H, Multifamily Residence
Districts
Three (3) stories or to twenty (20) stories
when additional setback requirements are
observed, except as noted in 10-102
following.
(6) CC, Country Club-Golf
Course Districts
Three (3) stories not to exceed forty (40) feet,
except as noted in 10-102 following.
(7) CS, Community Service Two (2) stories not to exceed thirty (30) feet,
except as noted in 10-102 following.
(8) GR, General Retail Districts Three (3) stories not to exceed forty (40) feet,
except as noted in 10-102 following.
(9) PD, Planned Development
Districts
To any height approved by the Town Council,
provided the Floor Area Ratio does not
exceed 1:1 and special setbacks, as specified
by the Town Council, are observed, and as
noted in 10-102 following.
10-102 SPECIAL HEIGHT REGULATIONS
(1) In all districts, roofs with a slope of less than 3:12 shall be considered flat roofs or roofs with a
flat surface. Roofs with a slope of 3:12 or greater, up to and including a slope of 18:12, shall be
considered pitched roofs. Roofs with a slope of greater than 18:12 shall be considered a vertical wall
and be limited to the maximum plate height limitation for the district where applicable.
(2) In C, D, E and F Districts, the height to the top of the top plate shall be a maximum of twentysix
(26) feet, except as limited by Section 8-601.
(2A) In G Multifamily districts, the height to the top of the top plate for structures on fifty (50) feet
wide building sites shall be a maximum of thirty-five (35) feet.
(3) In all districts except C, D, E, and F, roof gables may extend not more than ten (10) feet above
the maximum permitted building height.
(4) In all districts, chimneys, vent stacks, and antennas may extend not more than ten (10) feet
above the maximum permitted building height.
(5) Cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, and ornamental features including cupolas, domes, or
spires shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height in C, D, E, and F districts, or not more than ten
(10) feet above the maximum permitted height in all other districts.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 465/505
(6) In residential districts C, D, E, and F, parapet walls cannot exceed the maximum height of
twenty-six (26) feet.
(7) In nonresidential districts, parapet walls can extend an additional height not to exceed four (4)
feet above the maximum for the district for mansard roofs, roofs with a flat surface, or roofs with a
slope less than 3:12.
(8) When a roof contains more than one slope, the steeper roof slope above the second floor plate
line shall be extended to form a projected roof ridge which shall be limited to the maximum
permitted height for the district as outlined in Section 10-101.
(9) Roof designs other than those described in this section, including but not limited to domes or
arched roofs, shall be permitted provided the entire roof structure is completely contained within the
area defined by both building and roof regulations in this ordinance.
(10) In residential districts C, D, E, and F, one architectural feature per building site will be
permitted to exceed the twenty-six (26) feet height of the top plate provided the feature complies with
all of the following:
A. The maximum height to the top plate shall be limited to thirty (30) feet.
B. The maximum horizontal width above the twenty-six (26) foot top plate line shall not
exceed twice the width of the required side yard to a maximum of fifteen (15) feet.
C. The roof slope shall be 3:12 or greater, and comply with the maximum permitted height
for the district.
D. Such feature shall be limited in use for additional ceiling height in the room directly
below but in no case shall the space be used for living area above the second floor nor be used
to accommodate or provide headroom for a stairway or elevator shaft to the living area located
in the attic as permitted in Section 10-102(11).
E. For purposes of this subsection, a dormer shall not be considered an architectural feature.
(11) Subject to all applicable Town building regulations, living area in attic space of two-story
dwellings will be permitted provided the roof line is not altered or designed for other than a two-story
building. Openings for windows or dormers cannot exceed four (4) feet in width, must be separated
by a minimum of four (4) feet, and must be set back a minimum of thirty (30) inches from the top
plate.
(12) In G Multifamily Districts:
A. Windows shall not be permitted on the third story facing the rear yard adjacent to a
residential zoning district.
B. On fifty (50) feet wide building sites, doors shall not be permitted on the on the [sic] third
floor facing the alley.
C. Minimum required roof pitch will be 5:12. Parapets are not permitted.
(13) In the C, E [D], E and F Districts, windows or dormers above the second floor top plate line
shall face a front street. Fixed skylights that are flush-mounted with the roof shall be allowed above
the top plate line of the second story, provided that the skylight at its lowest elevation is a minimum
of six (6) feet measured vertically above the finished floor.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 466/505
(Ordinance 971, sec. 1, adopted 12/21/81; Ordinance 972, sec. 6, 12/28/81; Ordinance 1008, sec. 1(9), (10),
adopted 9/6/83; Ordinance 1422, sec. I, 11/1/99; Ordinance 1570, secs. 1, 2, adopted 11/3/03; Ordinance 1634,
secs. 2, 3, adopted 9/26/05; Ordinance 1780, secs. 7, 8, adopted 1/26/09; Ordinance 1873, sec. 6, adopted
10/24/11)
SECTION 11. SPECIFIC USE PERMITS
11-100 THE TOWN COUNCIL OF THE TOWN OF HIGHLAND PARK, TEXAS, AFTER PUBLIC
HEARING AND PROPER NOTICE TO ALL PARTIES AFFECTED AND AFTER RECOMMENDATIONS
BY THE TOWN ZONING COMMISSION MAY AUTHORIZE THE ISSUANCE OF SPECIFIC USE
PERMITS FOR THE USES INDICATED ON THE USE SCHEDULE IN DISTRICTS DESIGNATED AND
SHOWN BY 7-102 THROUGH 7-107.
11-101 The Town Zoning Commission in considering and determining its recommendation or the Town Council
in considering any request for a specific use permit may require from the applicant, plans, information, operating
data and expert evaluation concerning the location, function and characteristics of any building or use proposed.
The Town Council may in the interest of the public welfare and to assure compliance with this ordinance,
establish conditions of operation, location, arrangement and construction of any use for which a permit is
authorized. In authorizing the location of any of the uses listed as specific use permits, the Town Council may
impose such development standards and safeguards as the conditions and location indicate important to the
welfare and protection of adjacent property from excessive noise, dust, fumes, odor, glare, offensive view or
other adverse, undesirable or hazardous conditions.
SECTION 12. ACCESSORY BUILDING REGULATIONS
12-100 DEFINITION AND USE REGULATION
a. In a residence or apartment district, an accessory building cannot be rented, cannot contain
kitchen facilities nor can an accessory building be used for commercial purposes.
b. In other districts, an accessory building is a subordinate building, the use of which is incidental
to and used only in conjunction with the main building.
12-101 AREA REGULATIONS FOR ACCESSORY BUILDINGS IN RESIDENTIAL AND MULTIFAMILY
DISTRICTS:
(1) Front Yard.
(a) Attached accessory buildings shall have a front yard not less than that required for the
main building. Detached accessory buildings shall be located in the area defined as the rear
yard, except as provided in Subsection (b).
(b) Any detached accessory building located on a combined building site must be located in
the rear yard, or in a side yard, to the rear of a line joining the midpoint of one side lot line with
the midpoint of the opposite side lot line. (See Appendix Illustration 9)
(2) Side Yard.
(a) Except as provided in Subsection (b), there shall be a side yard for any detached
accessory building of not less than three (3) feet from any side lot line, alley line or easement
line, except that adjacent to a side street the side yard requirement shall be the same as that
required for the main building. An attached or detached accessory building on a corner lot
which opens directly to and is entered from the side street shall provide a side yard of not less
than twenty (20) feet. Maximum overhang of roof of an accessory building into the required
side yard is eighteen (18) inches.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 467/505
(b) Except as provided below in Subparagraph 4 (Nonconforming Accessory Buildings), any
detached accessory building to be located on a combined building site shall have a side yard
that is not less than ten feet from any side lot line, alley line, or easement line. All other
provisions of Subsection (a) shall apply to any detached accessory building located on a
combined building site.
(3) Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard for any accessory building of not less than (3) feet from
the rear property lot line, alley line, or easement line, except that if no alley exists, the rear yard shall
not be less than eight (8) feet as measured from the rear property line. In A, B, G and H Districts, the
main dwelling and all accessory buildings shall not cover more than sixty (60) percent of that portion
of the lot lying to the rear of a line erected joining the midpoint of one side lot line with the midpoint
of the opposite side lot line. In C, D, E and F Districts, coverage for the main building and all
accessory buildings is limited to not more than fifty (50) percent. Carports, garages or other detached
accessory buildings located within the rear portion of the lot as heretofore described shall not be
located closer than ten (10) feet to the main building, nor nearer than three (3) feet to any side lot
line, except that a breezeway not exceeding fifteen (15) feet in height and six (6) feet in width, as
measured to the outside face of support posts and exclusive of a maximum eighteen (18) inch roof
overhang, shall be permitted connecting the dwelling structure to an accessory building, provided it is
open on all sides from the eaves of the roof to the ground. Carports and garages which open directly
to and are entered from an alley shall not be located nearer than ten (10) feet to the rear lot line.
Maximum overhang for roofs of accessory buildings into the required rear yard is eighteen (18)
inches.
(4) Special Provision for Play Structures. Play structures are permitted only in the rear yard, or in
the side yard behind the midpoint of the lot depth. There shall be a side yard setback and rear yard
setback of not less than three (3) feet, including any roof overhang, to any property line, alley line, or
easement line.
12-102 AREA REGULATIONS FOR NONCONFORMING ACCESSORY BUILDINGS IN RESIDENTIAL
AND MULTIFAMILY DISTRICTS.
(1) Where existing, nonconforming accessory buildings on a building site do not provide the
minimum yard dimensions specified, no addition or change to such buildings may be made which
will increase the degree of nonconformity.
(2) Any addition or change to an existing, nonconforming accessory building located on a
combined building site shall conform to the requirements of sections 12-101(1)(b) and (2)(b) of this
section.
(3) Nonconforming accessory buildings may be replaced provided:
(a) That the new, nonconforming accessory building is occupied by the same or similar use;
(b) That the new, nonconforming accessory building has a maximum height not to exceed
that of the accessory building being replaced, and all portions thereof shall comply with section
8-601(1), (7), (8), (9) and (10).[;]
(c) That the nonconforming side and rear yard dimensions are not reduced;
(d) That no portion of the nonconforming accessory building (including an overhang) extends
across a property or easement line.
(4) On building sites where the main building is being replaced, any new accessory building shall
comply with the provisions of this ordinance.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 468/505
(Ordinance 740, sec. 9, adopted 5/4/70; Ordinance 847, sec. 1, adopted 3/1/76; Ordinance 1008, sec. 1(11),
adopted 9/6/83; Ordinance 1631, sec. 6, adopted 8/22/05; Ordinance 1780, sec. 9, adopted 1/26/09; Ordinance
1873, secs. 7–8, adopted 10/24/11; Ordinance 1927, secs. 4–5, adopted 9/9/13)
SECTION 13. SPECIAL AREA AND USE REGULATIONS
13-100 Courts–Where an apartment building or buildings are erected so as to create inner courts, the faces of all
opposite walls in such courts shall be a minimum distance of thirty (30) feet apart and no balcony or canopy
shall extend into such court area for a distance greater than five (5) feet.
13-101 Location of Dwellings and Buildings–Only one main building for one-family, two-family or multiplefamily
use with permitted accessory buildings may be located upon a lot or platted tract. Every dwelling shall
face or front upon a public street, or approved place, other than an alley, which means of access shall have a
minimum width of forty (40) feet. Whenever two (2) or more main buildings, or portions thereof, are proposed
to be placed upon a single lot or tract and such buildings will not face upon a public street, the same may be
permitted when the site plan for such development is approved by the Town Council so as to comply with the
normal requirements for platting. No parking area, storage area, or required open space for one (1) building shall
be computed as being the open space, yard or area requirements for any other dwelling or other use.
13-102 Temporary Construction Buildings–Temporary buildings, and temporary building material storage areas
to be used for construction purposes may be permitted for a specified period of time in accordance with a permit
issued by the Building Inspector and subject to periodic renewal by the Inspector for cause shown. Upon
completion or abandonment of construction or expiration of permit, such field offices and buildings shall be
removed at the direction of the Building Inspector.
13-103 Location of Tennis Courts, Multi-purpose Game Courts and Swimming Pools, and Water Storage–
(a) Private tennis courts or multi-purpose game courts which are accessory uses shall be located on
a building site and shall not cover more than twenty percent (20%) of the building site.
(b) Except as provided in Subsection (d), no portion of a tennis court or multi-purpose court
surface, fence or other appurtenance shall be located within the required front yard or side yard nor
nearer to any side lot line than permitted for a building as specified in Section 8-501 (minimum and
maximum required side yard schedule) of the zoning ordinance nor nearer than three (3) feet from the
rear property line, easement line or alley line. Fences or walls that exceed ten (10) feet in height shall
be set back from any side lot line one (1) foot for each foot the fence or wall exceeds ten (10) feet
from the setback permitted for a building under Section 8-501 of the zoning ordinance.
(c) All swimming pools and equipment shall be located behind the front building line. The edge of
the pool's water surface shall be located a minimum of three (3) feet from the side or rear yard line or
easement line, if no alley exists. Pool equipment shall not be permitted in the required side yard, but
may be located to the rear property line or easement line if no alley exists.
(d) A tennis court or multi-purpose court surface, swimming pool or other appurtenance located on
a combined building site shall be located only in the rear yard or, in a side yard to the rear of a line
joining the midpoint of one side lot line with the midpoint of the opposite side lot line, provided that
such improvement(s) is (are) set back a minimum distance of ten (10) feet from the side lot line. (See
Appendix Illustration 9)
(e) Groundwater reclamation and rainwater harvesting systems shall be allowed in the front yard if
located entirely below the natural front yard grade. Systems located partially above, or entirely
above, the natural ground level, shall not be located in the front yard and shall:
1. provide a minimum side yard setback of five (5) feet;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 469/505
2. be screened from view with a fence or wall; and
3. not exceed the height of the adjacent fence.
13-104 Convex Safety Mirrors–Convex Mirror regulations refer to the placement of convex (rounded) mirrors
placed adjacent to alleys and at alley intersections for safety purposes. Convex safety mirrors may be attached to
private property (i.e., a fence or wall) with permission of the property owner where the mirror is placed. Mirrors
may overhang into the public right-of-way up to twelve (12) inches, but may not be placed by residents in the
public right-of-way. Mirrors may not exceed eighteen (18) inches in diameter and may not be placed higher than
ten (10) feet or lower than seven (7) feet above grade.
13-105 Small Solar Energy Systems–Small Solar Energy Systems are permitted in all zoning districts as follows:
A. Accessory Use. A Small Solar Energy System is allowed as an accessory use in all zoning
districts.
B. General Standards. Small Solar Energy System devices must be designed and located to avoid
glare or reflection onto: (i) neighboring properties, inclusive of properties across an alley, easement,
or street, and (ii) adjacent roadways. The devices shall not interfere with traffic or create a safety
hazard, and must meet the following applicable requirements:
(1) Ground-Mounted.
(a) Ground-mounted Small Solar Energy Systems are considered structures and must
meet applicable setbacks for the zoning district, and shall be located in the rear yard.
(b) The solar panel collector and supporting framework of the Small Solar Energy
System cannot extend more than six (6) feet above the existing grade.
(2) Roof-Mounted.
(a) Roof-mounted Small Solar Energy Systems located on pitched roofs shall be
mounted as flush as possible to the roof, but in any case, shall not extend more than
twelve (12) inches above the point of attachment.
(b) Roof-mounted Small Solar Energy Systems on flat roofs cannot extend more than
six (6) feet above the roof surface.
(c) Roof-mounted Small Solar Energy Systems must also be in compliance with the
maximum building height for the applicable zoning district.
(d) Roof-mounted Small Solar Energy Systems shall not be visible from any street.
13-106 Wind Energy Devices and/or Systems Prohibited–Wind Energy Devices shall be prohibited from all
zoning districts of the Town of Highland Park, Dallas County, Texas.
13-107 Flags and Flagpoles–The regulations set out in this Section apply to flags and detached flagpoles in all
residential zoning districts as follows:
A. Setbacks - The minimum setback from any property line, overhead utility line, or public rightof-
way shall be a distance equal to the vertical distance from the ground to the top of the pole.
B. Size - The height of the flagpole shall not exceed twenty-five feet (25') measured from the
natural grade, set back a minimum distance equal to the height of the flagpole, measured at natural
grade, from all adjoining property lines. The size of the flag shall be appropriate for the height of the
flagpole, but each individual flag shall in no event exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in area.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 470/505
C. Number - No more than one (1) flagpole shall be allowed per building site.
D. Manner of Display - Flags and insignia of any government should be displayed in an approved
manner pursuant to federal guidelines in Title 4, United States Code, Chapter 1 (the Federal Flag
Code).
13-108 Temporary Storage Units–Temporary storage units and similar portable storage containers may be
located in the front yard, or in the side yard forward of the midpoint of the lot depth, for a period not to exceed
four (4) days. Units may be placed in the rear yard, or in the side yard behind the midpoint of the lot depth, for a
period not to exceed thirty (30) days.
Exception: Temporary storage units used in conjunction with a home renovation are excluded from
these rear yard and side yard location and time restraint regulations and shall be removed upon
completion of the home renovation project.
(Ordinance 884, sec. 4, adopted 2/6/78; Ordinance 1258, sec. 3, adopted 7/12/93; Ordinance 1631, sec. 7,
adopted 8/22/05; Ordinance 1927, secs. 6–7, adopted 9/9/13)
SECTION 14. SIGN REGULATIONS
14-100 Objectives and Purpose. The principal objectives and purpose of this section of the Zoning Ordinance
are:
(1) To provide a reasonable system for the control of signs;
(2) To encourage signs which are well designed and pleasing in appearance;
(3) To encourage a desirable urban character compatible with the general residential environment
of the Town which has a minimum of overhead clutter;
(4) To enhance the economic value of the community through the location and the design of signs;
(5) To provide for signs, for which the principal purpose will be to furnish information necessary
for business and commerce;
(6) To reduce possible traffic and safety hazards through good signage; and
(7) To provide for proper sign area and height with relation to viewing distance and other
circumstances.
14-101 Definitions. For the purpose of this section, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words
and phrases used in this section are defined as follows:
(1) Address Sign. Shall mean a sign not exceeding seventy-two (72) square inches in exposed
surface used to identify the address of the premises and is not illuminated or lighted.
(2) Area of Sign. Shall mean the area within the outer dimensions of a sign, including those
portions of the frame or support structure which (A) border or adjoin the face of the sign, or (B) are
of size, dimension or configuration which attracts attention or (C) are in excess of that necessary to
support the sign. In the case of a multiple-faced sign, each face shall be deemed to be a separate sign
for the purpose of determining sign area and each face is entitled to the allowable sign area. If a sign
is placed on a wall or other surface, or if letters or other portions of the sign are supported
individually, without any border, the area shall be computed by enclosing the entire sign within sets
of parallel lines. (See Figure D)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 471/505
(3) Banner. Flexible material, usually made of cloth or plastic, often bearing a symbol or slogan,
and which is attached at each end on a pole, or which hangs vertically on a pole.
(4) Billboard. An off-premise sign.
(5) Business Sign. Shall mean a structure or graphic display placed or arranged for the purpose of
directing attention to the occupant, building, service or product existing or offered on the premises on
which such sign is located.
(6) Commercial Message. Wording on any sign, logo, or other representation that, directly or
indirectly, names, advertises or calls attention to a business, product, service, or other commercial
activity.
(7) Construction Sign. Shall mean a sign stating the names of the general contractor and, if desired,
those individuals or businesses directly connected with a construction project. For the purposes of
construction signs, a “general contractor” shall be an individual, firm, corporation, or other entity that
has lawfully obtained a building permit.
(8) Face, Sign Face, or Face of a Sign. Shall mean any surface of a sign which is painted, stained,
lighted, has lettering, or is illustrated, separately or in combination, to attract attention.
(9) Ground Sign. Shall mean a sign which is supported by a pedestal or other solid foundation in or
upon the ground. It shall also include signs referred to as “monument signs.”
(10) Illuminated Sign or Lighted Sign. These terms may be used interchangeably and shall refer to
any sign which has a source of light, either internal or external, for the purpose of illuminating such
sign.
(11) Nonconforming Sign. Shall mean a sign which was not in violation of any ordinance of the
Town at the time of its erection, which was intended to be and which is permanent, and does not
constitute a hazard to public safety or a nuisance, but which does not conform to the requirements of
section 14.
(12) Noncommercial Sign. Any sign that does not contain or is not used to convey a commercial
message.
(13) Off-Premise Sign. Shall mean any sign not constructed on the same building site as the
business it is advertising.
(14) Pole Sign. Shall mean any detached sign taller than six feet (6') which is supported by one or
more poles, pylons, or similar structural fixture(s) permanently affixed to the ground.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 472/505
(15) Political Sign. Shall mean a temporary sign indicating the name, picture, and/or information
related to an individual seeking election or appointment to a public office, or relating to a
forthcoming public election or referendum, or pertaining to the advocating by persons, groups, or
parties of political views or policies.
(16) Portable Business Sign. Shall mean any outdoor advertising display sign not permanently
attached to a support structure via commonly used construction standards.
(17) Real Estate Sign. Shall mean a sign advertising the sale, lease, or rental of property only for a
use for which it is legally zoned.
(18) Sign. The term “sign,” as used herein, shall refer to any structure, object, or graphic device
which is located, placed, colored, designed, arranged, lighted, or erected for the purpose of attracting
attention to a building, premises, commodity, product, business, service, or activity or which gives
information about same.
(19) Temporary Sign. Shall mean a nonilluminated sign designed for the limited and/or temporary
advertisement of specific events for the property on which it is located.
14-102 Permits Required. It shall be unlawful to erect, re-erect, construct, or alter any sign except as provided by
section 14, pursuant to a required sign permit for the same issued by the Building Inspection Department. Except
as hereinafter provided, a permit shall be required for each sign. In addition, electrical permits shall be obtained
for lighted or illuminated signs.
14-103 Permits Not Required for Certain Signs. The following shall be subject to other requirements of this
article even though a permit shall not therefore be required:
(1) Maintenance and repairs to existing signs for which a valid sign permit was obtained, if
required at the time of the initial installation;
(2) Signs for public safety and convenience such as directional signs, provided that they do not
exceed three (3) square feet in size. Signs include “Entrance,” “One-Way,” “No Trespassing,” “Do
Not Enter,” “No Parking,” and similar types, and are not permitted in the right-of-way.[;]
(3) Public notice signs, such as notices to remove weeds;
(4) Political signs;
(5) Garage sale or estate sale signs;
(6) Detached or attached signs designating a building or place as historic, provided that they are no
larger than six (6) square feet in size;
(7) Security protection signs not exceeding one (1) square foot in size;
(8) “For Sale,” “For Lease,” and other similar real estate signs;
(9) Certain temporary window signs pursuant to section 14-109;
(10) School, civic, religious, charitable, and other nonprofit and noncommercial signs;
(11) Address signs.
14-104 Nonconforming Signs. Any words, symbols or other graphic materials of a nonconforming sign may be
replaced or changed. Except as provided in section 14-103, a permit is required to make other changes to a
nonconforming sign. A permit for alteration of a sign which involves only a change in copy, symbols or color,
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 473/505
and which does not involve any change in any part of the structure or lighting of the sign itself, shall not be
denied on the basis that the sign is otherwise nonconforming, if such sign was erected in accordance with
applicable Town ordinances. If any such sign is (1) dismantled, (2) removed, or (3) destroyed by fire, vandalism,
windstorm, or other natural forces or events beyond the control of the owner, to the extent of more than 60% of
the cost of erecting a new sign of the same type at the same location, it shall not be replaced, re-erected or rebuilt
without a sign permit conforming to section 14.
14-105 Sign Permit Applications. All applications for sign permits shall be made in writing on forms furnished
by the Town available at the Town Hall or online at the Town's website. The Building Official shall have the
authority to prepare application forms with application requirements such as scaled drawings, sign dimensions
and colors, applicant contact information, and other relevant information as appropriate and necessary to process
the sign permit request.
14-106 Maintenance of Signs. All signs shall be maintained so as to be structurally safe, clean, and in a good
state of maintenance and repair. Any unsafe signs shall be removed by the property owner by order of the
Building Official.
14-107 Unlawful or Prohibited Signs:
(1) Posting on Public Places. It shall be unlawful for any person to post, suspend, print, stick,
stamp, tack or otherwise affix, or cause the same to be done, any notice, placard, bill, card, poster,
sticker, banner, sign, advertising, or other device calculated to attract the attention of the public to,
over, or upon any street right-of-way (including the parkway, except for address signs), public
sidewalk, curb (except house numbers) lamp post, hydrant, tree, electric light pole, telephone pole, or
upon any fixture of the telephone systems, traffic-control poles or supports, or similar or related
systems involving governmental or public service of the Town, or upon any public building,
structure, or utility. (This subsection is not applicable to public convenience, safety, and regulatory
signs erected by the Town.)
(2) Moving Signs. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or install any sign which, in whole or
in part, moves, rotates, flashes, reflects, blinks, or appears to do any of the foregoing, or which
simulates motion in any manner. Time and temperature signs shall be permitted, but shall not change
less than every five (5) seconds.
(3) Prohibited Support. A sign shall not be supported in whole or in part from any public utility
installation or any tree on private premises.
(4) Off-Premise Signs. Off-premise signs are prohibited in any zoning district within the Town.
(5) Obscene Signs. Signs displaying indecent, obscene gestures or pictures or profanity are
prohibited in any zoning district within the Town.
(6) Pole Signs. Pole signs are prohibited in any zoning district within the Town.
(7) Portable Signs. Portable business and similar signs are not permitted in any zoning district
within the Town.
(8) Construction Signs. Construction signs are not permitted in residential zoning districts.
(9) Business Signs. Business signs are not permitted in residential zoning districts.
14-108 Detached Business Signs. Detached business signs shall be permitted in CS, GR, and PD 1 districts as
follows:
(1) Only on-site business signs are permitted as detached signs. All business signs not affixed to a
building are deemed detached signs.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 474/505
(2) Detached signs shall be ground signs.
(3) Detached business signs shall meet the following standards:
(a) No more than two (2) ground signs per site.
(b) Maximum sign height is six feet (6') and maximum width is ten feet (10').
(c) The sign face area shall not exceed 60 square feet per sign face and shall not exceed a
total of 120 square feet for all sides or faces (See Figure E) and the combined size of all
detached signs shall not exceed 120 square feet.
(d) Detached signs can be used for the one business or multiple tenants.
(e) Detached signs shall not be closer than ten feet (10') apart.
(f) Only external lighting is permitted on detached signs. However, individually back-lit
opaque letters are permitted. See section 14-114 for intensity of sign lighting permitted.
(g) Detached signs shall be set back a minimum of five feet (5') from the property line. Signs
shall not be placed that obstruct the view at an intersection or create a traffic hazard. No sign
shall be located or placed so as to interfere with the line of site at an intersection from a
distance of twenty-four inches (24") above the top of the adjacent street curb for a distance of
twenty-five feet (25') back from the intersection in each direction along the street curb.
(h) Signs shall be constructed of metal with a matte finish, stone, concrete, wood, brick, or
fiberglass with a matte finish.
14-109 Wall or Attached Business Signs. Wall or attached business signs shall be permitted in CS, GR, and PD 1
districts as follows:
(1) Signs painted on the wall of the building.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 475/505
(2) Signs composed solely of individual letters provided that no portion thereof shall extend more
than eight inches (8") from the wall, building, or structure to which it is attached.
(3) Attached wall signs shall not face a residential zoning district unless separated by a public
street, except a nonilluminated sign, not exceeding two (2) square feet, shall be permitted to face a
residential zoning district when separated by a public street, a parking lot, an easement, or alley.
(4) Attached wall signs shall not exceed two (2) square feet in area for each one (1) foot of first
story of linear frontage. There is no limit on the number of signs per wall, but in no case shall the
square footage of any single sign exceed 200 square feet.
(5) Attached signs shall not exceed the height of the wall to which the sign is attached.
(6) Internally illuminated and back-lit signs are permitted, including LED signs, except LED signs
with exposed bulbs, which are prohibited.
(7) Signs in windows or inside a building which are visible from a street or a sidewalk are exempt
from area and size requirements, but must meet all other requirements for attached signs. Window
signs in vacant tenant spaces shall not be lit in any manner.
(8) Murals and other wall paintings or graphics larger than permitted in this subsection may be
permitted by specific use permit (SUP) in nonresidential zoning districts only.
14-110 Projecting Blade Signs. Projecting blade signs shall be permitted in CS and GR districts as follows:
(1) Only one projecting blade sign per business shall be allowed.
(2) Projecting blade signs may be utilized as business identification signs in nonresidential zones
provided that such signs: (a) do not exceed three (3) square feet in area and six inches (6") in
thickness; (b) are erected at least seven feet (7') above grade or sidewalk, (c) are mounted with
connectors which are an integral part and in keeping with the overall design of the sign, (d) shall not
be internally illuminated, and (e) are erected so that the structural elements shall not be exposed
unless the same are an integral part and in keeping with the overall design and theme of the sign.
Projecting blade signs may be constructed of metal, wood, or fiberglass with matte finish.
14-111 Signs on Projecting Overhangs and Awnings. Signs on projecting overhangs or awnings shall be
considered attached signs.
14-112 Color of Signs. Signs requiring a permit shall be limited to earth-tone colors as determined from a color
palette approved by the Town Administrator, or his designee, and on file in the Building Inspection Department.
For the purpose of this section, “sign” shall include the lighting or illumination and, in the case of a sign placed
on a building surface without any border and with its background the same color as the building surface, the
color of the building surface shall not be considered as a color of the sign. For the purposes of this section, black
and white shall not be considered colors.
14-113 Lighting of Signs. Any external sign lighting shall be limited to white light and permitted only when
such lighting is installed on private property and hooded or shielded so that direct beams therefrom do not fall
upon public streets, alleys, or other private property. Sodium vapor or other colored exterior lights or lighting are
not permitted.
14-114 Intensity of Lighting/Luminance. Signs that interfere with the proper operation of, or cause confusion to
the operator of a motor vehicle on the public streets by virtue of the intensity, or direction of their lighting or
illumination shall not be permitted. Signs which are lighted or illuminated shall not have luminance greater than
5 footcandles within two feet (2') of the sign face.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 476/505
14-115 Real Estate Signs. One real estate sign per street frontage, such as “for sale” or “for lease,” per property
ownership or vacant tenant space is permitted and shall not exceed eight (8) square feet in area, including riders
or additional plates not exceeding two (2) in number, which may be attached. Such signs shall be erected or
constructed so that no portion thereof exceeds a height of six feet (6') from the ground. In addition, an “Open”
sign, not to exceed two (2) square feet in area, may be used on the property when the dwelling is open for public
inspection. Real estate signs must be removed not later than ten (10) days after the transaction pursuant to which
the property is sold or leased is closed.
14-116 Address Signs. Address signs are permitted as an accessory use in all zoning districts in the Town and
are permitted in the parkway when not on a permanent foundation.
14-117 Political Signs. Political signs, not exceeding thirty-six (36) square feet in area or eight feet (8') in height,
shall be permitted. Such signs shall not be illuminated nor have any moving parts.
14-118 Nonresidential Construction Signs. Nonresidential construction signs shall be permitted in CS, GR, and
PD 1 districts. Nonresidential construction signs shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet in size or eight feet (8')
in height. Only one construction sign per site is permitted. Construction signs shall be removed when the
construction, as specified on the building permit, is complete.
14-119 Noncommercial Signs. A noncommercial sign may be located in all zoning districts of the Town.
(1) Noncommercial signs located in CS, GR and PD districts shall be subject to dimensional,
design, and other requirements as set forth in section 14-108 for that district.
(2) Noncommercial signs located in A, B, C, D, E, F, G, and H districts shall not exceed eight feet
(8') in height or exceed thirty-six (36) square feet in area. When multiple signs are located on a
property, the total area of the combined sign faces shall not exceed one hundred twenty (120) square
feet.
14-120 Multifamily Identification Signs:
(1) One attached multifamily identification sign is permitted per site in the “G” and “H” zoning
districts. Attached signs shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet.
(2) One detached multifamily identification ground sign is permitted per site. Detached signs shall
not exceed one (1) square foot per one linear foot of building width.
(3) The total square footage of attached and detached signs shall not exceed sixty (60) square feet.
14-121 Temporary Signs:
(1) Require a permit from the Building Inspection Department prior to installation and/or display;
(2) Are only permitted in the CS, GR, PD, and multifamily zoning districts;
(3) Shall not exceed a total cumulative area of thirty (30) square feet in size; and
(4) May be on display for no more than a thirty (30) day period, and for no more than two (2) such
30-day periods per calendar year.
14-122 Signs in Highland Park Village (PD 1). Signs in the Highland Park Shopping Village (PD 1) shall
comply with the standards established in section 14. In addition, the following standards shall apply only to PD
1:
(1) Detached Signs:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 477/505
(a) Four (4) monument signs are permitted for the entire PD 1, but no more than two (2) such
signs are permitted on any street frontage.
(b) One detached interior sign per two (2) acres or portion thereof, is permitted, but not
exceeding seven feet (7') in height and a maximum of three (3) square feet per side. Interior
signs shall not be permitted in the front yard.
(c) One sandwich board sign designed to display changeable messages per business tenant is
allowed. A sandwich board sign shall not exceed four feet (4') in height and thirty inches (30")
in width. Sandwich board signs shall not obstruct a sidewalk, but may be placed on the
sidewalk provided that a minimum of four feet (4') is maintained for pedestrian movement.
Sandwich board signs are not permitted in the front yard.
(2) Attached Signs:
(a) No attached wall signs shall face a public street, except Preston Road or Mockingbird
Lane.
(b) One projecting blade or hanging sign per tenant is permitted, but shall not project more
than four feet (4') from the wall and not exceed six (6) square feet in size. Projecting blade or
hanging signs shall not exceed six inches (6") in thickness and shall be a minimum of seven feet
(7') above the sidewalk or ground. Projecting blade signs shall not face a public street.
(3) Fourteen (14) special event or tenant flags are authorized, but shall not be located in the front
yard. A permit from the Building Inspection Department shall not be required for such flags.
(4) Other signs not specifically set forth herein may be approved by the Town Council by site plan
amendment to PD 1.
14-123 Theater Signs. Theaters shall be allowed signs on permanent, fixed marquees. Such signs shall not
exceed ten percent (10%) of the front elevation of the theater and in no case, shall such sign exceed 120 square
feet in area.
14-124 Signs On University Property. All signs on property owned by Southern Methodist University shall
comply with standards established in section 14. In addition, property in a nonresidential zoning district adjacent
to Mockingbird Lane shall be permitted to have:
(1) One banner per building site for special events not exceeding two feet by six feet (2' x 6') in
size.
(2) Banners shall be allowed on poles or light support standards for a maximum of thirty (30) days
per event.
(3) Banners shall be a minimum of eight feet (8') and a maximum of twenty feet (20') above the
top of the adjacent street curb.
(4) Banners shall not extend across property lines or into the right-of-way.
(5) Other signs permitted by specific use permit (SUP).
14-125 Other Signs. Signs in a PD and CC districts may be approved by ordinance by the Town Council.
(Ordinance 847, sec. 1, adopted 3/1/76; Ordinance 1008, sec. 2(1), adopted 9/6/83; Ordinance 1246, sec. 2,
adopted 4/5/93; Ordinance 1873, sec. 9, adopted 10/24/11)
SECTION 15. FENCE REGULATIONS
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 478/505
15-100 NO FENCE, WALL OR OTHER FENCE-TYPE SPACE ENCLOSURE SHALL BE ERECTED,
PLACED OR ALTERED IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS, A THROUGH H, AND CC DISTRICT, UNLESS
SUCH FENCE, WALL OR STRUCTURE IS IN CONFORMANCE WITH THE FOLLOWING STANDARDS:
15-101 In residentially zoned districts A through H, and CC Districts, fences or walls may be erected to a
maximum height of eight (8) feet above the grade as measured from the nonowner's side when located in the
required rear and side yards and along either the required side or rear lot line. No fence or wall may be erected or
placed in front of the required front yard line.
A fence or wall may be erected, not to exceed eight (8) feet in height, along or within the front building line;
provided, that said fence shall not extend into, on or around the required front yard.
A masonry or concrete retaining wall may be constructed in the required front yard, provided the retaining wall
is no higher than the ground level immediately adjacent to the enclosed side of the retaining wall.
Every fence erected along and adjacent to any alley shall have an opening not less than three (3) feet in width
and seven (7) feet in height, and closed with a gate to provide access to the rear yard in case of fire and to permit
the removal of garbage or trash.
Swimming pools shall be completely surrounded by a fence or wall not less than four (4) feet in height, which
shall be so constructed as not to have openings, holes or gaps larger than four (4) inches in any dimension except
for doors and gates. A dwelling house or accessory building may be used as part of such enclosure. All gates or
doors opening through such enclosure shall be equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device for keeping
the gates or doors securely closed at all times when not in actual use, except that the door of any dwelling which
forms a part of the enclosure need not be so equipped.
15-102 No fence or wall erected under the provisions of section 15-101 and no screens, hedges, shrubs or trees
shall be so located as to be dangerous or detrimental to the health or safety of persons living on adjoining
premises, nor shall a fence, wall, hedge, shrub, tree or screen be so placed or planted so as to cause danger or
hazard to traffic by obstructing the view at any street or alley intersection within the sight visibility easement.
No fence, wall, hedge, tree, shrub or screen shall be located or placed so as to interfere with the line of sight at
an intersection from a distance of twenty-four (24) inches to eight (8) feet above the top of the curb. The sight
visibility easement (See Appendix Illustration 10) shall extend as follows:
A. At the intersection of two (2) public streets - a distance of twenty-five (25) feet back from the
intersection in each direction as measured along the street curbline.
B. At the intersection of a public street and an alleyway - a distance of fifteen (15) feet back from
the intersection in each direction as measured along the street curbline and the edge of alley paving.
15-103 Temporary construction fences not exceeding eight feet (8') in height are permitted in nonresidential
zoning districts and will be removed when the construction, as specified on the building permit, is completed or
upon written request by the Building Official.
Editor's note–Ordinance 1008, sec. 2(2), adopted 9/6/83, amended the zoning ordinance by deleting the provisions of subsection 15-
103, pertaining to the erection of fences and walls on sloping ground, and illustration 8. Former subsection 15-103 and said illustration
were derived from Ordinance 847, secs. 1, 2, adopted 3/1/76; and Ordinance 972, sec. 7, adopted 12/28/81.
15-104 Fences and/or walls along the rear (east) property line behind the residential lots along Airline
Road, adjacent to the corporate limit line between the Town of Highland Park and the City of Dallas, are
permitted to extend up to a maximum of twelve (12) feet in height and must be comprised of solid masonry or
concrete construction in order to exceed eight (8) feet in height. Such fences and/or walls which exceed eight (8)
feet in height, up to a maximum of twelve (12) feet, must also meet all structural design criteria of the Town's
adopted building code. No variance is available as to the height or material standards established in this section.
Openings for gates remain as required previously in Section 15.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 479/505
(Ordinance 740, sec. 10, adopted 5/4/70; Ordinance 847, sec. 1, adopted 3/1/76; Ordinance 972, secs. 7, 8,
adopted 12/28/81; Ordinance 1008, secs. 2(2), 3, adopted 9/6/83; Ordinance 1873, sec. 10, adopted 10/24/11;
Ordinance 1927, sec. 8, adopted 9/9/13; Ordinance 2038 adopted 8/13/18)
SECTION 16. NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
16-100 A NONCONFORMING STATUS SHALL EXIST UNDER THE FOLLOWING PROVISIONS OF
THIS ORDINANCE:
a. When a use or structure which does not conform to the regulations prescribed in the district in
which such use or structure is located was in existence and lawfully operating prior to July 3, 1929,
and has been operating since without discontinuance.
b. When on the effective date of this ordinance the use or structure was in existence and lawfully
constructed, located and operating in accordance with the provisions of the prior zoning ordinance or
which was a nonconforming use thereunder, and which use or structure does not now conform to the
regulations herein prescribed for the district in which such use or structure is located.
16-101 Any nonconforming use of land or structures may be continued for definite periods of time subject to
such regulations as the Board of Adjustment may require for immediate preservation of the adjoining property
prior to the ultimate removal of the nonconforming use.
16-102 Reconstruction and/or Repair of Nonconforming Structures:
a. The term “nonconforming structure,” as referenced in this section, does not include the term
“nonconforming accessory building” as used in section 12-102.
b. Partial reconstruction of a nonconforming structure, damaged by fire or natural disaster, will be
permitted when the reconstruction does not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total square footage of
such structure. The size of the reconstructed, nonconforming structure shall not be expanded beyond
the size of the nonconforming structure prior to the loss, nor shall there be an increase in the degree
of nonconformity.
c. Reconstruction of a nonconforming structure, damaged by fire or natural disaster, must conform
to the regulations established in this ordinance when the reconstruction exceeds fifty percent (50%)
of the total square footage of such structure.
d. Reconstruction of a nonconforming structure shall begin within twelve (12) months of the
damaging event, or result in the loss of these nonconforming reconstruction and/or repair provisions.
If the reconstruction and/or repair is delayed by contested insurance claims, litigation, or similar
causes, then the twelve (12) month period may be extended up to an additional twelve (12) months
by the Building Official.
e. If a nonconforming structure is razed and/or demolished, then the replacement structure or new
structure shall comply with the requirements of this ordinance.
f. Any voluntary, exterior reconstruction of any portion of a nonconforming structure shall not be
permitted, unless the reconstruction conforms to the regulations established in this ordinance.
g. The total square footage of a structure, as referenced herein, shall be the total under roof square
footage recorded on the most recent Town approved tax roll. If such square footage data is
unavailable, and/or inaccurate, then the Town shall use information from the most recent building
permit data on file.
h. If a structure occupied by a nonconforming use is damaged by fire or natural disaster, and such
damage exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the total square footage, then the nonconforming use may not
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 480/505
continue to occupy or reoccupy, this structure.
(Ordinance 740, sec. 11, adopted 5/4/70; Ordinance 1873, sec. 11, adopted 10/24/11)
SECTION 17. BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
17-100 Organization: There is hereby created a Board of Adjustment consisting of five (5) members, each to be
appointed by resolution of the Town Council for a term of two years and removable for cause by the appointing
authority upon written charges and after public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any
member, whose place becomes vacant for any cause, in the same manner as the original appointment was made.
Two members heretofore appointed shall serve until May 15, 1966, or until their successors are appointed and
three members, as heretofore appointed, shall serve until May 15, 1967, or until their successors are appointed,
and thereafter each member reappointed or each new appointee shall serve the full term of two years unless
removed as hereinabove provided. Provided, however, that the Town Council may appoint two alternate
members of the Board of Adjustment who shall serve in the absence of one or more of the regular members
when requested to do so by the Mayor, so that all cases to be heard by the Board of Adjustment will always be
heard by a minimum number of four members. The alternate members, when appointed shall serve for the same
period as the regular members, which is for a term of two years, and any vacancy shall be filled in the same
manner and they shall be subject to removal the same as the regular members.
17-101 The Board shall adopt rules to govern its proceedings; provided, however, that such rules are not
inconsistent with this ordinance or statutes of the State of Texas. Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call
of the Chairman and at such other times as the Board may determine. The Chairman, or in his absence, the
Acting Chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Board shall
be open to the public. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon
each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicate such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and
other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the Board and shall be a public
record.
17-102 Appeals to the Board of Adjustment can be taken by any person aggrieved or by an officer, department
or board of the municipality affected by any decision of the Administrative Officer. Such appeal shall be taken
within fifteen (15) days time after the decision has been rendered by the Administrative Officer, by filing with
the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the Board of Adjustment, a notice of appeal specifying the
grounds thereof. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
17-103 An appeal shall stay all proceedings of the action appealed from unless the officer from whom the appeal
is taken certifies to the Board of Adjustment, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him that by
reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In
such case, proceedings shall not be stayed, otherwise, than by a restraining order which may be granted by the
Board of Adjustment or by a court of record on application on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is
taken and on due cause shown.
17-104 The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an appeal, give the public notice
thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest and decide the same within a reasonable time. At the
hearing any party may appear in person or by attorney or by agent.
17-200 Jurisdiction: When in its judgment, the public convenience and welfare will be substantially served and
the appropriate use of the neighboring property will not be substantially or permanently injured, the Board of
Adjustment may, in specific cases, after public notice and public hearing, and subject to appropriate conditions
and safeguards authorize the following special exceptions to the regulations herein established.
a. Permit the reconstruction, extension or enlargement of a building occupied by nonconforming
use on the lot or tract occupied by such building provided such reconstruction does not prevent the
return of such property to a conforming use.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 481/505
b. Permit such modifications of the height, yard, fence location and fence height, coverage,
easement obstruction regulations and parking regulations as may be necessary to secure appropriate
development of a parcel of land which differs from other parcels in the district by being of such
restricted area, shape, or slope that it cannot be appropriately developed without such modification.
c. Require the discontinuance of nonconforming uses of land or structure under any plan whereby
the full value of the structure and facilities can be amortized within a definite period of time, taking
into consideration the general character of the neighborhood and the necessity for all property to
conform to the regulations of this ordinance. All actions to discontinue a nonconforming use of land
or structure shall be taken with due regard for the property rights of the persons affected when
considered in the light of the public welfare and the character of the area surrounding the designated
nonconforming use and the conservation and preservation of property. The Board shall from time to
time on its own motion or upon cause presented by interested property owners inquire into the
existence, continuation or maintenance of any nonconforming use within the Town of Highland Park,
Texas.
17-300 Actions of the Board:
a. In exercising its powers, the Board may, in conformity with the provisions of Articles 1011-A
[to] and including 1011-J of the 1925 Civil Statutes of Texas, as amended, revise or reform, wholly or
partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decisions, or determination appealed from and make
such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made and shall have all the powers
of the officer from whom the appeal is taken including the power to impose reasonable conditions to
be complied with by the applicant.
b. The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Board shall be necessary to revise any order,
requirement, decision or determination of any such administrative official, or to decide in favor of the
applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this ordinance or to affect any
variance in said ordinance.
c. Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the Board of
Adjustment or any taxpayer or any officer, department or board of the municipality may present to a
court of record a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or part,
specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court within ten (10)
days after the filing of the decision in the office of the Board and not thereafter.
(Ordinance 740, sec. 12, adopted 5/4/70)
Charter reference–Board of Adjustment, sec. 11.02.
State law reference–Establishment and authority of Zoning Board of Adjustment, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 211.008 et
seq.
SECTION 18. CREATION OF BUILDING SITE
18-100 NO PERMIT FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF A BUILDING OR BUILDINGS UPON ANY TRACT
OR PLOT SHALL BE ISSUED UNTIL A BUILDING SITE, BUILDING TRACT OR BUILDING LOT HAS
BEEN CREATED BY COMPLIANCE WITH ONE OF THE FOLLOWING CONDITIONS:
a. The lot or tract is part of a plat of record, properly approved by the Town Council of Highland
Park, and filed in the Plat Records of Dallas County, Texas, and has not been previously utilized as
all or part of building site.
b. The site, plot or tract is all or part of a site plan officially approved by the Town Council of
Highland Park, which site plan provides all utility and drainage easements, alleys, streets and other
public improvements necessary to meet the normal requirements for platting including the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 482/505
designation of building areas and such easements, alleys and streets have been required and properly
dedicated and the necessary public improvements provided.
c. The plot, tract or lot, which is a combination of previously platted lots utilized as a single
building site and has not been diminished in area or dimension and which faces upon a dedicated
street and was separately owned prior to the effective date of this ordinance in which event a building
permit for only one main building may be issued on each such combination of lots or parts of lots
without first filing a replat of the building sites involved which plat is approved by the Town Council
as provided for in 18-100 a.
Editor's note–The reference to “18-100 a.” above was changed from “17-100(a)” at the request of the Town.
d. The site, tract, or lot results from two (2) building sites that have been combined.
e. The site, tract, or lot results from division of a building site and subsequent combination with an
adjacent building site.
18-101 LIMITATION ON NEW BUILDING SITES
a. For zoning districts B, C, D, E and F, no more than (i) two building sites or (ii) one building site
and a part of an adjacent building site shall be combined to create a combined building site.
b. No combined building site created after August 22, 2005, may be combined with another
building site. The building sites to which this provision applies shall be listed in Section 26-101 b.,
except as provided in Section 26-101 a.
c. The requirements of this section cannot be varied by the Board of Adjustment.
(Ordinance 740, sec. 13, adopted 5/4/70; Ordinance 1631, secs. 8, 9, adopted 8/22/05)
SECTION 19. CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY AND COMPLIANCE
19-100 No building hereafter erected, converted or structurally altered shall be used, occupied or changed in use
and no land may be used until a Certificate of Occupancy and Compliance shall have been issued by the
Building Inspector of the Town of Highland Park stating that the building or proposed use of land or building
complies with the provisions of this ordinance and other building laws of the Town of Highland Park. Provided
that this provision shall not apply to alteration of structures which remain occupied during construction, so long
as all applicable ordinances and building standards of the Town of Highland Park are complied with.
19-101 A Certificate of Occupancy and Compliance shall be applied for coincident with the application for a
building permit and will be issued within ten (10) days after the completion of the erection, alteration or
conversion of such building or land provided such construction or change has been made in complete conformity
to the provisions of this ordinance.
19-102 A Certificate of Occupancy and Compliance shall state that the building or proposed use of a building or
land, complies with all the building and health laws and ordinances and with the provisions of these regulations.
A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the Building Inspector, and copies shall be
furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the land or building affected.
(Ordinance 740, sec. 14, adopted 5/4/70)
SECTION 20. COMPLETION OF BUILDING UNDER CONSTRUCTION
20-100 Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction or designated use of a
building actually under construction at the time of the passage of this ordinance and which entire building shall
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 483/505
be completed within six (6) months from the date of the passage of this ordinance. (Ordinance 740, sec. 15,
adopted 5/4/70)
SECTION 21. AMENDMENTS
21-100 Any person or corporation having a proprietary interest in any property may petition the Town Council
for a change or amendment to the provisions of this ordinance, or the Zoning Commission may on its own
motion or on request from the Town Council institute study and proposal for changes and amendments in the
public interest.
21-101 The Town Council may from time to time amend, supplement, or change by ordinance the boundaries of
the districts or the regulations herein established as provided by the statutes of the State of Texas.
21-102 Before taking action on any proposed amendment, supplement or change, the governing body shall
submit the same to the Town Zoning Commission for its recommendation and report.
21-103 The Town Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing on any application for any amendment or
change prior to making its recommendation and report to the Town Council. Written notice of all public hearings
before the Town Zoning Commission on a proposed amendment or change shall be sent to all owners of real
property lying within two hundred (200) feet of the property on which the change is requested. Such notice shall
be given not less than ten (10) days before the date set for hearing by posting such notice properly addressed and
postage-paid to each taxpayer as the ownership appears on the last approved Town tax roll.
21-104 A public, hearing shall be held by the governing body before adopting any proposed amendment,
supplement or change. Notice of such hearing shall be given by publication in the official publication of the
Town of Highland Park stating the time and place of such hearing, which time shall not be earlier than fifteen
(15) days from the date of publication.
21-105 If a protest against a proposed amendment, supplement or change has been filed with the Town
Secretary, duly signed and acknowledged by the owners of twenty (20) percent or more, either of the area of the
lots included in such proposed change or those immediately adjacent in the rear thereof extending two hundred
(200) feet therefrom or of those directly opposite thereto extending two hundred (200) feet from the street
frontage of such opposite lots, such amendment shall not become effective except by a three-fourths vote of the
governing body.
(Ordinance 740, sec. 16, adopted 5/4/70)
SECTION 22. GENERAL DEFINITIONS
22-100 CERTAIN WORDS IN THIS ORDINANCE NOT HERETOFORE DEFINED ARE DEFINED AS
FOLLOWS:
WORDS USED IN THE PRESENT TENSE INCLUDE THE FUTURE; WORDS IN THE SINGULAR
NUMBER INCLUDE THE PLURAL NUMBER AND WORDS IN THE PLURAL NUMBER INCLUDE THE
SINGULAR NUMBER; THE WORD “BUILDING” INCLUDES THE WORD “STRUCTURE”; THE WORD
“LOT” INCLUDES THE WORDS “PLOT” OR “TRACT”; THE WORD “SHALL” IS MANDATORY AND
NOT DISCRETIONARY.
(1) Alley–A public space or thoroughfare which affords only secondary means of access to
property abutting thereon.
(2) Apartment–A room or suite of rooms in a multifamily dwelling or apartment house arranged,
designed or occupied as a place of residence by a single family, individual or group of individuals.
(3) Apartment House–Any building or portion thereof, which is designed, built, rented, leased or
let to be occupied as three or more dwelling units or apartments or which is occupied as a home or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 484/505
place of residence by three or more families living in independent dwelling units.
(4) Area of the Lot–The area of the lot shall be the net area of the lot and shall not include portions
of streets and alleys.
(5) Basement–A building story (consisting of not more than one level), which is partly
underground but having at least one-half of its height above the average level of the adjoining
ground. A basement shall be counted as a story in computing building height.
(6) Block–An area enclosed by streets and occupied by or intended for buildings; or if said word is
used as a term of measurement, it shall mean the distance along a side of a street between the nearest
two streets which intersect said street on the said side.
(7) Board–The Zoning Board of Adjustment as established in Section 16 [17].
(7A) Breezeway–A covered walkway open on all sides from the eaves of the roof to the ground
connecting the main structure with an accessory structure on the same building site.
(8) Building–Any structure built for the support, shelter and enclosure of persons, animals, chattels
or moveable property of any kind.
(9) Building Site
(a) A platted lot of record or combination of such platted lots which has not been previously
built upon and which meets the area and dimension standards of this ordinance for the creation
of a building site and which does not include any area, yard or other space which is part of the
required area or space of any adjacent lot or combination of lots containing main or accessory
buildings.
(b) A platted lot or combination of platted lots upon which all or part of a main residential
building and related accessory buildings have been built including all required yards and area
standards specified by this ordinance and which is not diminished in area or dimension from the
original lot or combination of lots so utilized.
(9A) Combined Building Site–A building site created subsequent to the effective date of the
Zoning Ordinance, Ordinance No. 676, by either combining (i) two or more building sites pursuant to
Section 18-100 d., as amended, or (ii) a building site and part of an adjacent building site pursuant to
Section 18-100 e., as amended.
(10) Town Council–The governing body of the Town of Highland Park, Texas.
(11) Building Line–A line parallel or approximately parallel to the street line at a specific distance
therefrom marking the minimum distance from the street line that a building may be erected.
(12) Carport–A building or structure detached or attached as part of the main dwelling or structure
designated for the primary purpose of storing motor vehicles and which structure is open to the
weather on at least two sides.
(13) Cellar–A building story (consisting of not more than one level) with more than half of its
height below the average level of the adjoining ground. A cellar shall not be counted as a story in
computing building height.
(14) Certificate of Occupancy or Compliance–An official certificate issued by the Town through
the enforcing official which indicates conformance with or approved conditional waiver from the
Zoning Regulations and authorizes legal use of the premises for which it is issued.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 485/505
(15) Town Zoning Commission–The agency appointed by the Town Council as an advisory body to
it and which is authorized to recommend changes in the zoning in conformance with State Laws.
(16) Court–An open, unoccupied space, bounded on more than two sides by the walls of a
building. An inner court is a court entirely surrounded by the exterior walls of a building. An outer
court is a court having one side open to a street, alley, yard or other permanent space.
(17) Deck–A flat, floored area, attached to a building, or a free-standing structure, without a roof
or walls other than the side(s) of a building when attached.
(18) Deck, Roofed–Any deck that is completely or partially covered, including but not limited to,
open beams or lattice work, that meets regulations for accessory buildings.
(19) Depth of Lot–The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
(20) District–A section of the Town of Highland Park for which the regulations governing the area,
height or use of the land and buildings are uniform.
(21) Dwelling–A building or portion of building designed exclusively for residential occupancy by
a family or families including one-family, two-family and multiple-family dwellings but not
including mobile homes, house trailers, hotels, boarding or lodging houses.
(22) Dwelling, Condominium–A dwelling unit owned separately from other similar units which are
associated on a site wherein all or a portion of the site is owned and maintained in common. The
common ownership may include yards, drives, parking areas, pools and other recreation facilities and
in the case of condominium apartments the common ownership and maintenance may include
corridors, halls, service areas and storage facilities.
(23) Dwelling, One-Family–A detached building having accommodations for and occupied by not
more than one family no portion of which is rented to anyone outside the immediate family and no
portion of which is used for commercial purposes.
(24) Dwelling, Two-Family–A detached building having separate accommodations for and
occupied by not more than two families no portion of which is rented to anyone not a part of the
immediate family occupying each dwelling unit and no portion of which is used for commercial
purposes.
(25) Dwelling, Multiple-Family–Any building or portion thereof, which is designed, built, rented,
leased or let to be occupied as three or more dwelling units or apartments or which is occupied as a
home or residence of three or more families and no portion of any dwelling unit which is used for
commercial purposes.
(26) Dwelling, Townhouse–A dwelling designed and constructed for occupancy by one family
which is joined to another dwelling at one or more sides by a party wall or abutting separate wall and
which is located on an identified lot or building site having independent separate access and utility
service.
(27) Dwelling Unit–A building or portion of a building which is arranged, occupied, or intended to
be occupied as living quarters of a family and including facilities for food preparation and sleeping.
(28) Family–Any number of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit, in which not
more than two (2) individuals are unrelated by blood, marriage or adoption, neither of which
unrelated individuals pays rent to any member of the family.
(29) Fence–A structure of wood, stone, iron, brick, tile or cement, connected together and designed
for use in the position fixed, erected upon the ground for decorative or functional purposes.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 486/505
(30) Floor Area–The total square feet of floor space within the outside dimensions of a building
including each floor level, but excluding cellars, carports or garages.
(31) Floor Area Ratio (FAR)–An indicated ratio between the number of square feet of total floor
area in the main building(s) on a lot and the total square footage of land in the lot; it is the number
resulting from dividing the main building floor area by the lot area.
(32) Gable–The triangular area above the top plate formed by two sloping planes supported at their
ends by a wall below.
(33) Garage–An accessory building for the storage of motor vehicles.
(34) Height
1. In Districts A, B, G, H, CC, CS, GR, and PD, height is the vertical distance of a building
as measured from the average established grade at the street line or from the average natural
front yard ground level at the front building setback, whichever is higher, to: (1) the highest
point of the roof's surface if a flat roof, as defined in Section 10 “Height Regulations”; (2) the
deck line of mansard roofs; or (3) the mean height level between eaves and ridge line.
2. In Districts C, D, E, and F, height is the vertical distance of a building as measured from
the average established grade at the street line or from the average natural front yard ground
level at the front building setback, whichever is higher to: (1) the highest point of the roof's
surface if a flat roof, as defined in Section 10 “Height Regulations”; (2) to the deck line of
mansard roofs; or (3) to the roof ridge or projected roof ridge, whichever is higher, of a pitched
roof, as defined in Section 10 “Height Regulations.”
3. The mean height level between the eaves and ridge line except in G Districts, which shall
be as provided in section 10-101(4)A.
(35) Lot–Land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory building, and including
such open spaces as are required under this ordinance, and having its principal frontage upon a public
street or officially approved place.
(36) Lot coverage–The percentage of the total area of a lot which is covered by a roof or other
structure and is not open to the sky. Lot coverage includes, but is not limited to, the main building,
accessory buildings, covered porches, covered terraces and carports.
(37) Lot Lines–The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.
(38) Lot of Record–A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the
office of the County Clerk of Dallas County.
(39) Lot Width–The width of a lot at the front building line.
(40) Main Building–The building or buildings on a lot which are occupied by the primary use.
(41) Nonconforming Use–A building, structure or use of land lawfully occupied at the time of the
effective date of this ordinance or amendments thereto, and which does not conform to the use
regulations of the district in which it is situated.
(42) Occupancy–The use or intended use of the land or buildings by proprietors or tenants.
(43) Open Space–Area included in any side, rear or front yard or any unoccupied space on the lot
that is open and unobstructed to the sky except for the ordinary projections of fences, cornices, eaves
or porches.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 487/505
(44) Parking Space, Off-Street–An enclosed or unenclosed all-weather-surfaced area of not less
than one hundred eighty (180) square feet (measuring approximately nine (9) feet by twenty (20)
feet) not on a public street or alley, together with an all-weather-surfaced driveway connecting the
area with a street or alley permitting free ingress and egress without encroachment on the street or
alley. Any parking adjacent to a public street wherein the maneuvering is done on the public street
shall not be classified as off-street parking in computing the parking area requirements for any use.
(44A) Play Structure–A recreational structure (i.e., a tree house, playhouse, fort, prefabricated play
structure, etc.), located at grade or elevated, not intended for habitation and without amenities such as
electricity or plumbing.
(45) Premises–Land together with any buildings or structures occupying it.
(46) Private Garage–An accessory building housing vehicles owned and used by occupants of the
main building; if occupied by vehicles of others, it is a storage garage.
(47) Private Open Space–Land area which is maintained without buildings, for the use of
occupants of the premises and may include landscaped or surfaced areas such as a lawn, wooded
area, terrace, or similar feature. For the purposes of this section private open spaces are permitted
uses in a Flood Hazard area.
(48) Residence–Same as a dwelling; also when used with “district,” an area of residential
regulations.
(49) Retaining walls–A wall constructed with the wall of no greater height than the ground level
immediately adjacent to the enclosed side of such retaining wall.
(49A) Small Solar Energy System–Any device that relies upon direct sunlight as an energy source -
including, but not limited to, any device that collects sunlight for generating energy for use on site --
used to produce power for the same property/building on which the system is located. A Small Solar
Energy System may also include the use of Building Integrated Systems (BIS) which are defined as
photovoltaic materials used in place of conventional building materials (such as the roof or skylights)
and may also be referred to as Building-Integrated Photovoltaics (BIPV).
(50) Story–The height between the successive floors of a building or from the top floor to the roof.
(51) Street–Any thoroughfare or public driveway, other than an alley, and more than forty (40) feet
in width, which has been dedicated or deeded to the public for public use.
(52) Street Line–A dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a contiguous street.
(53) Structural Alterations–Any change in the supporting member of a building, such as a bearing
wall, column, beams or girders.
(54) Structure–(Same as building)
(54A) Wind Energy Device–Any portion of a wind energy conversion system consisting of a wind
turbine, a tower, and associated control or conversion electronics which will be used to reduce on-site
consumption of utility power.
(55) Yard–An open space, other than a court, on the lot in which a building is situated and which is
not obstructed from a point thirty (30) inches above the general ground level of the graded lot to the
sky, except as provided for roof overhang and similar special features.
(56) Yard, Front–An open spaces, unoccupied by structures, on a lot facing a street, extending
across the front of the lot between the side lot lines and from the main building to the front lot or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 488/505
street line and providing the minimum horizontal distance between the street line and the main
building line as specified for the district in which it is located.
(57) Yard, Rear–An open, unoccupied space, except for accessory buildings as herein permitted,
extending across the rear of a lot from one side lot line to the other side lot line and having a depth
between the building and the rear lot line as specified in the district in which the lot is situated.
(58) Yard, Side–An open, unoccupied space or spaces on one or two (2) sides of a main building
and on the same lot with the building, situated between the building and a side line of the lot and
extending through from the front yard to the rear yard. Any lot line not the rear line or a front line
shall be deemed a side line.
(59) Zoning District Map–The official certified map upon which the boundaries of the various
Zoning Districts are drawn and which is an integral part of the Zoning Ordinance.
(Ordinance 740, sec. 17, adopted 5/4/70; Ordinance 847, sec. 1, adopted 3/1/76; Ordinance 971, sec. 2, adopted
12/21/81; Ordinance 1008, sec. 1(12)–(15), adopted 9/6/83; Ordinance 1570, sec. 2, adopted 11/3/03; Ordinance
1631, sec. 10, adopted 8/22/05; Ordinance 1780, sec. 10, adopted 1/26/09; Ordinance 1927, sec. 9, adopted
9/9/13)
SECTION 23. PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS
23-100 Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this ordinance or who shall
fail to comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall build or alter any building or use
in violation of any detailed statement or plan submitted and approved hereunder shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, may be fined as provided in section 1.01.009 of this Code. The
owner or owners of any building or premises or part hereof [thereof], where anything in violation of this
ordinance shall be placed or shall exist, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, person or corporation
employed in connection therewith and who may have assisted in the commission of any such violation shall be
guilty of a separate offense and upon conviction shall be fined as herein provided. The penalty provided herein
shall be cumulative of other remedies provided to the Town by and/or under State law or regulation and/or
federal law or regulation. (Ordinance 740, sec. 18, adopted 5/4/70; Ordinance 847, sec. 6, adopted 3/1/76;
Ordinance 1552, sec. 36, adopted 7/21/03)
SECTION 24. PRESERVING RIGHTS IN PENDING LITIGATION AND VIOLATIONS UNDER
EXISTING ORDINANCE
24-100 By the passage of this ordinance, no presently illegal use shall be deemed to have been legalized unless
specifically such use falls within a use district where the actual use is a conforming use. Otherwise, such uses
shall remain nonconforming uses where recognized, or an illegal use, as the case may be. It is further the intent
and declared purpose of this ordinance that no offense committed, and no liability, penalty or forfeiture, either
civil or criminal, incurred prior to the time the existing zoning ordinance was repealed and this zoning ordinance
adopted, shall be discharged or affected by such repeal; but prosecutions and suits for such offenses, liabilities,
penalties or forfeitures may be instituted or causes presently pending proceeded with in all respects as if such
prior ordinance had not been repealed. (Ordinance. 740, sec. 19, adopted 5/4/70)
SECTION 25. VALIDITY
25-100 If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, phrase or provision of this ordinance shall be adjudged
invalid or held unconstitutional, the same shall not affect the validity of this ordinance as a whole or any part or
provisions thereof other than the part so decided to be invalid or unconstitutional. (Ordinance 740, sec. 20,
adopted 5/4/70)
SECTION 26. LIST OF SPECIFIC USE PERMITS, PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS AND
COMBINED BUILDING SITES
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 489/505
26-100 The following listed specific use permits and Planned Development existing in the Town of Highland
Park are adopted as part of this ordinance and are referenced on the Zoning District Map.
PD 1 Shopping Center–Bounded by Mockingbird Lane, Preston Road, Livingston and Douglas
Avenues
PD 2 Planned Development District–Lots 22-27 of Block 162, part of Lot 7, Block 4/167, Block 164
and Block 166, 9th installment of Highland Park West addition.
CUD Ordinance No. 1244–Community Unit Development at 4200-4208 Lomo Alto Drive.
PD Ordinance No. 1257–New Middle school at Block 209, Highland Park Addition.
PD Ordinance No. 1307–Amending Ordinance 1469, to include a two-story addition at Armstrong
Elementary School for the purpose of adding an elevator to meet the requirements of the Americans
with Disabilities Act.
PD Ordinance No. 1307–Amending Ordinance 1507, providing for replacing the four-foot high chain
link fence on the playgrounds east of Byron Avenue with four-foot high iron fence and the eight-foot
high chain link fence on the north, east and south sides of the playground on the southwest corner of
Cornell Avenue and Byron Avenue will be replaced with eight-foot high iron fence.
PD Ordinance No. 1307–Armstrong Elementary School–Block 53, lots 16-20, Block 54, lots 1 and 2,
20' of Block 63, Lot 3, 20' of Block 64, lots 7 and 8 in Highland Park 4th addition; amended
Ordinance No. 1469; amended Ordinance No. 1507.
PD Ordinance No. 1308–Bradfield Elementary School–Block 150 of Highland Park West 2nd
installment.
PD Ordinance No. 1309–Amendment to Community Unit Development at 4200-4208 Lomo Alto
Drive.
PD Ordinance No. 1311–Amendment to PD for new middle school at Block 209, Highland Park
Addition.
PD Ordinance No. 1324–Amendment to PD for new middle school at Block 209, Highland Park
Addition.
PD Ordinance No. 1332–Amending Ordinance 1506, extending approval of one portable classroom
building at Bradford Elementary School as requested by the Highland Park Independent School
District until August 31, 2004, under the same terms and conditions set forth in Ordinance No. 1332.
PD Ordinance No. 1332–Repealed Ordinance No. 1324; amended Ordinance No. 1257; amended
Ordinance No. 1308.
PD Ordinance No. 1370–Amending Ordinance No. 1257, relocating the athletic facilities for middle
school.
PD Ordinance No. 1381–Amending Ordinance No. 1307, Armstrong Elementary School, adding two
(2) portable classrooms for one year.
PD Ordinance No. 1381–Amending Ordinance 1505, extending approval of portable classroom
buildings at Armstrong Elementary School as requested by the Highland Park Independent School
District until August 31, 2004, under the same terms and conditions set forth in Ordinance No. 1381.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 490/505
PD Ordinance No. 1405–Amending Ordinance No. 1308, replacing fencing and relocating bicycle
rack at Bradfield Elementary School.
PD Ordinance No. 1406–Amending Section 3 of Ordinance No. 1332, which amended Ordinance
No. 1308, extending approval of two portable classrooms at Bradfield Elementary School through
August 31, 2001.
PD Ordinance No. 1407–Amending Ordinance No. 1381, extending approval for use of portable
classrooms at Armstrong Elementary School through August 31, 2001.
PD Ordinance No. 1425–Designating Highland Park United Methodist Church–Property described as
tract 1 being 4.27 acres of the Joel Sykes Survey, Abstract 1338, an addition to the Town of Highland
Park, Dallas County, Texas.
PD Ordinance No. 1571–Amends Ordinance No. 1307, Section 2, to provide for construction of
approximately 142 feet of 4-foot-high wrought iron fencing adjacent to the portable buildings at
Byron Avenue and Cornell Avenue.
PD Ordinance No. 1595–Repeals Ordinance 1505; amends Ordinance No. 1381, Section 1, to extend
approval of portable classroom buildings at Armstrong Elementary School as requested by the
Highland Park Independent School District through July 31, 2008, under the same terms and
conditions set forth in Ordinance No. 1381.
PD Ordinance No. 1596–Repeals Ordinance 1506; amends Ordinance No. 1381, Section 3, to extend
approval of one (1) portable classroom building at Bradfield Elementary School as requested by the
Highland Park Independent School District through July 31, 2008, under the same terms and
conditions set forth in Ordinance No. 1332.
CUD Ordinance No. 1703–Community Unit Development at 3515 Normandy Avenue.
PD Ordinance No. 1732–Amending Ordinance No. 821, Planned Development No. 2, to permit a
second story addition at 4400 Westside Drive.
PD Ordinance No. 1751–Amends Ordinance 1595 to extend approval of two (2) portable classroom
buildings at Armstrong Elementary School as requested by the Highland Park Independent School
District through August 31, 2010, under the same terms and conditions set forth in Ordinance No.
1595.
PD Ordinance No. 1752–Amends Ordinance 1596 to extend approval of one (1) portable classroom
building at Bradfield Elementary School as requested by the Highland Park Independent School
District through August 31, 2010, under the same terms and conditions set forth in Ordinance No.
1596.
PD Ordinance No. 1775-Amending PD Ordinance No. 1308 to amend the site plan for Bradfield
Elementary School to provide for a two-story addition on the west end of the building for classrooms
and a one-story addition on the north side of the building for kitchen expansion and an enclosed fire
exit stairway.
PD Ordinance No. 1776-Amending PD Ordinance No. 1257 to amend the site plan for McCulloch
Intermediate and Highland Park Middle Schools to provide for one- and two-story additions on the
south side of the building, expansion of the southeast parking lot, and modifications to the athletic
field.
PD Ordinance No. 1777-Amending PD Ordinance No. 1425 to amend the site plan for Highland Park
United Methodist Church to replace the signs at the Hillcrest Avenue/Mockingbird Lane and Bishop
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 491/505
Boulevard/Mockingbird Lane intersections and add a sign facing Bishop Boulevard near the north
property line.
PD Ordinance No. 1788-Amending PD Ordinance No. 1307 to amend the site plan for Armstrong
Elementary School to provide for a two-story addition on the west side of the building for classrooms
and for expansion of the dining and food preparation areas; relocating an outdoor fenced seating area;
adding an enclosure for the dumpster; and providing head-in parking spaces on the west side of
Byron Avenue north of Cornell Avenue.
PD Ordinance No. 1796–Amending PD for the Highland Park Shopping Village to provide for
placing four (4) tables with eight (8) chairs on the sidewalk in front of Unit 70 and requiring a
minimum clearance of four feet (4') between the tables and chairs and the curb.
PD Ordinance No. 1806–Amending PD for the Highland Park Shopping Village to convert 1,070
square feet of storage space into Unit No. 84, office space; and to convert 504 square feet of attic
space into office space to enlarge Unit No. 74.
PD Ordinance No. 1811–Amending PD for the Highland Park Shopping Village to convert office
space into lounge area and restrooms and to extend the marquee to add outdoor seats.
PD Ordinance No. 1817–Amending PD Ordinance No. 1257 to amend the site plan for McCulloch
Intermediate School/Highland Park Middle School to provide for the expansion of the gymnasium by
ten feet (10'), the addition of a storage building, and modifications to the playground for track
facilities.
PD Ordinance No. 1822–Amending PD for the Highland Park Shopping Village to reduce the size of
the Village Theatre from 568 to 354 seats and add a restaurant that will occupy the space now used
by Escada on the first floor and a second-story addition of 2,000 square feet.
PD Ordinance No. 1825–Amending Ordinance No. 1308 to provide for security lighting.
PD Ordinance No. 1831–Amending Ordinance No. 1425 as amended, to amend the site plan for
Highland Park United Methodist Church to provide for (1) construction of a columbarium garden,
including a masonry wall with three hundred eight (308) niches, decorative iron fencing, a stonepaved
seating area, masonry retaining walls, and a fountain feature in the Mockingbird Lane front
yard; and (2) use of the columbarium garden niches for the interment of ashes.
PD Ordinance No. 1840–Amending the Comprehensive Transportation and Parking Plan for the
Highland Park Shopping Village to reduce the number of surplus parking from 25 spaces to 15
spaces.
PD Ordinance No. 1848–Amending PD for the Highland Park Shopping Village to (1) add a new
elevator and 186 square feet of covered walkways on the second floor between the center court
buildings; (2) reclassify 1,189 square feet of restaurant space into retail space, demolish 313 square
feet on the first floor and add a new second floor consisting of 500 square feet of retail space to Unit
69; (3) reassign the existing 43 outdoor seats from Unit 69 and Unit 70 to Unit 87, and eliminate 23
outdoor seats; (4) reclassify 1,030 square feet of restaurant space to retail space, and add 128 square
feet of retail space to the first floor of Unit 70; (5) construct a 420-square-foot, first floor outdoor
covered dining patio with a maximum of 32 seats, and a 686-square-foot, second floor outdoor
covered dining patio with a maximum of 36 seats at Unit 87; and (6) increase the number of surplus
parking from 15 spaces to 19 spaces.
PD Ordinance No. 1853–Amending PD for the Highland Park Shopping Village to reclassify 5,338
square feet of retail/personal service space on the second floor of Building 11:1 (formerly Larry
North Fitness) to office space (Hill Family Offices).
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 492/505
PD Ordinance No. 1857–Amending PD for the Highland Park Shopping Village to provide for (1)
construction of a 16-foot tall masonry and stucco wall with a wooden gate in place of an existing 8-
foot tall wooden fence and gate located at the service alley entrance of Building C adjacent to
Douglas Avenue behind Patrizio Restaurant; and (2) increasing the number of surplus parking spaces
from 19 spaces to 58 spaces.
PD Ordinance No. 1858–Amending PD for the Highland Park Shopping Village to (1) provide for
placing six tables with twenty chairs on the sidewalk at Unit 77 (Mi Cocina); (2) require a minimum
clearance of four feet between the tables and chairs and the curb; and (3) decrease the number of
surplus parking spaces from 58 spaces to 55 spaces.
PD Ordinance No. 1860–Amending Ordinance No. 1425 as amended, to amend the site plan for the
Highland Park United Methodist Church to provide for the construction of an additional two hundred
twenty-five (225) niches to be used for the interment of ashes in the Columbarium Garden, for a total
of five hundred thirty-three (533) niches.
PD Ordinance No. 1861–Amending PD for the Highland Park Shopping Village to provide for the
construction of a two hundred twenty-one-square-foot addition to the second floor adjacent to the
north side of Unit 74 to be used as office space and to decrease the number of surplus parking spaces
from 55 spaces to 54 spaces.
PD Ordinance No. 1863–Amending PD for the Highland Park Shopping Village to: (i) provide for
the construction of an eight hundred seventeen (817)-square-foot addition to the second floor
adjacent to the west side of Unit 74 located in the southwest quadrant of the center court building to
be used as office space; (ii) reclassify one thousand seven hundred twelve (1,712) square feet of
Storage space to Office use on the second floor of Building D; (iii) reclassify two thousand four
hundred thirty (2,430) square feet of Retail space to Office use on the second floor of Building D;
(iv) revise the lease area in Building C to reflect a reduction of five hundred forty-eight (548) square
feet; and (v) increase the number of surplus parking spaces from 54 spaces to 56 spaces.
PD Ordinance No. 1876–Amending PD for the Highland Park Shopping Village to: (i) provide for
the reclassification of one thousand fifty-six (1,056) square feet of Retail space to Restaurant use to
include forty-one (41) indoor dining seats at Unit 67 on the second floor of Building F; (ii) provide
for the reclassification of two hundred fifty-eight (258) square feet of Retail space to Office use at
Unit 25-206 on the second floor of Building C; and (iii) decrease the number of surplus parking
spaces from 56 spaces to 52 spaces.
PD Ordinance No. 1882–Amending PD for the Highland Park Shopping Village to allow the
installation of three (3) double-faced store directory signs. Each sign will consist of a three-foot (3')
by five-foot, nine-inch (5'9") panel mounted between two seven-foot, eleven-inch (7'11") tall
decorative metal poles which provide a total width of the sign structure of five feet (5'), as measured
at the base. One side of the double-faced sign will display the store listings/locations, with the
opposite side displaying store advertising. External lighting, affixed at the top of both sides of the
panel, will be provided for each sign. The Signs will be located adjacent to: (i) the southeast corner of
Building D; (ii) the south side, middle of Building F; and (iii) the northwest corner of Building G. A
four-foot (4') minimum clearance will be maintained adjacent to all Signs where pedestrian access is
provided.
PD Ordinance No. 1883–Amending Ordinance No. 821, PD 2, as amended, to provide for the
construction of a permanent flat roof over the interior courtyard at 4347 Westside Drive.
PD Ordinance No. 1901–Amending PD for the Highland Park Shopping Village to: (i) permit
construction of a new second floor consisting of approximately four thousand six hundred fifteen
(4,615) square feet of retail space above Units 18 through 21 of Building B; and (ii) decrease the
surplus parking from 52 to 29 spaces.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 493/505
PD Ordinance No. 1912–Amending PD for the Highland Park Shopping Village to: (i) provide for
the reclassification of nine hundred sixty (960) square feet of Office space to Retail use at Unit 25-
209 on the second floor of Building C; and (ii) decrease the surplus parking from 29 to 27 spaces.
PD Ordinance No. 1922–Amending PD for the Highland Park Shopping Village to modify the
comprehensive site plan by: (i) permitting construction of an eighty-one (81) square-foot first floor
addition to the front facade of Unit 11 in Building B; and (ii) decreasing the surplus parking from 27
spaces to 26 spaces.
PD Ordinance No. 1924–Amending PD for Bradfield Elementary School to permit construction of an
eleven hundred (1,100) square-foot paved area for a memorial seating space and two connecting
walkways, to be known as Johnny's Place, in the front yard on the east side of the main entrance to
the school on Southern Avenue.
CUD Ordinance No. 1930–Community Unit Development at 4300 Lomo Alto Drive.
PD Ordinance No. 1933–Amending PD for the Highland Park Shopping Village to allow the
installation of two (2) directory signs adjacent to the east side of Building C. One sign will be an
attached tenant directory, and will measure approximately two feet (2') wide by four feet, six inches
(4'6") tall. This sign will be attached to the east wall of the exterior stairway. Once installed, the nine
(9) existing tenant signs will be removed from the adjacent building wall. The second sign will be a
detached double-faced store directory sign located in a planting area adjacent to the tree within the
sidewalk. The sign will consist of a three-foot (3') by five-foot, nine-inch (5'9") panel mounted
between two seven-foot, eleven-inch (7'11") tall decorative metal poles which provide a total width
of five feet (5') as measured at the base of the sign structure. One side of the double-faced sign will
display the store listings/locations, with the opposite side displaying store advertising or the same
store listings/locations. External lighting will be affixed at the top of both sides of the panel.
PD Ordinance No. 1936–Amending PD for the Highland Park Shopping Village to: (i) provide for
the reclassification of four hundred ninety (490) square feet of office space to retail space at Unit 25-
201 on the second floor of Building C; and (ii) decrease the surplus parking from 26 to 25 spaces and
a final parking space count of 1,059.
PD Ordinance No. 1946–Amending PD for the Highland Park Shopping Village to: (i) provide for
the reclassification of three thousand two hundred (3,200) square feet of office space to retail space at
Unit 30 on the second floor of Building C; and (ii) decrease the surplus parking from 25 to 16 spaces
and a final parking space count of 1,059.
PD Ordinance No. 1953–Amending PD for Bradfield Elementary School to allow construction of a
garden which will incorporate: (i) a three-by-eight-by-eight-foot-tall (3' x 8' x 8') entry gate trellis;
(ii) two eighteen-inch-tall (18") elevated vegetable planting beds with a cumulative area of three
hundred square feet (300 sf); (iii) an eight-by-eight-by-five-foot-tall (8' x 8' x 5') reading nook trellis;
(iv) a twenty-four-inch-tall (24") by eighty square feet (80 sf) elevated earth science station; (v) a
five-foot-tall rain barrel; (vi) an outdoor paved gathering space with white board; and (vii) a water
feature, (collectively, the “Garden Improvements”). In the event Bradfield does not offer the garden
curriculum for a period of one year, and/or does not properly maintain the Garden Improvements as
depicted on the presented drawings, then the District shall remove the Garden Improvements in their
entirety.
PD Ordinance No. 1954–Amending PD for Armstrong Elementary School to construct a garden
which will incorporate: (i) a four-by-six-by-eight-foot tall (4'x6'x8') tool shed building finished in a
color to match the school building exterior; (ii) a two-foot square compost bin; (iii) a twelve-byeighteen-
by-ten-foot tall (12'x 18'x 10') open air arbor; (iv) a thirty-five-foot (35') long raised
planting bed structure; (v) one hundred thirty-two linear feet (132) of four-foot (4') tall iron fence
surrounding the garden area; and (vi) miscellaneous gravel walk ways, (collectively, the “Garden
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 494/505
Improvements”). The fence will be located twelve feet north of the public sidewalk along Cornell
Avenue. This area will be known as Armstrong Garden, and the Garden Improvements shall be
located in the front yard on the southeast side of the main entrance to the school on Cornell Avenue.
In the event Armstrong does not offer the garden curriculum for a period of one year, and/or does not
properly maintain the Garden Improvements, then the District shall remove the Garden
Improvements in their entirety within sixty (60) days prior written notice from the Town.
PD Ordinance No. 1956–Amending PD for Bradfield Elementary School to allow construction of a
tool shed measuring six feet deep by eight feet wide (6' x 8'), with a single sloped shed roof
measuring ten feet, one inch (10' 1") above the ground, to be located adjacent to the northwest
exterior wall of the school building, the walls of which are to be finished with a painted siding to
match the color of the school building's exterior.
PD Ordinance No. 1958–Amending the comprehensive site plan of PD 2, as amended, is hereby
amended to provide for the construction of a one-hundred-forty-square-foot second floor addition
over the existing two-car rear entry garage at 4354 Westside Drive.
PD Ordinance No. 1959–Amending PD for the Highland Park Shopping Village to: (i) reduce indoor
and outdoor seating and enclose four hundred sixty square feet (460 sf) of patio area at Unit 26,
Building C on the first floor; (ii) reclassify two thousand six hundred seventy square feet (2,670 sf) of
Unit 26, Building C, from restaurant to retail use on the first floor; (iii) reclassify one thousand seven
hundred ten square feet (1,710 sf) of Unit 25, Suite 101, Building C, from retail to restaurant use on
the first floor; (iv) convert one hundred eighty square feet (180 sf) of retail space combined from Unit
25, Suite 211, and Unit 30, Suite 100, both in Building C, for a new public elevator; (v) reclassify one
thousand one hundred ten square feet (1,110 sf) of retail space to office use in Unit 30, Building C on
the second floor; (vi) construct seven hundred square feet (700 sf) for new retail use in Unit 30,
Building C, above the alley on the second floor; (vii) construct seven hundred square feet (700 sf) for
new restaurant outdoor dining use, providing thirty-four (34) seats at Unit 77, Building F on the
second floor; (viii) construct two hundred sixty-five square feet (265 sf) for a new common hallway
to access mezzanine storage areas above Units 80 and 85 in Building F on the second floor; and (ix)
increase the surplus parking from 16 to 35 spaces.
SUP Ordinance No. 1962–Amending Ordinance No. 1930 for the Community Unit Development at
4300 Lomo Alto Drive.
PD Ordinance No. 1963–Amending PD for the Highland Park Shopping Village to (i) expand the
existing footprint of the mechanical penthouse on top of Building G by one thousand eighty-nine
square feet (1,089 sf) to accommodate lease area for additional cellular antennas and equipment, and
(ii) eliminate visibility of the antenna panels.
PD Ordinance No. 1964–Amending Ordinance No. 1425 as amended, to amend the site plan for the
Highland Park United Methodist Church to provide for the installation of two permanent shade
structures measuring fourteen feet by fourteen feet (14' x 14') at the playground in the interior
courtyard.
PD Ordinance No. 1973–Amending PD 1, the Highland Park Shopping Village, to allow construction
of an illuminated channel letter sign measuring three feet tall by fifteen feet, six inches long (3' x
15'6"), located on the east side of the roof of Building C, 33 Highland Park Village, advertising “Five
Creeks Tavern.”
SUP Ordinance No. 1985–amending Ordinance No. 1962 for the Community Unit Development at
4300 Lomo Alto Drive.
PD Ordinance No. 1986–Amending PD 1, the Highland Park Shopping Village, to allow installation
of twelve two-chair tables on the sidewalk adjacent to No. 1 Highland Park Village, also known as
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 495/505
Royal Blue Grocery, on the east end of Building A; and the utilization of the Nelson Nygaard parking
model in conjunction with the redevelopment of Building A results in a total surplus parking space
count of forty two (42) surplus spaces and a total parking space count of 1,059 in the Village's
comprehensive transportation and parking plan.
PD Ordinance No. 2003–Amending PD 1, the Highland Park Shopping Village, is hereby amended to
allow the following alterations to Building G, 100 Highland Park Village: (i) construct two covered
and open outdoor roof terraces on the third floor; (ii) construct three additions totaling 1,970 square
feet on the north, east, and west sides of the third floor; (iii) convert a portion of the third floor office
space to restaurant and bar use; (iv) replace the third floor roof penthouse with a new expanded
penthouse containing two architectural tower elements measuring 68 feet and 70 feet tall; (v)
construct a one-story stair tower and pedestrian bridge over the private drive to the west side of
Building G; and (vi) require use of the ticketless valet parking system depicted on the attached site
plan, Exhibits A. The utilization of the Nelson Nygaard parking model in conjunction with the
modification of Building G results in a decrease to the surplus parking by six (6) surplus spaces
resulting in a total surplus parking of thirty six (36) spaces and a total parking space count of 1,059 in
the Village's comprehensive transportation and parking plan.
PD Ordinance No. 2010–Amending PD 1, the Highland Park Shopping Village, to allow the
installation of three four-seat tables and two two-seat tables (sixteen total seats) on the sidewalk
adjacent to No. 7A Highland Park Village, known as Bird Bakery, in Building A; and due to: (i) not
constructing the 408 square feet mezzanine in the rear of lease space 8C in Building A, and (ii)
conversion of 2,897 square feet of Retail to Restaurant for lease space 7A Highland Park Village,
eleven (11) additional parking spaces are added to the existing thirty six (36) surplus spaces resulting
in a total surplus parking count of forty seven (47) surplus spaces and a total parking space count of
1,059 in the Village's comprehensive transportation and parking plan.
PD Ordinance No. 2011– amending the comprehensive site plan of PD 2, as amended, to allow the
construction and installation of three (3) covered parking structures with motion sensing lights over
forty (40) parking spaces in the north parking lot of the office building at 4300 MacArthur Avenue.
PD Ordinance No. 2014–Amending PD 1, the Highland Park Shopping Village, to allow: (i) the
installation of four two-seat tables (eight total seats) on the sidewalk adjacent to No. 66 Highland
Park Village in Building F, and (ii) a maximum of two food trucks in the Livingston Court event
space located on the south side of the Village; causing the reduction of four (4) parking spaces from
the existing forty seven (47) surplus spaces, resulting in a total surplus parking count of forty three
(43) surplus spaces and a total parking space count of 1,059 in the Village's comprehensive
transportation and parking plan.
PD Ordinance No. 2016–Amending PD 1, the Highland Park Shopping Village, to allow the
following alterations to Building G, 100 Highland Park Village: (i) convert 415 square feet of Retail
use into common area for a service elevator and corridor on the first floor; (ii) convert 16,780 square
feet of Office and Service use on the second floor into Retail Fashion use; (iii) convert 908 square
feet, of Office and Service use on the second floor into Fine Jewelry use; (iv) construct a nine-foottall
screen wall for the mechanical equipment on the roof adjacent to the cellular equipment
penthouse; (v) construct a three-story stair tower on the west side of Building G; (vi) modify the
comprehensive transportation and parking plan by reducing the surplus parking by 23 spaces and
eliminating 5 parking spaces on the west side of Building G; and (vii) restrict the general public from
access to the roof above the third floor of Building G, and allow access to only maintenance/service
personnel for the purpose of making repairs or performing routine maintenance. The utilization of the
Nelson Nygaard parking model in conjunction with the modification of Building G results in a
decrease to the surplus parking twenty by three (23) spaces, resulting in a total surplus parking count
of twenty (20) surplus spaces and with the elimination of 5 parking spaces for the stair tower on the
west side of Building G, a total parking space count of 1,054 in the Village's comprehensive
transportation and parking plan.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 496/505
PD Ordinance No. 2018–Amending PD 1, the Highland Park Shopping Village, to allow the
following alterations: (i) construction of a new second floor consisting of 1,175 square feet of Retail
use above 94 Highland Park Village in Building F; (ii) conversion of 5,669 square feet of Designer
Fashion use to Fine Jewelry use at 51 Highland Park Village in Building E; and (iii) modify the
Parking Plan by reducing the surplus parking by 9 spaces. The utilization of the Nelson Nygaard
parking model in conjunction with the modification of Building F and Building E results in a
decrease to the surplus parking by nine (9) spaces, resulting in a total surplus parking count of eleven
(11) surplus spaces and a total parking space count of 1,054 in the Village's comprehensive
transportation and parking plan.
PD Ordinance No. 2019–Amending PD 1, the Highland Park Shopping Village, to allow the
following alterations to Building G, 100 Highland Park Village: (i) expand the stair tower to
accommodate the relocation of the service elevator; and (ii) expand the stair tower to accommodate
the relocation of the fire riser room. The utilization of the Nelson Nygaard parking model in
conjunction with the modification of Building G stair tower has no impact to the Village's
comprehensive transportation and parking plan.
PD Ordinance No. 2021–Amending PD Ordinance No. 1257 for McCulloch Intermediate
School/Highland Park Middle School to allow: (i) construction of a three story addition to the south
side of the school proper; (ii) construction of an underground parking structure for two hundred (200)
parking spaces below the play field on the south side of the school; and (iii) relocation of the three
non-illuminated tennis courts to the north side of the play field. The three-story addition on the south
side of the school proper will maintain a side yard setback of thirty six feet (36'), which is no closer
to the west side property line than the school already exists.
PD Ordinance No. 2022–Amending PD Ordinance No. 1307 for McCulloch Intermediate
School/Highland Park Middle School to allow construction of a two-story addition to the southeast
corner of the school building. This two-story addition will maintain a front yard setback of thirty six
feet (36') from the Cornell Avenue property line, and a side yard setback of thirteen feet, ten inches
(13'10") from the Byron Avenue property line.
PD Ordinance No. 2033–Amending PD-1 The Highland Park Village, to allow for temporary events
and gatherings that include the display of merchandise, goods, food, products, services, and/or
customer experiences at Highland Park Village.
PD Ordinance No. 2036–Amending PD Ordinance No. 1308 for John S. Bradfield Elementary
School to allow redevelopment of the campus to include demolition of the existing improvements
and construction of a new three-story building, an underground parking facility for eighty-nine
spaces, and a six-foot-tall iron perimeter fence. The building will be set back 38.5 feet from the south
property line (Southern Avenue), 36 feet from the west property line (Armstrong Avenue), 21 feet
from the north property line (Mockingbird Lane), and 472 feet from the east property line (Douglas
Avenue). The maximum height of the proposed building is 56.4 feet for the tower element. The wall
height of the main building will vary from three stories at a height of 47.3 feet on the west end, to one
story at a height of 19.3 feet on the east end.
SP 1 Parking Lot–Ordinance Number 595
SP 2 Municipal Garage and Maintenance Center
SP 2a Telecommunications Facility, 5005 Holland Avenue–Ordinance No. 1340
SP 3 Free Parking Area–Ordinance No. 818
SP 4 Free Parking Area–Ordinance No. 889
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 497/505
SP 5 Free Parking Area–Ordinance No. 954
SP 6 Free Parking Area–Ordinance No. 1034
SP 7 Free Parking Area–Ordinance No. 1107
SP 8 Town Hall and Municipal Building–Ordinance No. 1872
SP 8a Telecommunications Facility, 4700 Drexel Drive–Ordinance No. 1916
SP 9 Telecommunications Facility, 3300 Mockingbird Lane–Ordinance No. 1947
26-101 COMBINED BUILDING SITES
a. The following combined building sites, each of which was created prior to August 22, 2005,
shall be subject to all provisions of this Zoning Ordinance applicable to combined building sites,
except Section 18-101 b.; provided, however, that any building site listed in this subsection which
after August 22, 2005, is combined with another building site or part of another building site, shall
thereafter be subject to Section 18-101 b.
Zoning District Address Date
B 4208 Armstrong Parkway 1980
D 3213 Princeton Avenue 1986
E 3215 St. Johns Drive 1987
C 3640 Beverly Drive 1990
C 3824 Gillon Avenue 1994
C 3428 Beverly Drive 1997
D 3921 Normandy Avenue 1997
B 4328 Overhill Drive 1997
B 4308 Overhill Drive 1997
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 498/505
E 4606 N. Versailles Avenue 1999
D 3403 Dartmouth Avenue 2000
E 4332 Potomac Avenue 2000
C 3807 Miramar Avenue 2001
D 5004 Abbott Avenue 2002
D 5008 Abbott Avenue 2002
D 3836 Stratford Avenue 2004
D 3712 Stratford Avenue 2005
B 3832 Beverly Drive 2005
b. The following combined building sites, each of which was created after August 22, 2005, shall
be subject to all provisions of this Zoning Ordinance applicable to combined building sites.
Zoning District Address Date
D 4404 Belclaire Avenue 2006
D 4412 Belclaire Avenue 2006
B 4321 Overhill Drive 2006
B 4311 Rheims Place 2006
D 3801 Gillon Avenue 2007
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 499/505
D 3809 Gillon Avenue 2007
G 4608 Abbott Avenue 2007
G 3515 Normandy Avenue 2007
B 4464 Rheims Place 2008
D 3508 Potomac Avenue 2008
D 3516 Potomac Avenue 2008
D 3400 St. Johns Drive 2008
D 3408 St. Johns Drive 2008
E 3520 Mockingbird Lane 2008
D 3404 Cornell 2009
C 3711 Beverly Drive 2009
C 4215 Belclaire Avenue 2009
B 4400 Lakeside Drive 2009
C 3700 Euclid Avenue 2009
B 4311 Lakeside Drive 2010
B 4321 Lakeside Drive 2010
E 3217 Cornel Avenue 2010
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 500/505
C 3500 Beverly Drive 2010
E 4416 Beverly Drive 2010
D 3212 Dartmouth Avenue 2011
C 3509 Euclid Avenue 2011
C 3920 Euclid Avenue 2011
C 4700 St. Johns Drive 2011
E 4543 Arcady Avenue 2013
D 3801 Maplewood Avenue 2013
G 4502 Abbott Avenue 2013
D 3805 Potomac Avenue 2015
D 4305 Belclair Avenue 2015
D 4824 Abbott Avenue 2017
G 3525 Normandy Avenue 2018
(Ordinance 740, sec. 21, adopted 5/4/70; Ordinance 818 adopted 10/31/74; Ordinance 821 adopted 12/9/74;
Ordinance 889 adopted 6/29/78; Ordinance 954 adopted 8/3/81; Ordinance 1034 adopted 7/2/84; Ordinance
1107 adopted 11/2/87; Ordinance 1244 adopted 12/7/92; Ordinance 1257 adopted 9/7/93; Ordinance 1307
adopted 6/5/95; Ordinance 1308 adopted 6/5/95; Ordinance 1309 adopted 6/19/95; Ordinance 1311 adopted
7/24/95; Ordinance 1324 adopted 12/8/95; Ordinance 1332 adopted 6/3/96; Ordinance 1340 adopted 9/9/96;
Ordinance 1347, sec. 1, adopted 3/3/97; Ordinance 1370 adopted 12/1/97; Ordinance 1381 adopted 6/15/98;
Ordinance 1405 adopted 5/4/99; Ordinance 1406 adopted 6/7/99; Ordinance 1407 adopted 6/7/99; Ordinance
1425 adopted 12/13/99; Ordinance 1469, sec. 1, adopted 7/2/01; Ordinance 1485, sec. 1, adopted 1/7/02;
Ordinance 1505, sec. 1, adopted 8/5/02; Ordinance 1506, sec. 1, adopted 8/5/02; Ordinance 1507, sec. 1, adopted
8/5/02; Ordinance 1571, sec. 1, adopted 11/3/03; Ordinance 1595, sec. 1, adopted 8/23/04; Ordinance 1596, sec.
1, adopted 8/23/04; Ordinance 1631, sec. 11, adopted 8/22/05; Ordinance 1662, sec. 2, adopted 6/12/06;
Ordinance 1666, sec. 2, adopted 7/24/06; Ordinance 1670, sec. 2, adopted 9/11/06; Ordinance 1699, sec. 2,
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 501/505
adopted 6/25/07; Ordinance 1700, sec. 2, adopted 6/25/07; Ordinance 1703, secs. 2, 3, adopted 8/13/07;
Ordinance 1726, sec. 2, adopted 2/11/08; Ordinance 1732, sec. 2, adopted 4/14/08; Ordinance 1750, sec. 2,
adopted 6/9/08; Ordinance 1751 adopted 7/14/08; Ordinance 1752 adopted 7/14/08; Ordinance 1755, sec. 2,
adopted 8/11/08; Ordinance 1771, sec. 2, adopted 11/10/08; Ordinance 1775 adopted 12/15/08; Ordinance 1776
adopted 12/15/08; Ordinance 1777 adopted 12/15/08; Ordinance 1782, sec. 2, adopted 2/9/09; Ordinance 1788
adopted 4/1/09; Ordinance 1793, sec. 2, adopted 5/26/09; Ordinance 1796 adopted 6/22/09; Ordinance 1797,
sec. 2, adopted 7/27/09; Ordinance 1801, sec. 2, adopted 8/24/09; Ordinance 1806 adopted 9/14/09; Ordinance
1811 adopted 11/9/09; Ordinance 1812, sec. 2, adopted 12/14/09; Ordinance 1817 adopted 1/25/10; Ordinance
1822 adopted 3/22/10; Ordinance 1824, sec. 7, adopted 5/24/10; Ordinance 1825 adopted 5/10/10; Ordinance
1831 adopted 8/9/10; Ordinance 1840 adopted 10/11/10; Ordinance 1842 adopted 11/22/10; Ordinance 1843
adopted 11/22/10; Ordinance 1844 adopted 11/22/10; Ordinance 1848 adopted 1/24/11; Ordinance 1853 adopted
3/28/11; Ordinance 1854 adopted 4/11/11; Ordinance 1857 adopted 5/9/11; Ordinance 1858 adopted 5/23/11;
Ordinance 1860 adopted 7/11/11; Ordinance 1861 adopted 7/11/11; Ordinance 1863 adopted 8/23/11; Ordinance
1869 adopted 10/24/11; Ordinance 1870 adopted 10/24/11; Ordinance 1871 adopted 10/24/11; Ordinance 1872
adopted 10/24/11; Ordinance 1876 adopted 12/12/11; Ordinance 1882 adopted 6/25/12; Ordinance 1883 adopted
8/13/12; Ordinance 1901 adopted 11/12/12; Ordinance 1911 adopted 2/25/13; Ordinance 1912 adopted 3/11/13;
Ordinance 1916 adopted 5/28/13; Ordinance 1921 adopted 7/22/13; Ordinance 1922 adopted 8/13/13; Ordinance
1924 adopted 8/26/13; Ordinance 1930 adopted 10/28/13; Ordinance 1933 adopted 11/11/13; Ordinance 1935
adopted 12/9/13; Ordinance 1936 adopted 12/9/13; Ordinance 1946 adopted 3/24/14; Ordinance 1947 adopted
3/24/14; Ordinance 1947 adopted 3/24/14; Ordinance 1953 adopted 5/12/14; Ordinance 1954 adopted 5/27/14;
Ordinance 1956 adopted 7/28/14; Ordinance 1958 adopted 8/11/14; Ordinance 1959 adopted 8/25/14; Ordinance
1962 adopted 10/27/14; Ordinance 1963 adopted 11/10/14; Ordinance 1964 adopted 11/10/14; Ordinance 1972
adopted 4/13/15; Ordinance 1973 adopted 4/13/15; Ordinance 1984 adopted 12/14/15; Ordinance 1985 adopted
12/14/15; Ordinance 1986 adopted 12/14/15; Ordinance 2003 adopted 6/27/16; Ordinance 2010 adopted
10/24/16; Ordinance 2011 adopted 11/14/16; Ordinance 2014 adopted 1/9/17; Ordinance 2016 adopted 2/27/17;
Ordinance 2018 adopted 4/24/17; Ordinance 2019 adopted 4/24/17; Ordinance 2021 adopted 6/12/17; Ordinance
2022 adopted 6/26/17; Ordinance 2026 adopted 9/11/17; Ordinance 2033 adopted 3/12/18; Ordinance 2035
adopted 3/26/18; Ordinance 2036 adopted 4/9/18)
SECTION 27. EFFECTIVE
27-100 The fact that the present zoning regulations are inadequate to properly safeguard the general public
welfare, health, peace and safety, creates an urgency and an emergency, and requires that this ordinance become
effective immediately upon its passage, and it is accordingly so ordained. (Ordinance 740, sec. 22, adopted
5/4/70)
APPROVED AS TO FORM
Town Attorney
PASSED AND APPROVED 3rd day of November, 1965
Mayor, Town of Highland Park, Texas
ATTEST:
Town Secretary, Town of Highland Park, Texas
APPENDIX ILLUSTRATIONS
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 502/505
(Ordinance 1008, sec. 2(3), adopted 9/6/83)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 503/505
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 504/505
8. (RESERVED)
Note–See the editor's note to section 15-103.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 505/505
(Ordinance 1631, sec. 12, adopted 8/22/05)
(Ordinance 1927, sec. 10, adopted 9/9/13)