
Henderson, TX Code of Ordinances


CITY OF HENDERSON, TEXAS
CODE OF ORDINANCES




Contains 2018 S-2 Supplement, current through
Ordinance 17-10-24, passed 11-14-2017





Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet:  http://www.amlegal.com




ADOPTING ORDINANCES



ORDINANCE NO. 16-05-06



AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF HENDERSON,
REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING
GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE POLITICAL SUBDIVISION DEALING WITH SUBJECTS
EMBRACED IN SUCH CODE OF ORDINANCES, AND THE EFFECTIVE DATE THEREOF.



   WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the political
subdivision are inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in
form and substance for the complete preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality and for the proper conduct of
its affairs; and



   WHEREAS, the Acts of Legislature of the State of Texas empower and
authorize the political subdivision to revise, amend, restate, codify and
compile any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted
or published and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book
form;



   WHEREAS, the Legislative Authority of the Political Subdivision has
authorized a general compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances
of the Political Subdivision of a general and permanent nature and
publication of such ordinance in book form; and



   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of
the municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace,
health, safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance
take effect at an early date.



   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
HENDERSON, TEXAS:



   SECTION 1:   The general ordinances of the Political Subdivision as
revised, amended, restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby
adopted as and shall constitute the "Code of Ordinances of the City of
Henderson, Texas".



   SECTION 2:   Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall
consist of the following Titles:



   SECTION 3:   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated
in such Code of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the
effective date of this ordinance except as they are included and reordained
in whole or in part in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any
offense committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the
effective date of this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions
of ordinances levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching
territory, establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain
persons, authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds
or borrowing of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal
property, granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to
public use, vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public
places; nor shall such repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or
special nature or pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the
Code.



   SECTION 4:   Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of
its adoption and approval by the Legislature Authority and the Clerk of the
Political Subdivision is hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of such
Code of the Ordinance in the Office of the City Secretary.



   SECTION 5:   Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided
in Section 6, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and
places of the ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and
regulations therein contained and of the date of passage, and that the same
is properly signed, attested, recorded, and approved and that any public
hearings and notices thereof as required by the law have been given.



   SECTION 6:   That this ordinance shall take full effect and force
upon the final passage by the City Council of the City of Henderson, Texas.



   PASSED AND APPROVED this first reading on the 12th of May, 2016.



   PASSED, APPROVED AND ADOPTED this second reading on the ___th of June,
2016.



                        _____________________________



                        Patricia L. Brack, Mayor



ATTEST:



______________________________



Stephanie Kimbrell, City Secretary



HOME RULE CHARTER



   Editor’s note:



      Printed herein is the Charter of the City of Henderson, Texas,
which was adopted at an election held on April 1, 1947



ARTICLE I. NAME AND BOUNDARIES



Section 1.  Corporate name.



   All the inhabitants of the Town of Henderson, in Rusk County, Texas, as
the boundaries and limits of said town are herein established, shall be a
body politic, incorporated under, and to be known by the name and style of
the “City of Henderson,” with such powers, rights and duties as are
herein provided.



Section 2.  Boundaries.



   The boundaries and limits of said corporation shall include the
following boundaries as adopted by the Home Rule Charter of the City of
Henderson on April 1, 1947, plus any and all modifications whether by
annexation or disannexation subsequent to April 1, 1947.



Part of the Smith, Warren, Bennett, Starr, Johnson, Sory, Brooks, Brumley
Surveys, in Rusk County, Texas:



BEGINNING one mile due South from the center of the Courthouse in said town
of Henderson;



THENCE E 145 vrs to the middle of the Mt. Enterprise Road continuing E at 925
vrs the West bank of Dutch Creek and at 1900 vrs to a cor in W.E. Shadden’s
field from which a cabin in Shadden’s field brs N 39’45” E 133 2-10 vrs
the oil mill tower brs N 31’15” W;



THENCE N 1260 vrs the Pine Hill Road and 1360 vrs the Carthage Road and at
1520 vrs E edge of Willow Lake and continuing N across said lake at 3800 vrs
to a cor; from which a red oak brs N 53’30” E 15-1/2 vrs a sweet gum brs
S 44’20” W the N E cor of W.D. Arnold’s land brs S 85’45”E 11 vrs;



THENCE W 1900 vrs to a point due North of said Courthouse and at 3800 vrs in
all to a cor in R.E. Huston’s orchard from which Huston’s west chimney
brs S 2’30”;



THENCE S 140 vrs the Overton Road and at 1900 vrs one mile due West of the
Courthouse and continuing due S at 3800 vrs a cor in Gould’s pasture from
which a sweet gum 20 in dia brs N 11’40” E 34-1/2 vrs a post oak 15 in
dia N 4710” W;



THENCE E 534 vrs Shawnee Creek and at 1900 vrs in all the beginning, one mile
due South of the Courthouse.



Also the following:



BEGINNING at a point established as the Northwest Corner of the City of
Henderson prior to the 12th day of March, 1936, according to the filed notes
recorded in Vol. 70, page 190 of the Deed Records of Rusk County, Texas.



THENCE due West 950 vrs to a stake for corner;



THENCE due South 3800 vrs to a stake for corner;



THENCE due East to a point established for the Southwest Corner of the City
of Henderson as it existed prior to the 12th day of March, 1936, and
according to said field notes recorded in Volume 70, page 190, of the Deed
Records of Rusk County, Texas;



THENCE due North 3800 vrs along and with the West Boundary Line of the City
of Henderson as it existed prior to the 12th day of March, 1936, as
established according to said field notes recorded in Vol. 70, page 190, of
the Deed Records of Rusk County, Texas, to the place of beginning.



(Amend. of 4/6/85, sec. 1)



Statutory reference:



   Municipal boundaries and annexation, see Tex. Local Gov’t Code, Ch.
41 et seq.



Section 3.  Platting of property.



   (a)   Should any property within the City Limits be hereafter
platted into blocks, lots, additions or subdivisions, the owner thereof shall
plat and lay the same off to conform to streets and alleys abutting the same,
and in conformity with the Zoning Ordinances of the City; all such plats,
together with proposed restrictions, before recording in the Deed Records,
shall be submitted to the Council for approval and until and unless approved
no such lots, blocks, subdivisions or additions shall be officially
recognized or accepted by the City.



   (b)   In addition to the platting above provided, it is expressly
provided, by the adoption of this Charter by vote of the qualified voters of
the City, that the provisions of Article 974-a, as amended from time to time,
relating to platting of subdivisions and the approval and recording thereof,
are hereby adopted and made a part hereof as though fully copied at length
herein, and as cumulative and in addition to subsection (a) of this section.



(Amend. of 4/6/85, sec. 2)



Statutory references:



   Plat required for division of tract, see Tex. Local Gov’ Code, §
212.004



   Recording of plats, see Tex. Property Code, § 12.002



Section 4.  Extension of boundaries.



   The City Council shall have the power by ordinance to annex additional
property lying adjacent to the city in accordance with Article 970-a V.A.T.S.
known as the Municipal Annexation Act [V.T.C.A., Local Government Code sec.
43.001 et seq.].



(Amend. of 4/6/85, sec. 3)



Statutory references:



   Authority of home-rule municipality to annex area, see Tex. Local
Gov’t Code, § 43.021



   Municipal annexation, see Tex. Local Gov’t Code, Ch. 43



   Municipal boundaries and annexation, see Tex. Local Gov’t Code, Ch.
41 et seq.



ARTICLE II. CORPORATE POWERS



Section 1.  General.



   The City of Henderson shall from henceforth have and enjoy the benefits
of local self-government, shall have perpetual succession, may use a common
seal, may sue and be sued, may contract and be contracted with, implead and
be impleaded in all courts and places and in all matters whatever; may take,
hold and purchase lands, within or without the city limits, as may be needed
for the corporate purposes of said city, and may sell any real estate or
personal property owned by it; perform and render all public services, and
when deemed expedient, may condemn property for corporate use, and may hold,
manage and control the same, and shall be subject to all the duties and
obligations now pertaining to or incumbent upon said Town of Henderson as a
corporation, not in conflict with the provision of this charter, and shall
enjoy all the rights, immunities, powers, privileges and franchises now
possessed by said town and herein conferred and granted.



Statutory references:



   Authority of local self-government, see Tex. Local Gov’t Code, §
51.072



   General powers of home-rule municipality, see Tex. Local Gov’t Code,
§§ 51.071 et seq.



   Powers of home-rule municipality, see Tex. Local Gov’t Code, §§
9.0001 et seq.



Section 2.  Power of ordinances.



   The City of Henderson shall have the power to enact and enforce all
ordinances necessary to protect health, life and property, and to prevent and
summarily abate and remove all nuisances and to preserve and enforce the good
government, order and security of the city and its inhabitants, and to enact
and enforce ordinances on any and all subjects, provided, that no ordinance
shall be enacted inconsistent with the provisions of this charter, or the
general laws or constitution of the State of Texas.



Statutory reference:



   Ordinance, rule or regulation necessary to carry out other powers, see
Tex. Local Gov’t Code, § 51.001



Section 3.  Style of ordinances.



   The style of all ordinances of the City of Henderson shall be: “Be It
Ordained by the [city council of the] City of Henderson,” but the same may
be omitted when published in book or pamphlet form purporting to be published
by the City of Henderson.



Section 4.  Real estate.



   All real estate owned in fee simple title or held by lease, sufferance,
easement or otherwise; all public buildings, fire stations, parks, streets
and alleys, and all property, whether real or personal, of whatever kind,
character or description, now owned or controlled by the Town of Henderson,
shall vest in, inure to, remain and be the property of the said City of
Henderson.



Section 5.  Acquisition of property.



   The City of Henderson shall have the power and authority to acquire by
purchase, gift, devise, deed, condemnation or otherwise any character of
property, including any charitable or trust fund.



Statutory reference:



   Authority relating to property, see Tex. Local Gov’t Code, § 51.076



Section 6.  Eminent domain.



   Said City shall have the right of eminent domain and the power to
appropriate private property for public purposes whenever the governing
authority shall deem it necessary; and to take any private property, within
or without the city limits for any of the following purposes, to wit:
Cemeteries, airports, city halls, police stations, jails, calabooses, fire
stations and fire alarm systems, libraries, hospitals, sanitariums,
auditoriums, market houses, reformatories, abattoirs, streets, alleys, parks,
highways, playgrounds, sewer systems, storm sewers, sewerage disposal plants,
filtering beds and emptying grounds for sewer systems, drainage, water and
electric light and power systems, streetcar systems, telephone and telegraph
systems, gas plants or gas systems, crematories, prison farms, pest houses,
and to acquire lands within or without the city, for any other municipal
purpose that may be deemed advisable. That the power herein granted for the
purpose of acquiring private property shall include the power of improvement
and enlargement of waterworks, including water supply, riparian rights, stand
pipes, watersheds, and the construction of supply reservoirs. In all cases
where the city exercises the power of eminent domain, it shall be controlled,
as nearly as practicable, by the laws governing the condemnation of property
by railroad corporations in this state; the city taking the position of the
railroad corporations in such cases.



Statutory references:



   Eminent domain, see Tex. Property Code, Ch. 21



   Municipal right of eminent domain, see Tex. Local Gov’t Code, Ch. 251



Section 7.  Improvements.



   To appropriate so much of the revenues of the city emanating from
whatever source, for the purpose of retiring and discharging the accrued
indebtedness of the city and for the purpose of erecting and maintaining city
hall, and other public buildings and projects, and for maintaining public
parks and playgrounds, as may from time to time be expedient.



Section 8.  Public utility systems.



   (a)   Said City shall have the power to buy or own, or construct,
and to maintain and operate, within or without the city limits, complete
water system or systems, gas or electric lighting or power plant or plants,
telephone systems, street railways, sewer systems, sewerage plants,
fertilizing plants, abattoirs, municipal railway systems, or any other public
service utility, and to demand and receive compensation for services
furnished by the city for private purposes or otherwise, and to have the
power to regulate, by ordinance, the collection of compensation for such
services. That said City shall have the power to acquire by lease, purchase
or condemnation, the property of any person, firm or corporation now or
hereafter conducting any such business, for the purpose of operating such
public utility or utilities, and for the purpose of distributing such service
throughout the City or any portion thereof.



   (b)   Should the City determine to acquire any public utility by
purchase, condemnation or otherwise, as herein provided, said City shall have
the power to obtain funds for the purpose of acquiring said public utility
and paying the compensation therefor, by issuing bonds or notes, may secure
such notes by fixing a lien upon the property constituting the public utility
so acquired, and said security shall apply alone to said property so pledged.



Statutory references:



   Municipal home-rule powers to regulate public utilities and franchises
using streets, etc., see Tex. Local Gov’t Code, §§ 9.0001 et seq.



   Municipal utilities, see Tex. Local Gov’t Code, §§ 552.001 et seq.



Section 9.  Operation of public utility by city.



   Said City shall have the authority to manufacture its own electricity,
gas or anything else that may be needed for public use, to make contracts
with any person, firm or corporation for the purchase of gas, water,
electricity or any other commodity or articles used by it or the public, and
to sell same to the public as may be determined by the governing authority.



   In the event said City shall acquire by purchase, gift, devise, or
deed, condemnation or otherwise, any waterworks system, electric light or
power system, gas system, street railway system, telephone system, or any
other public service utility, to operate and maintain for the purpose of
serving the inhabitants of said City, the right to operate and maintain such
public service utility, so acquired, shall be exclusive.



Statutory references:



   Authority for municipal public services and utility systems in
home-rule municipalities, see Tex. Local Gov’t Code, § 552.002



   Municipal jurisdiction over electric utility, see Tex. Utilities Code,
Ch. 33



   Municipal jurisdiction over rates, operations and services of gas
utility, see Tex. Utilities Code, Ch. 103



   Municipal jurisdiction over water and sewer utility rates, operations
and services, see Tex. Water Code, § 13.042



   Public Utility Regulatory Act, see Tex. Utilities Code, Ch. 11 et seq.



   Water systems in home-rule municipalities, see Tex. Local Gov’t Code,
§ 552.017



Section 10.  Reserved.



Editor’s note:



   Section 4 of an amendment of April 6, 1985, repealed section 10 in its
entirety. Former section 10 pertained to the regulation of charges and
licenses on franchises and trades



Section 11.  Streets, etc., paving, improvement and assessments.



   The City of Henderson shall have exclusive dominion, control and
jurisdiction in, upon, over, and under the public streets, avenues, alleys
and highways of the City and to provide for the improvement thereof by
paving, repaving, raising, grading, draining, or otherwise; the provision of
Title 28, Chapter 9, of the 1925 Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, together
with existing amendments and such amendments as hereinafter may be made, are
expressly adopted by reference herein in regard to the powers of the City
over such properties, the order for improvements, the levying of costs
thereof, the assessment of railroads and street railroads, the assessments
against owners of abutting property, and certificates as evidencing the
owner’s obligations, the exemption of certain properties, the enforcement
of liens thus created, the notice of hearing thereunder, the hearing, the
reassessments, the right of an owner to sue thereunder, provision for special
reassessment, and notice thereunder, special liens to be created, the time
and amount of such assessment, or reassessment, and the dates on which such
assessment or reassessment shall be enforceable.



Statutory references:



   Assessment for street improvements, see Tex. Transportation Code, §
311.091



   Assessment of costs of improvements on abutting properties, see Tex.
Transportation Code, §§ 313.041 et seq.



   Authority of municipality over and under public highways, streets and
alleys, see Tex. Transportation Code, § 311.001



   Street improvements and assessments in cities having more than 1,000
inhabitants, see Tex. Transportation Code, Ch. 313



Section 12.  Sidewalks, curbs and gutters.



   Said City shall have the power to provide for the construction and
building of sidewalks and to charge the entire cost of the construction of
such sidewalks, including the curb and gutter, against the owner of the
abutting property and to make a special charge against the owner for such
cost, and to provide by special assessment a lien against such property for
such cost.



Statutory references:



   Assessment for construction of sidewalks and curbs, see Tex.
Transportation Code, § 311.093



   Authority over sidewalks, see Tex. Transportation Code, § 311.004



Section 13.  Repair of sidewalks, etc.



   Said City shall have the power to provide for the construction,
improvement or repair of any such sidewalk, or the construction of any such
curb and gutter, by penal ordinance, and to declare defective sidewalks to be
a public nuisance.



Statutory reference:



   Authority over sidewalks, see Tex. Transportation Code, § 311.004



Section 14.  Franchises.



   Said City shall have the power and authority to grant franchises for
the use and occupancy of the streets, avenues, alleys, and any and all public
grounds belonging to or under the control of the City. No telegraphs,
telephone, electric light or power, street railway, interurban railway, steam
railway, gas company, waterworks, water systems or any other character of
public utilities shall be granted any franchise or permitted the use of any
street, avenue, alley, highway or grounds of the City without first making
application to and obtaining the consent of the governing authorities
thereto, expressed by ordinance, and upon paying such compensation as may be
prescribed, and upon such conditions as may be provided for by such
ordinance, and before such ordinance proposing to make any grant or franchise
or privilege to any applicant to use or occupy any street, avenue, alleys or
other public ground belonging to the City, or under its control, shall become
effective, publication of such ordinance as finally proposed to be passed,
shall be made in some newspaper published in the City of Henderson, once a
week for three consecutive weeks, which such publication shall be made at the
expense of the applicant desiring said grant, and said proposed ordinance
shall not be thereafter changed unless republished as in the first instance,
nor shall any such ordinance take effect or become a law or contract or vest
any rights in the applicant therefor until after the expiration of thirty
days from the last publication of said ordinance, as aforesaid.



Statutory references:



   Authority to grant franchise to use or occupy public grounds, see Tex.
Local Gov’t Code, § 282.003



   Franchise to use streets in municipality, see Tex. Transportation Code,
§§ 311.071 et seq.



   Municipal home-rule powers to regulate public utilities and franchises
using streets, etc., see Tex. Local Gov’t Code, §§ 9.0001 et seq.



Section 15.  Street improvements, widening, etc.



   Said City shall have the power to open, extend, straighten and widen
any public street, avenue, or alley, and for such purpose to acquire the
necessary land by purchase or condemnation, and to provide that the cost of
improving any such streets, avenues or alleys by opening, extending,
straightening or widening, the same shall be paid by the owner of property
lying in the territory of such improvement, and which is especially
benefitted thereby; and to provide that the cost shall be charged by special
assessment against such owner and his property for the amount due by him, and
three special commissioners shall be appointed by the county judge of Rusk
County, Texas, for the purpose of condemning said land and apportioning said
cost, and such apportionment shall be specially assessed by the governing
authority of said City against the owner or owners and their property lying
in the territory so found by said special commissioners to be specially
benefitted in enhanced values, and said City may issue assignable
certificates for the payment of any such cost against such property owner and
his property, and may provide for the payment thereof in deferred payments,
which deferred payments shall bear interest at the rate of not exceeding
eight per centum per annum. Said City shall pay such portion of such cost as
may be determined by said special commissioners to be due by it; provided the
cost paid by the City shall never exceed one-half of the cost of such
improvement.



Statutory references:



   Assessment for street improvements, see Tex. Transportation Code, §
311.091



   Assessment of costs of improvements on abutting properties, see Tex.
Transportation Code, §§ 313.041 et seq.



   Authority of municipality over and under public highways, streets and
alleys, see Tex. Transportation Code, § 311.001



   Street improvements and assessments in cities having more than 1,000
inhabitants, see Tex. Transportation Code, Ch. 313



Section 16.  Opening streets.



   Said City shall have the power to control, regulate and remove all
obstructions, encroachments, and encumbrances on any public street, avenue or
alley, and to narrow, alter, widen, straighten, vacate, abandon the same, and
create and open up new streets where deemed needed; to provide for sprinkling
and cleaning same, and to regulate and control the moving and building and
structures of every kind and character upon and along the same.



Section 17.  Parks.



   Said City shall have exclusive control over all city parks and
playgrounds, within or without the city limits, and to control, regulate and
remove all obstructions and prevent all encroachments thereupon; and to
provide for raising, grading, filling, terracing, landscape gardening,
erecting buildings, providing amusements therein, for establishing walks and
paving driveways around, in and through said parks, maintaining zoological
gardens, playgrounds and other public grounds, and appropriating funds
therefor.



Statutory reference:



   Authority to acquire and maintain parks, museums and historic sites,
see Tex. Local Gov’t Code, Ch. 331



Section 18.  General miscellaneous powers.



   Said City shall have the power to define all nuisances, prohibit the
same within the city limits, outside of the city limits for a distance of
5,000 feet; to police all parks, grounds, speedways, streets, avenues and
alleys owned by said City, within or without the city limits; to prohibit the
pollution of all sources of water supply of said City, and to provide for the
protection of watersheds; to provide for the inspection of dairies, cows and
dairy herds, slaughter pens and slaughter houses and abattoirs, within or
without the city limits from which meat, milk, butter or eggs from same are
furnished to the inhabitants of said City, and to provide for the inspection
of meat markets, grocery stores, drugstores, confectioneries, fruit stands,
ice cream factories, laundries, bottling plants, hotels, restaurants, and
bakeries, and the source, storage and distribution of water, and all other
places where food or drinks for human consumption are manufactured, handled,
sold or exposed for sale, and to regulate and inspect the character and
standards of such articles of food and drinks so sold or offered for sale; to
provide for the inspection and regulation of the sanitary condition of all
premises and vacant lots within the city limits, for the removal of garbage,
night soil, refuse and unsanitary vegetation; to provide for establishing a
lien against the property for any expense incurred by the City in enforcing
this provision, and further to provide for the making and enforcing of all
proper and reasonable regulations for the health and sanitation of said City
and its inhabitants; and to provide for a health department and the
establishing of rules and regulations protecting the health of the City; the
establishing of quarantine station, pest houses, and hospitals, and to
provide for the adoption of necessary quarantine laws to protect the
inhabitants against contagious and infectious diseases; to provide for a
sanitary sewer system and for the maintenance thereof; to require property
owners to make connections with such sewer with their premises, and to
provide for fixing a lien against any property owner’s premises who fails
or refuses to make sanitary sewer connections and to charge the cost against
the said owner and make it a personal liability, and to fix penalties for
failure to make sanitary sewer connections; to restrict the use of any toilet
facility where sanitary sewerage is available; to require property owners,
their agents and lessees to remove within a reasonable time, ice, slush, snow
and other debris from sidewalks fronting on property owned, occupied or
controlled by such owner, agent, lessee, and to require such owner, agent or
lessee to remove all low hanging limbs from trees adjacent to sidewalks in
said City; to provide for social security, pensions, hospitalization and
medical attention for employees; to provide for the regulation and
prohibition of driving herds of horses, mules, cattle, hogs, sheep, goats and
all herds of domestic animals along or upon the streets, avenues or alleys of
said City; to establish and regulate public pounds and regulate, restrain and
prohibit the running at large of horses, mules, cattle, sheep, swine, goats,
chickens, pigeons, ducks and all other domesticated animals and fowls, and to
authorize the restraining, impounding and sale of the same for the cost of
the proceedings and the penalty incurred, and to order their destruction when
they cannot be sold and to impose penalties upon the owner thereof for the
violation of any ordinances regulating or prohibiting the same, and to tax,
regulate, restrain and prohibit the running at large of dogs, and to
authorize their destruction and impose penalties on the owners or keepers
thereof; to prohibit the inhumane treatment of animals and provide punishment
therefor; to prohibit and restrain the flying of kites, firing of firearms,
fireworks, rolling of hoops, and the use of velocipedes, bicycles and skates,
or the use and practice of and amusement on the streets or sidewalks to the
annoyance of pedestrians or persons using such streets or sidewalks and to
restrain, regulate and prohibit the ringing of bells, or blowing of horns,
bugles and whistles, crying of goods and other and all noises, practices and
performances tending to the collection of persons in the streets or tending,
unnecessarily, to interfere with the peace and quietude of the inhabitants of
said city, and to suppress and regulate all unnecessary noises; to license
any lawful business, occupation or calling that is susceptible to the control
of the police power, and to license, regulate, control or prohibit the
erection of signs or billboards; to license, tax and regulate or suppress and
prevent hawkers, peddlers and pawnbrokers; to license, tax and regulate all
charges of fares made by any person, firm or corporation owning, operating or
controlling any vehicle operated for the carriage of passengers or freight
for hire on the public streets of the City; to regulate the operation of
railway trains and streetcars operated on, along or across the streets,
avenues or alleys of said City, and airplanes over the City; to license and
control the operation of automobiles, motorcycles, taxicabs, buses, cabs and
carriages and all character of vehicles using the public streets and to
regulate the use and occupancy of the streets by any such vehicle; to provide
for the regulation and control of plumbers and plumbing work, and to secure
efficiency in the same; to provide for the inspection of weights, measures
and meters and to fix a standard of such weights, measures and meters and
require conformity to such standards and provide penalties for failure to use
or conform to the same, and to provide for inspection fees; to regulate and
provide for location of heavy, dangerous and noisy business in districts set
apart for such purpose; to provide for the issuance of permits for erecting
all buildings; for the inspection of the construction of all buildings in
respect to proper wiring, for electric lights and other electrical
appliances; piping for gas, flues, chimneys, plumbing and sewer connections,
and to enforce proper regulations in regard thereto; to provide for the
establishment and designation of fire limits; to provide for the kind and
character of fireproof buildings within said limits and for the condemnation
of dangerous or dilapidated structures which are calculated to increase the
fire hazard; to enact and enforce all ordinances and resolutions, necessary
to regulate the safety of all office buildings, hotels, apartment houses,
rooming houses, hospitals, theaters, store buildings and all public
buildings; to require the construction of fire escapes in connection with
public buildings, and to determine the efficiency and regulate the safety of
all exits and fire escapes provided on public buildings of every kind and
character; to restrain and punish vagrants, mendicants, beggars and
prostitutes, to regulate, control or prohibit the sale, gift, barter,
exchange of cocaine, opium, morphine and the salts thereof, and other
narcotics; to define nuisances and prohibit and punish same by fine; to pass
ordinances defining offenses against the person and property and public
health and safety and provide penalties to enforce same; to prohibit and
punish keepers and inmates of bawdy, assignation and disorderly houses, and
to prevent and suppress such bawdy, assignation and disorderly houses, and to
punish such keepers, inmates and owners, or agents of such owners of such
houses, knowingly permitting such houses to be occupied as such bawdy,
assignation or disorderly houses, to determine such inmates and keepers to be
vagrants; to provide for establishing and maintaining the fire department of
the City; to require waterworks corporations, gas companies, streetcar
companies, telephone companies, electric light and power companies, or other
companies or individuals, exercising franchises, now or hereafter from the
city, to make and furnish extension of their services to such territory as
may be required by ordinance; to establish and maintain the city police
department, prescribe the qualifications and duties of policemen and regulate
their conduct; to provide for the enforcement of all ordinances enacted by
the city by a fine not to exceed $200.00, provided that no ordinance shall
provide a greater or less penalty than is prescribed for a like offense by
the laws of this state; to provide for the commutation of fines imposed by
labor in a workhouse, on the public streets and public highways of the City,
and for a collection of any fine imposed, execution may be enforced, as
executions issued in civil cases and capias pro fines; to establish, maintain
and regulate the city prison, workhouses and other means of punishing
vagrants, city convicts and disorderly persons, and such hospitals,
orphanages and charitable institutions as may be deemed expedient by the
governing authorities.



Section 19.  Zoning.



   The City of Henderson shall have the power to divide the City in zones
or districts, and to regulate the location, size, height, bulk, and use of
buildings within such zones or districts, and to establish building lines
within such zones or districts or otherwise, and make different regulations
for different districts and thereafter to alter the same. The City is
authorized to create a commission or board for the purpose of carrying out
the powers of this section, or may provide for the creation of a board of
appeals or review for the purpose of hearing and deciding on appeals from and
reviewing any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the City in
carrying out the powers and authority herein conferred, provided the
authority and power herein conferred shall never be construed to be a
limitation of any other power and authority conferred in this Charter.



(Amend. of 4/6/85, sec. 5)



Statutory reference:



   Municipal zoning authority, see Tex. Local Gov’t Code, Ch. 211



Section 20.  Reserved.



Editor’s note:



   Section 5 of an amendment of April 6, 1985, repealed section 20 in its
entirety. Former section 20 pertained to the establishing of building lines



Section 21.  Additional general powers.



   The enumeration of particular powers in this Charter shall not be held
or deemed to be exclusive, but in addition to the powers enumerated herein,
implied thereby or appropriate to the exercise thereof, the City of Henderson
may have and shall exercise all other powers which, under the Constitution of
the State of Texas, it would be competent for the Charter specifically to
enumerate.



(Amend. of 4/6/85, sec. 6)



Section 22.  Additional home rule powers.



   (a)   The City of Henderson shall have and exercise all the powers
conferred upon cities by what is known as the Home Rule Amendment to the
Constitution of the State of Texas and the enabling act and all other laws
passed or which may hereafter be passed by the legislature in relation to
such matters.



   (b)   The City of Henderson may exercise any of its powers or
perform any of its functions, and may participate in the financing thereof,
jointly or in cooperation, by contract or otherwise with the Government of
Texas or any agency thereof, or with the Federal Government of Texas [sic] or
any agency thereof, or with the Federal Government or any agency thereof, or
with the government of any county, city, or political subdivision to
accomplish any lawful municipal purpose.



(Amend. of 4/6/85, sec. 7)



Statutory references:



   Authority of local self-government, see Tex. Local Gov’t Code, §
51.072



   General powers of home-rule municipality, see Tex. Local Gov’t Code,
§§ 51.071 et seq.



   Powers of home-rule municipality, see Tex. Local Gov’t Code, §§
9.0001 et seq.



ARTICLE III. CITY COUNCIL



Section 1.  Composition of city council.



   The municipal government of the City of Henderson, Texas, shall consist
of a Mayor, elected at large, and five (5) Council members elected from five
(5) geographically defined districts. The Mayor and two (2) district Council
members shall be elected in even numbered years. Three (3) district Council
members shall be elected in odd numbered years. The Mayor and Council members
shall serve two (2) year terms.



   This form of government shall be instituted at the time of the city
election beginning in 1986.



(Amend. of 4/6/85, sec. 8)



Section 2.  Election of officers.



   (a)   An election shall be held annually in the City on the first
Saturday of April, at such places as the City Council may direct. Such
election shall be conducted in accordance with the Texas Election Code,
including any and all amendments to such code. The provisions of the Texas
Election Code, and any and all amendments thereto, relating to qualifications
of officers, limitations of council members, vacancies and special elections
to fill such vacancies, are hereby adopted.



   (b)   The Mayor and all Council members elected by the City shall be
elected with a majority of the votes cast for that particular office, and in
the event that there are more than two (2) candidates for any office and no
candidate is elected by a majority, then there must be a runoff election
held. The runoff election shall be held in compliance with the Texas Election
Code and any and all amendments thereto.



(Amend. of 4/6/85, sec. 8)



Statutory references:



   Applicability of Election Code, see Tex. Election Code, § 1.002



   Date for election of officers, see Tex. Local Gov’t Code, § 26.042



   Election dates, see Tex. Election Code, Ch. 41



   Election by plurality, see Tex. Election Code, §§ 2.001 et seq.



   Runoff election, see Tex. Election Code, §§ 2.021 et seq.



Section 3.  Election from district.



   In addition to the qualifications contained in Section 4, Article III
of this Charter, a City Council member elected from a district must have been
a bona fide resident of that district on the day of filing for such office.



(Amend. of 4/6/85, sec. 8)



Statutory reference:



   Age and residence requirements for home-rule city office, see Tex.
Election Code, § 141.003



Section 4.  Qualifications.



   Each member of the City Council and the Mayor shall at the time of his
or her election to office be at least twenty-one (21) years of age and shall
be a qualified voter of the State of Texas and a citizen of the City for a
period of time not less than six (6) months next preceding his or her
election. No member of the City Council or the Mayor shall hold any other
office or salaried employment under the City Government while he or she is
serving as a member of the City Council or as Mayor, nor shall he or she hold
any salaried employment under the City Government within one (1) year
thereafter. A member of the City Council or the Mayor ceasing to reside in
the City or in the district from which he or she was elected shall
immediately forfeit his or her office. No member of the City Council nor the
Mayor shall hold any other public office except as Notary Public while he or
she is a member of the City Council or Mayor. No candidate for public office
or public official of the City of Henderson shall be delinquent in any
account owed to the City.



(Amend. of 4/6/85, sec. 8)



Statutory references:



   Age and residence requirements for home-rule city office, see Tex.
Election Code, § 141.003



   Candidates for city office, see Tex. Election Code, Ch. 143



   Eligibility for public office, see Tex. Election Code, §§ 141.001 et
seq.



Section 5.  Duties and powers of officers.



   Each and all provisions of Chapter Three, Title 28, R.C.S. 1925, and
amendments, being Articles 993 through 1006 of said Statutes [V.T.C.A., Local
Government Code sections 22.005, 22.008, 22.010, 22.012, 22.042,
22.073-22.077, 52.003, 141.001, 141.006, 141.007, 142.004-142.008, 341.001,
341.011, 341.012, 362.001, 362.002], are hereby adopted and made a part of
this Charter to the same effect as though fully copied herein.



(Amend. of 4/6/85, sec. 8)



Section 6.  Vacancies.



   All vacancies from any cause in the office of Mayor or City Council
member shall be filled in accordance with Article 989, Revised Civil
Statutes, State of Texas, and amendments [V.T.C.A., Local Government Code
section 22.010].



(Amend. of 4/6/85, sec. 8)



Section 7.  Council meetings, procedures, ordinances and powers.



   The City Council shall meet at least once each month and more often as
may be fixed by ordinance; a majority of the duly elected Council members
shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of holding a legal meeting.



   Chapter Four, Title 28, R.C.S. 1925, and amendments [V.T.C.A., Local
Government Code sections 22.033, 22.037, 52.004], are hereby adopted
expressly, to the same effect as though such chapter were fully copied
herein, which chapter relates to attendance and salary of officers, powers of
the Council, ordinances, public governmental affairs, finances and other
related subjects.



(Amend. of 4/6/85, sec. 8)



Section 8.  Ordinances.



   (a)   The Council shall have the power to carry into effect all the
powers granted under this Charter, including ordinances regulating and
concerning all matters of property, health, safety and public peace and all
other matters pertaining to local self-government not inhibited by the
Constitution and laws of the State.



   (b)   The Council shall have the power by ordinance to define
misdemeanor offenses against person, property, health, safety, morals and all
other form of culpable misconduct within the City Limits, and to prohibit the
same and fix penalties for violation of such ordinances.



   (c)   All ordinances of the City providing for a penalty or any
other ordinances heretofore required by law to be published twice in an
official newspaper of the City, once each week during a ten (10) day period
and such publication need not set out the entire text of such ordinance, but
it shall be sufficient for such publication to contain a descriptive caption
or title stating in summary, the purpose of the ordinance and the penalty for
violation thereof



   (d)   Before an ordinance is finally passed, it shall be read in two
(2) consecutive meetings of the Council; provided, however, that emergencies
may be dealt with as authorized by paragraph (e) of this section.



   (e)   An emergency ordinance is an ordinance or resolution for the
immediate preservation of public peace, property, health or safety, or
providing for the usual daily operation of a municipal department, and shall
become immediately in force and effective after passage, irrespective of any
rule providing for separate readings more than once.



   (f)   In any investigation by the Council of matters pertaining to
any City Department, and franchise, and any matter of a public nature in
which the interest of the City is concerned, the Council shall have the power
to issue subpoena for witnesses, require the production of books and records
and papers pertinent to such investigation, and to pass ordinances providing
for such attendance and production of papers and records before the Council
and providing penalty for failure to do so.



   (g)   The Council shall have the power to require by ordinance the
extension of any public utility where the health and welfare of the City and
public requires it.



   (h)   The Council shall have the power to enact all ordinances
necessary to maintain order and public peace, prohibit unlawful interference
with the right of the people to work and to restrain unlawful assemblies,
boycotts, strikes and other unlawful acts against the City, free enterprise
and business where the public interest and welfare is concerned.



   (i)   The enumeration of specific powers hereinabove set forth are
not exclusive, and shall not be so deemed, and it is expressly provided that
the Council shall have the power to pass all ordinances and do all things
necessary for the welfare of the City in the administration of municipal
departments, in the administration of police powers, and for the preservation
of public peace, property, health, safety and general welfare of the City and
its citizens, and for the progress and development of the City as local
self-government may require.



   (j)   The style of all ordinances of the City of Henderson shall be:
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF HENDERSON, TEXAS.



(Amend. of 4/6/85, sec. 8)



Statutory references:



   Ordinance, rule or regulation necessary to carry out other powers, see
Tex. Local Gov’t Code, § 51.001



   Publication of ordinances, see Tex. Local Gov’t Code, § 52.013



Section 9.  Transition.



   Once these changes in the Charter of the City of Henderson are approved
and the drawing of district lines become effective, each one of the existing
Council members shall be designated as the particular representative of one
of the five (5) respective districts in the following way:



   (a)   If only one Council member presently resides in a newly drawn
geographic district, that Council member shall be designated the
representative of that particular district and shall continue to represent
said district until standing for reelection according to the existing
reelection schedule.



   (b)   If two (2) or more Council members presently reside in a newly
drawn geographic district, each shall draw by lot in order to determine which
one shall become the designated representative of that district.



   (c)   Newly drawn geographic districts within which no current
Council member resides shall each have one Council member designated as that
district’s representative with previously unassigned Council members
drawing by lot for each one’s specific district representation assignment.
Each Council member shall then represent said district until each
respectively would normally stand for reelection according to the existing
reelection schedule.



(Amend. of 4/6/85, sec. 8)



ARTICLE IV. ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATIONS



   Editor’s note:



      Section 9 of an amendment of April 6, 1985, renamed article IV as
“Administrative Organization.” Former article IV was entitled
“Departments.”



Section 1.  The city manager generally.



   The Council shall appoint a City Manager who shall be the
administrative and executive officer of the City. The Manager shall be chosen
by the Council solely on the basis of training, experience and ability. The
Manager need not, when appointed, be a resident of the City of Henderson;
however, upon acceptance, the Manager shall immediately establish residence
within the City. The Council shall appoint the Manager only for an indefinite
term and fix the annual compensation. In the absence or inability of the City
Manager to perform designated duties, the Council, by majority vote, may
designate a qualified administrative officer to perform the duties of the
Manager during such absence or disability.



(Amend. of 4/6/85, sec. 9)



Section 2.  Responsibilities and general powers of the city manager.



   The City Manager shall be responsible to the Council for the proper
administration of all the affairs of the City. The powers and duties herein
conferred upon the City Manager shall include, but shall not be limited by,
the following:



   (a)   To appoint and remove any officer or employee of the City
except those officers and employees whose appointment or election is
otherwise provided for by law or this Charter; and to supervise all municipal
programs.



   (b)   To prepare the budget annually, submit it to the Council and
be responsible for its administration after its adoption.



   (c)   To manage the City’s funds; to keep the Council informed of
the financial condition of the City; and to make recommendations on current
and future needs of the City as may seem desirable.



   (d)   To provide information to the Council facilitating its ability
to make informed decisions in the best interests of the community.



   (e)   To prepare the Council meeting agendas; to attend all such
meetings serving as a resource to the Council and the public; and to
recommend alternatives by which the Council can respond to the community
needs.



   (f)   To perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this
Charter or required of him by the Council which are not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Charter.



(Amend. of 4/6/85, sec. 9)



Section 3.  Removal of the city manager.



   The Council may remove the Manager from office in accordance with the
following procedures:



   (a)   The Council shall adopt, by affirmative vote of a majority of
all its members, a preliminary resolution which must state the reasons for
removal and may suspend the Manager from duty for a period not to exceed
thirty (30) days. A copy of the resolution shall be delivered promptly to the
Manager.



   (b)   Within seven (7) days after a copy of the resolution is
delivered to the Manager, the Manager may file with the Council a written
request for a public hearing. This hearing shall be held at a Council meeting
not earlier than ten (10) days, nor later than twenty (20) days, after the
request is filed. The Manager may file with the Council a written reply not
later than five (5) days before the hearing.



   (c)   The Council may adopt a final resolution of removal, which may
be made effective immediately, by affirmative vote of a majority of all its
members at any time after five (5) days from the date when a copy of the
preliminary resolution was delivered to the Manager, if the Manager has not
requested a public hearing, or at any time after the public hearing, if one
has been requested.



   The Manager shall continue to receive full salary until the effective
date of a final resolution of removal. The action of the Council in
suspending or removing the Manager shall be final.



(Amend. of 4/6/85, sec. 9)



Section 4.  Administrative departments.



   There shall be such administrative departments as are established by
this Charter and as may be established by ordinance, all of which shall be
under the control and direction of the City Manager. The Council may abolish
or combine one or more departments created by it and may assign or transfer
duties of any departments of the City from one department to another by
ordinance.



(Amend. of 4/6/85, sec. 9)



Section 5.  Directors of departments.



   At the head of each department there shall be a director, whose
qualifications may be prescribed by the Council, who shall be appointed by
the City Manager for an indefinite term, subject to the consent of the City
Council, and who may be removed by the City Manager. Such directors shall
have supervision and control over their respective departments. The City
Manager may authorize directors of departments to appoint and remove
subordinates in each one’s respective department. Two (2) or more
departments may be headed by the same individual and the City Manager may
head one or more departments.



(Amend. of 4/6/85, sec. 9)



Section 6.  City attorney.



   The City Council shall appoint a City Attorney from recommendations of
the City Manager, or by any member of the City Council, who shall be duly
licensed to practice law in the State of Texas. The City Attorney shall
receive, for particular services, such compensation as may be fixed by the
Council, and may be removed at any time by majority vote of the City Council.



   The City Attorney shall represent the City of Henderson in all its
litigation, serving as the legal advisor of and attorney and counsel for the
City of Henderson, the Council and all boards, commissions and agencies, and
all officers and departments thereof.



   Notwithstanding the above provisions, the Council may engage special
legal counsel to represent the City of Henderson in any specific matter or
for the performance of any specifically delineated duties otherwise to be
performed by the City Attorney.



(Amend. of 4/6/85, sec. 9)



Section 7.  Municipal court and judge.



   There shall be a Municipal Court of the City of Henderson which shall
have such jurisdiction, powers, and duties as are prescribed by the Laws of
the State of Texas, over which shall preside the Municipal Judge, whose
qualifications shall be prescribed by the Laws of the State of Texas, and who
shall be appointed by a majority vote of the City Council from
recommendations of the City Manager or by any member of the City Council.



(Amend. of 4/6/85, sec. 9)



Section 8.  City secretary.



   The City Council by majority vote, upon the recommendation of the City
Manager, shall appoint the City Secretary who shall serve at the discretion
of the Council and who may be removed from office by the City Council upon
the recommendation of the City Manager. The duties of the City Secretary
shall include, but not be limited to, the following:



   (a)   To attend all meetings of the City Council and keep accurate
records of all actions taken by the Council;



   (b)   To maintain the official records and files of the City;



   (c)   To administer oaths of office;



   (d)   To attest contracts, assessment certificates and other legal
instruments when executed by the authorized officers of the City;



   (e)   To serve as the election official for all City elections; and



   (f)   To perform such other duties as may be assigned by the City
Council or the City Manager or as may be required by this Charter or State
Law.



(Amend. of 4/6/85, sec. 9)



ARTICLE V. TAXATION



Section 1.  Tax limit.



   The City shall have the power and is hereby authorized to annually
levy, assess and collect taxes not to exceed $2.50 on each $100.00 assessed
valuation of all real and personal property within the city limits of the
City of Henderson, not exempt from taxation by the constitution and laws of
the State of Texas.



Statutory references:



   Property taxes authorized, see Tex. Tax Code, § 302.001



Section 2. Reserved.



Editor’s note:



   Section 10 of an amendment of April 6, 1985, repealed section 2 in its
entirety. Former section 2 pertained to the levy of a poll tax.



Section 3.  Issuance of licenses.



   Said City shall authorize the granting and issuance of licenses and
shall direct the manner of issuing and registering the same, and fix the fees
therefor, but no license shall be issued for a longer period than one year,
and shall not be assignable, except by permission of the governing body of
the City.



Section 4.  Street rental charge and/or gross receipt tax.



   The City shall have the right and power to levy and collect annually a
street rental charge and/or gross receipt tax against any utility corporation
using and occupying the public streets and grounds of the City, separately
from the tangible property of such corporations, and to levy annually upon
the property and shares of corporations, companies and corporate institutions
as the same are now, or may be, assessed hereafter by the state laws, and
shall have full power to enforce the collection of such taxes. (Amend. of
4/6/85, sec. 11)



Statutory references:



   Municipal authority to impose charges on electric utility using
streets, etc., see Tex. Utilities Code, Ch. 33



   Municipal authority to impose charges on gas utility using streets,
etc., see Tex. Utilities Code, Ch. 103



Sections 5-9. Reserved.



Editor’s note:



   Section 12 of an amendment of April 6, 1985, repealed sections 5
through 9 in their entirety. Former sections 5 through 9 pertained to taxes



Section 10.  Collection.



   The City shall have full power to provide for the prompt collection, by
suit or otherwise, of taxes assessed, levied and imposed, and it is hereby
authorized, and to that end, shall have full power and authority to sell, or
cause to be sold, all kinds of property, real and personal, and shall make
such rules and regulations, and enact all such ordinances as are deemed
necessary for the collection of any taxes provided for in this Charter.



Statutory reference:



   Tax collection powers, see Tex. Tax Code, § 302.102



Section 11. Reserved.



Editor’s note:



   Section 13 of an amendment of April 6, 1985, repealed section 11 in its
entirety. Former section 11 pertained to not requiring a bond to be executed
on behalf of the city in any action, suit or proceeding



Section 12.  Fiscal year.



   The City shall have the power to control and manage the finances of the
City; to provide its fiscal year and fiscal arrangements.



Statutory references:



   City fiscal year, see Tex. Tax Code, § 1.05



   General fiscal power to establish fiscal year, see Tex. Local Gov’t
Code, § 101.022



Section 13.  City funds.



   All moneys arising from the collection of taxes by the City shall be
divided into appropriate funds and designated as the general funds and
interest and sinking fund.



Sections 14-16.  Reserved.



Editor’s note:



   Section 12 of an amendment of April 6, 1985, repealed sections 14
through 16 in their entirety. Former sections 14 through 16 pertained to
assessment irregularity, a board of equalization, and general law applicable
to taxation, respectively



Section 17.  Occupation tax.



   The City shall have the right to assess and collect such occupational
taxes, license and franchise taxes upon trades, professions, occupations, and
any business transaction carried on in the said City as may be authorized by
the laws of the State of Texas, but the amount so levied in collection shall
not exceed one-half of the amount levied by the State of Texas for the same
trades, professions, occupations, vocations or businesses.



(Amend. of 4/6/85, sec. 14)



Statutory reference:



   Occupation taxes, see Tex. Tax Code, § 302.101



ARTICLE VI. CITY FINANCES



Statutory reference:



   General financial provisions applicable to home-rule municipality, see
Tex. Local Government Code, §§ 101.021 et seq.



Section 1.  Revenue appropriation for bond improvements, etc.



   The governing authority of the City shall have the power to appropriate
so much of the general revenue of the City as may be necessary for the
purpose of retiring and discharging the accrued indebtedness of the City and
for the purpose of improving the streets, constructing sewers, erecting and
maintaining public buildings and parks of every kind, and for the purpose of
erecting, maintaining and operating an electric light plant, or plants, and
such other public utilities as the governing body may from time to time deem
expedient, and in the furtherance of any and all of these subjects the City
shall have the right and power to borrow money upon the credit of the City
and to issue bonds of the City therefor in the sum or sums as may be deemed
advisable within the limits governed by federal law and the laws of the State
of Texas, provided that the aggregate amount of said bonds shall not exceed
ten (10) percent of the whole taxable value of the City of Henderson, as
ascertained from the tax records, at the time of the issuance of such bonds.
Said bonds to be issued in conformity with the ordinances hereafter to be
enacted by the City Council and conformity with the general laws of the State
of Texas, and all federal laws applicable thereto and governing the issuance
of bonds by municipalities.



(Amend. of 4/6/85, sec. 15)



Statutory references:



   Authority of municipality to issue bonds for public improvements, see
Tex. Gov’t Code, § 1331.052



   Municipal bonds, see Tex. Gov’t Code, Ch. 1331



Section 2.  Bond provisions for payment.



   All bonds shall specify for what purpose they are issued and when any
bonds are issued by the City a fund shall be provided to pay the interest and
create a sinking fund to redeem said bonds, which fund shall not be diverted
or drawn upon for any other purpose, and the person acting as City Treasurer
shall honor no drafts upon said fund, except to pay interest upon or redeem
the bonds for which it was provided.



(Amend. of 4/6/85, sec. 16)



Statutory references:



   Municipal bonds, see Tex. Gov’t Code, Ch. 1331



   Public Security Procedures Act, see Tex. Gov’t Code, Ch. 1201



Section 3.  Bond term.



   Said bonds shall be issued for a period of time not to exceed a period
of forty (40) years, shall be signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the
person acting in the capacity of City Secretary, and shall be payable at such
places and times that may be fixed by ordinance of the City Council. All such
bonds shall be submitted to the Attorney General of the State of Texas for
his approval, and the State Comptroller for registration, as provided by the
laws of Texas, provided that any such bonds after approval may be issued by
the City either optional or serial or otherwise, as may be deemed advisable
by the City Council.



(Amend. of 4/6/85, sec. 17)



Section 4.  Bond elections.



   Before the issuance of any bonds the same shall be submitted to a vote
of the qualified property taxpaying voters of the City of Henderson, and
should a majority of the votes cast in said election be in favor of the
issuance of the bonds the same shall be issued as provided herein, but should
said election fail to carry, the bonds shall not be issued. The election
provided for above shall be conducted as other elections under the state law,
after due notice of such election in accordance with Article 704, V.A.T.S.
[V.T.C.A., Government Code section 1251.003], and amendments.



(Amend. of 4/6/85, sec. 18)



Statutory reference:



   Bond elections generally, see Tex. Gov’t Code, Ch. 1251



Section 5.  Emergency deficiency warrant.



   The City Council shall issue no deficiency warrant, except in cases of
emergency and the [same shall] not draw interest at more than six per cent
per annum, and in no event without the unanimous vote of all members of the
City Council, and in no event shall deficiency warrants be outstanding for
more than $5,000.00 at any one time.



Section 6.  Budget expenditures.



   Expenditures shall be legal only on the basis of appropriations in the
budget and on the authority of warrants issued by authority of the City
Council.



Statutory reference:



   Levy of taxes and expenditure of funds under budget, emergency
expenditure, see Tex. Local Gov’t Code, § 102.009



Section 7.  Transfer of funds.



   For good cause shown the City Council may pass resolutions,
transferring appropriations made from one department to another department,
but in no event shall the total appropriation made for all the departments of
the City exceed the reasonable and anticipated revenues of the City in excess
of fixed charges for that year.



Section 8.  Audit of records.



   The City Council shall cause a continuous audit of the books and
accounts of all records and transactions of the administration of the affairs
of the City, such audit to be made annually, embracing each fiscal year, and
shall be made by a Certified Public Accountant. The duty of such accountant
shall include the certification of all statements required, such statements
shall include a general balance sheet showing summaries of income and
expenditures and also comparisons in proper classification with the last
previous audit; such summary shall be published in a newspaper published in
the City of Henderson, one time within ten (10) days after completion of such
audit.



(Amend. of 4/6/85, sec. 19)



Statutory reference:



   Audit of municipal finances, see Tex. Local Gov’t Code, Ch. 103



Section 9.  City depository or depositories.



   The City Council shall receive applications for the custody of City
funds from any banking corporation, association or individual banker that may
desire to be selected as a depository of the City and designate such a
depository or depositories in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 3,
Title 47, Revised Civil Statutes of Texas [V.T.C.A., Local Government Code,
chapter 105], in effect at the time of such selection. The term of
designation of such depository or depositories shall be for no more than
three (3) years unless otherwise provided by Statute.



(Amend. of 4/2/82, sec. 3)



Statutory reference:



   Depositories for municipal funds, see Tex. Local Gov’t Code, Ch. 105



Section 10.  City cemetery.



   The City Council shall have the power to make ample provisions for the
upkeep and maintenance of the City Cemeteries, and in the furtherance
therefor shall enact all ordinances and pass all resolutions necessary in the
premises, and shall provide by appropriations from the general fund of said
City, annually, such amount as may be necessary for that purpose.



(Amend. of 4/6/85, sec. 20)



Statutory references:



   Cemeteries, see Tex. Health and Safety Code, §§ 711.001 et seq. and
§§ 714.001 et seq.



   Municipal regulation of cemeteries, see Tex. Health and Safety Code,
§§ 713.001 et seq.



Section 11.  General law adopted for bond issuance.



   In addition to the specific powers herein enumerated, with reference to
issuance of bonds, revenue bonds, and warrants, it is expressly provided that
the City shall have all of the powers to issue bonds as provided in Title 28,
R. C. S. 1925 [V.T.C.A., Government Code title 9], and amendments now or
hereafter made by the State Legislature, in the mode and manner and for the
purposes therein set forth, and in addition for such other purposes which may
be for the public good and welfare, so long as such purposes are not
inhibited by the Constitution or law of the State; and the City may
appropriate available funds, which are not by law limited to specific
purposes, for improvements and purposes necessary in the administration and
progress of a local self-governing home rule city, provided only that such
purposes for expenditures of funds be not inhibited by the Constitution and
Laws of Texas.



Section 12.  Reserved.



Editor’s note:



   Section 21 of an amendment of April 6, 1985, repealed section 12 in its
entirety. Former section 12 pertained to the assumption of city obligations
incurred prior to charter adoption



ARTICLE VII. GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section 1.  Ordinances, orders, etc., to remain in force.



   All ordinances, resolutions and orders of the City Council of the Town
of Henderson in force at the time of taking effect of this Charter, not
inconsistent with its provisions, shall continue in force and effect until
amended or repealed.



Section 2.  Vested rights continued.



   All vested rights of the Town of Henderson shall continue to be vested
and shall not in any manner be affected by the adoption of this Charter,
unless otherwise herein expressly provided to the contrary. All contracts
entered into by the Town of Henderson or for its benefit prior to the taking
effect of this Charter shall be continued and performed hereunder, according
to their terms, tenor and effect. Public improvements for which legislative
steps shall have been taken under the laws in force at the time of the
adoption of this Charter and the time it becomes effective may be carried out
and completed in accordance with the provisions of such laws.



Section 3.  Savings or constitutional clause.



   Should any portion of this Charter be held unconstitutional, or in
conflict with a State law, rendering it void, such holding shall not have the
effect of invalidating any other portion of the Charter.



Section 4.  Oath of office.



   (a)   Elected officers. Every elected officer of the City shall,
before entering upon the duties of his office, take and subscribe to the
following oath or affirmation, to be filed and kept in the office of the City
Secretary:



      I, ____________ , do solemnly swear (or affirm), that I will
faithfully execute the duties of the office of the City of Henderson, State
of Texas, and will to the best of my ability preserve, protect and defend the
constitution and laws of the United States and of this state and the Charter
and ordinances of this City; and I furthermore solemnly swear (or affirm)
that I have not directly or indirectly paid, offered, or promised to
contribute any money, or valuable thing, or promised any public office or
employment, as a reward for the giving or withholding a vote at the election
at which I was elected. So help me God.



   (b)   Appointed officers. Every appointed officer of the City shall,
before entering upon the duties of his office, take and subscribe to the
following oath or affirmation, to be filed and kept in the office of the City
Secretary:



      I, ____________ , do solemnly swear (or affirm), that I will
faithfully execute the duties of the office of the City of Henderson, State
of Texas, and will to the best of my ability preserve, protect and defend the
constitution and laws of the United States and of this state and the Charter
and ordinances of this City; and I furthermore solemnly swear (or affirm)
that I have not directly or indirectly paid, offered, or promised to
contribute any money, or valuable thing, or promised any public office of
[or] employment, as a reward to secure my appointment or the confirmation
thereof So help me God.



(Amend. of 4/6/85, sec. 22)



State constitution reference:



   Oath of office, see Texas Constitution, Art. 16, § 1



Section 5.  Effect of this Charter on existing law.



   All ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations now in force under
the city government of the City and not in conflict with the provisions of
this Charter shall remain in force under this Charter until altered, amended
or repealed by City Council after this Charter takes effect; and all rights
of the City under existing franchises and contracts are preserved in full
force and effect to the City, and any unissued bonds and revenue bonds, or
installments thereof, heretofore authorized at an election held in said City
shall not be affected by the adoption of this Charter, but the right to sell,
issue and deliver same, in whole or in part, in keeping with the provisions
of the laws under which they were voted is hereby expressly reserved.



(Amend. of 4/6/85, sec. 23)



Section 6.  General law adopted where not otherwise provided herein.



   All subjects, matters, powers and procedures pertaining to municipal
law and government not expressly covered herein may be dealt with and
conducted as provided by the general laws of the State pertaining to cities
of over 5,000 inhabitants and the laws pertaining to home rule cities; this
provision is not to be construed as a limitation on the powers of the City
but as a cumulative provision, subject to change by ordinance to such extent
as not prohibited by the Constitution and law of the State.



Section 7.  Liberal construction of home rule powers.



   The provisions of this Charter shall be liberally construed for the
purpose of obtaining the objects and ends hereof. It is intended by this
Charter to vest in the City Government all of the powers which a political
entity can lawfully exercise in the administration of local self-government
for the present and future good and welfare of the citizens and progress,
growth and development of the City, limited only by the inhibitions and
prohibitions of the Constitution and laws of the State.



Section 7.1.  Severability clause.



   If any section or part of a section of this Charter shall be held
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect
the remainder of this Charter nor the context in which such section or part
of such section so held invalid may appear, except to the extent that an
entire section or part of a section may be inseparably connected in meaning
and effect with the section or part of a section to which such holding shall
directly apply.



(Amend. of 4/6/85, sec. 24)



Section 7.2.  References to laws.



   All references within this Charter to laws of the State of Texas or of
the United States are to be construed as meaning such laws as now or
hereafter amended or superseded.



(Amend. of 4/6/85, sec. 25)



Section 8.  Provision for submission of this charter.



   This Charter is submitted in accordance with the provision of Chapter
13, Title 28, R. C. S. 1925, and amendments [V.T.C.A., Local Government Code
secs. 9.001 et seq., 26.021, 26.041, 51.072, 51.074 et seq., 43.021, 43.142,
101.022, 141.004 et seq., etc.], for vote of the qualified citizens at the
City General Election held on Tuesday, April 1, 1947, and when adopted by the
citizens shall be the Charter of the City of Henderson, Rusk County, Texas.



The State of Texas         )



County of Rusk         )



City of Henderson         )



I, the undersigned City Secretary of the City of Henderson, Texas, do hereby
certify that the above and foregoing is a true and correct copy of the
Charter of the City of Henderson, Texas, as adopted by the voters of the City
of Henderson, Texas, at an election held on April 1, 1947.



I further certify that no amendments of any nature have been made to this
charter since April 1, 1947.



Witness my hand and seal of office, this the 11th day of April, 1958.



         /s/      W. M. Armstrong



               City Secretary,



               City of Henderson, Texas.



(SEAL)



TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   Chapter



      10.   GENERAL CODE CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY



CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL CODE CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Interpretation



   10.03   Application to future ordinances



   10.04   Captions



   10.05   Definitions



   10.06   Rules of interpretation



   10.07   Severability



   10.08   Reference to other sections



   10.09   Reference to offices



   10.10   Errors and omissions



   10.11   Official time



   10.12   Reasonable time



   10.13   Ordinances repealed



   10.14   Ordinances unaffected



   10.15   Effective date of ordinances



   10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinance



   10.17   Ordinances which amend or supplement code



   10.18   Section histories; statutory references



   10.19   Altering or tampering with code



   10.20   Enforcement of nuisance offenses



   10.21   Code enforcement by citation



 



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   This codification of ordinances by and for the City of Henderson,
Texas, shall be designated as the “Code of Henderson”, and may be so
cited.



Statutory reference:



   Authority of municipality to codify ordinances, see Tex. Local Gov’t
Code, Ch. 53



§ 10.02  INTERPRETATION.



   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required,
the same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state
law.



§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.04  CAPTIONS.



   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.05  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain
or ordinary and usual sense; however, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to
their technical import.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION or MUNICIPALITY.  The City of
Henderson, Texas.



      CODE,THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES.  This municipal code
as modified by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or
sections.



      COUNCIL or CITY COUNCIL.  The City Council of the City of
Henderson, Texas.



      COUNTY.  Rusk County, Texas.



      DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY.  Whenever a provision of this code of
ordinances requires or authorizes an officer or employee of the city to do
some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize such
officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to
perform the act or duty unless the terms of the provision specifically
designate otherwise.



      JOINT AUTHORITY.  Words purporting to give authority to three or
more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to
a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared.



      MAY.  The act referred to is permissive.



      MONTH.  A calendar month.



      OATH.  An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR
and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.



      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT.  An
officer, office, employee, commission or department of this municipality
unless the context clearly requires otherwise.



      PERSON.  Extends to and includes person, persons, firm,
corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver. Whenever used in any
clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as
applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.



      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING.  Next before or next after, respectively.



      PROPERTY.  Includes real and personal property.



      REAL PROPERTY.  Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.



      SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.



      SIDEWALK.  The portion of a street between the curbline and the
adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.



      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION.  Includes a mark when the person
cannot write.



      STATE.  The State of Texas.



      STREET.  Shall have its commonly accepted meaning, and shall
include highways, sidewalks, alleys, avenues, recessed parking areas and
other public rights-of-way, including the entire right-of-way.



      SUBCHAPTER.  A division of a chapter, designated in this code by
a heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of
the chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter
of the heading. Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.



      WRITTEN.  Any representation of words, letters or figures,
whether by printing or otherwise.



      YEAR.  A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.



(Prior Code, § 1.01.004)



§ 10.06  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.



   The construction of all ordinances of this municipality shall be by the
following rules, unless that construction is plainly repugnant to the intent
of the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance.



   (A)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if
written “and/or”, if the sense requires it.



   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an
act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the
principal, the requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the act
by an authorized agent or deputy.



   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the
masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders;
words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall
include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include
the future, if applicable.



   (D)   General term.  A general term following specific enumeration
of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so
limited.



§ 10.07  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its
application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity
does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application.



§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever in a section reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered, unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.09  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of this municipality exercising the powers,
duties or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.10  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning
can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and
the word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though
the correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No
alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the
nature or extent of the error.



§ 10.11  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within this municipality for the transaction of
all municipal business.



§ 10.12  REASONABLE TIME.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME
OR NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of that act or the giving of that notice.



   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein
provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the
last. If the last day be Sunday, it shall be excluded.



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this
code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.



§ 10.14  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   (A)   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication, including but not limited to the following types of ordinances:



      (1)   Any ordinance guaranteeing or promising the payment of
money for the municipality or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the
municipality or any evidence of the municipality’s indebtedness;



      (2)   Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance providing for
an annual budget or prescribing salaries for municipal officers and employees;



      (3)   Any ordinance annexing territory to the municipality or
discontinuing territory as a part of the municipality;



      (4)   Any ordinance designating or otherwise relating to
municipal depositories;



      (5)   Any ordinance granting any franchise, permit or other
right;



      (6)   Any ordinance approving, prescribing or otherwise
relating to rates to be charged by private utility companies;



      (7)   Any ordinance approving, authorizing or otherwise
relating to any contract or agreement;



      (8)   Any ordinance accepting, dedicating, vacating or
otherwise relating to any easement; and



      (9)   Any ordinance establishing or amending the zoning
designation of land.



   (B)   All such ordinances mentioned in division (A) are hereby
recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if
set out at length herein.



§ 10.15  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.



   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication
shall take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless
otherwise expressly provided. Ordinances not requiring publication shall take
effect from their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.



§ 10.16  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.



   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be
repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an
ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due
publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is
required to give effect thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.



   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty
instituted, created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous
to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may
be prosecuted, enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had
continued in force, unless it is otherwise expressly provided.



   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or
provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to
revive the former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly
provided.



§ 10.17  ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.



   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing
chapter or section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically
repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment,
substituted in its place.



   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a
new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of
this code, the proper number of the chapter or section.  In addition to such
indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a
caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.



§ 10.18  SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and
passage date of the original ordinance, and the amending ordinances, if any,
are listed following the text of the code section.  Example:  (Ord. 10,
passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Ord.
25, passed 1-1-1985)



   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this
indicates that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the
statute. Example:  (Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code, § 54.001)  (Ord. 10, passed
1-17-1980; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1985)



      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory
reference” following the text of the section, this indicates that the
reader should refer to that statute for further information. Example:



         § 39.01  PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.



            This municipality shall make available to any person
for inspection or copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by
state law.



         Statutory reference:



            Inspection of public records, see Tex. Loc. Gov’t
Code, §§ 552.001 et seq.



§ 10.19  ALTERING OR TAMPERING WITH CODE.



   It shall be an offense for any unauthorized person to change or amend,
by addition or deletion, any part or portion of this code, or to insert or
delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or to tamper with this code in
any manner whatsoever which will cause a law of the city to be misrepresented
thereby.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 10.20  ENFORCEMENT OF NUISANCE OFFENSES.



   In accordance with the authority provided by Tex. Local Gov’t Code,
§ 217.042, every section of this code that defines or prohibits any nuisance
shall apply within the city limits and to any area that is outside the city
limits, but within 5,000 feet of said limits.



(Prior Code, § 1.01.010)



§ 10.21  CODE ENFORCEMENT BY CITATION.



   The Director of the Community Development Department, the code
enforcement officers in the Community Development Department, peace officers
of the city, and other city employees as designated in writing by the
Director of the Community Development Department, are authorized to issue
municipal court citations to appear in court for violations of the following
sections of this code, unless said code provides for other means of
enforcement:



   (A)   Chapter 94, Parks and recreation;



   (B)   Chapter 90, Animal control (concurrently with the animal
control officer and designee);



   (C)   Chapters 150 and 151, Building and flood regulations;



   (D)   Chapter 116, Oil, gas and salt water disposal wells;



   (E)   Sections 110.070 through 110.076, Itinerant vendors;



   (F)   Sections 110.055 through 110.059, Religious solicitations in
public places;



   (G)   Chapter 117, Solicitors;



   (H)   Sections 110.015 through 110.022, Flea markets;



   (I)   Chapter 113, Carnivals;



   (J)   Section 110.002, Garage sales;



   (K)   Sections 110.003 and 110.004, Signs;



   (L)   Chapter 93, Health and sanitation;



   (M)   Chapter 130, General provisions (of general offenses);



   (N)   Chapter 132, Fireworks;



   (O)   Chapter 133, Litter;



   (P)   Sections 134.35 through 134.37 and 134.99, Junked Vehicles;



   (Q)   Chapter 135, Noise;



   (R)   Chapter 152, Subdivisions;



   (S)   Section 74.13, Vehicles exceeding 25 feet;



   (T)   Section 74.15, Residential parking;



   (U)   Section 74.16, Boats, recreational vehicles and trailers;



   (V)   Section 74.17, Parking in the front yard of a residence;



   (W)   Title V, Utilities;



   (X)   Chapter 153, Zoning; and



   (Y)   Any ordinance adopted by the City Council in 2010 or
thereafter, which is not solely enforceable by peace officers or the Fire
Department.



(Prior Code, § 1.01.011)  (Ord. 11-05-06, passed 5-10-2011)



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   (A)   Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city an act
is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a
misdemeanor, or whenever in the code or ordinance the doing of any act is
required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no
specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of
this code or any such ordinance shall be punished by:



      (1)   A fine not to exceed $2,000 in all cases arising under
municipal ordinances that govern fire safety, zoning, and public health and
sanitation;



      (2)   A fine not to exceed $2,000, if a motor vehicle is used
in illegal dumping or an offense under the law or city ordinance violated by
the illegal dumping; or



      (3)   A fine not to exceed $500 in all other cases; provided,
however, that no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided
for the same or a similar offense under the laws of the state.



   (B)   Each day any violation of this code or of any ordinance shall
continue shall constitute a separate offense. In the event that any such
violation is designated as a nuisance under the provisions of this code, the
nuisance may be summarily abated by the City Manager or the Chief of Police
or their assigns.



Statutory reference:



   Municipal penalties, see Tex. Local Gov’t Code, § 54.001



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



   Chapter



      30.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      31.   CITY COUNCIL



      32.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT



      33.   MUNICIPAL COURT



      34.   PERSONNEL



      35.   TAX AND FINANCE



      36.   CITY POLICIES



CHAPTER 30:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section




Generally




   30.01   Corporate seal




Records Management




   30.15   Definition of city records



   30.16   City records declared public property



   30.17   Policy



   30.18   Office of Records Manager established



   30.19   Duties of Records Manager



   30.20   Responsibilities of department heads



   30.21   Responsibilities of Records Officers



   30.22   City offices to use records schedule



   30.23   Development of records retention and disposition schedules



   30.24   One-time destruction of records



   30.25   Records center



   30.26   Preservation of permanent records



   30.27   Maintenance of noncurrent records



Elections



   30.40   State law and Charter to govern



   30.41   Notice of write-in candidacy




Claims Against City




   30.55   Notice



   30.56   Denial of claim prerequisite to suit



   30.57   Service of notice



   30.58   Waiver of notice



   30.59   Affirmation to notice




GENERALLY




§ 30.01  CORPORATE SEAL.



   There is hereby adopted as the official corporate seal of the city a
seal consisting of the embossed impression of a circular metallic disk,
containing in the outer rim the words “City of Henderson-Henderson,
Texas” and containing in the center the form of a star.



(Prior Code, § 1.03.001)




RECORDS MANAGEMENT




§ 30.15  DEFINITION OF CITY RECORDS.



   All papers, correspondence, memoranda, accounts, reports, maps, plans,
photographs, sound and video recordings, files, microform, magnetic or paper
tape, punched cards, or other documents, regardless of physical form or
characteristic, which have been or shall be created, received, filed or
recorded by any city office or department or its lawful successor or
officials thereof in pursuance of law or ordinance or in the conduct,
transaction or performance of any business, duty or function of public
business, whether or not confidential or restricted in use, are hereby
declared to be the records of the city, and shall be created, maintained and
disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter or
procedures authorized by it and in no other manner. Library and museum
materials acquired solely for reference, exhibit or display and stocks of
publications shall not constitute records for the purposes of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 1.03.031)  (Ord. 90-12-21, passed 12-19-1990)



§ 30.16  CITY RECORDS DECLARED PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   All city records as defined in § 30.15 are hereby declared to be the
property of the city. No city official or employee has, by virtue of his or
her position, any personal or property right to such records even though he
or she may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction,
removal from files or use of such records is prohibited.



(Prior Code, § 1.03.032)  (Ord. 90-12-21, passed 12-19-1990)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



Charter reference:



   Administrative organization, see Art. IV



Statutory reference:



   Local Government Records Act, see Tex. Local Gov’t Code, Ch. 201 et
seq.



§ 30.17  POLICY.



   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for
efficient, economical and effective controls over the creation, distribution,
organization, maintenance, use and disposition of all city records through a
comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records
from their creation to their ultimate disposition.



(Prior Code, § 1.03.033)  (Ord. 90-12-21, passed 12-19-1990)



§ 30.18  OFFICE OF RECORDS MANAGER ESTABLISHED.



   The City Council shall appoint a City Records Manager, with the rank of
department head, who shall administer the Records Management Department, and
shall be responsible for city-wide files management and the direction and
control of the city’s records disposition program. The Records Manager
shall report to and be responsible to the City Manager in the same manner as
other department heads.



(Prior Code, § 1.03.034)  (Ord. 90-12-21, passed 12-19-1990)



§ 30.19  DUTIES OF RECORDS MANAGER.



   The Records Manager shall have the following duties, and others as
assigned by the City Manager; however, duties assigned shall be limited to
records management activities:



   (A)   Plan, formulate and prescribe basic files management and
records disposition policies, systems, standards and procedures;



   (B)   Prepare records retention and disposition schedules in
cooperation with department heads for all city offices and departments,
define and identify vital and permanent records, and establish retention
periods for all records. Retention periods shall be no shorter than desired
by the originating office, but shall be as long as deemed necessary by either
the Records Manager, the City Attorney or the City Finance Officer;



   (C)   Review schedules annually and update or amend as needed;



   (D)   Coordinate the city-wide management and records disposition
programs, and report annually to the City Manager on program effectiveness in
each city department;



   (E)   Provide records management advice and assistance to all city
offices and departments by preparation of manuals of procedure and policy and
by on-site consultation;



   (F)   Develop, disseminate and coordinate files maintenance and
records disposition procedures, including, but not limited to, those
prescribed by this division (F), to meet the current and long-term
information needs of the city;



   (G)   Train departmental Records Officers and other personnel in the
fundamentals of records management and their duties in the records management
program;



   (H)   Carry out at the proper time actions such as microphotography,
destruction and transfers that are required by records schedules;



   (I)   Design and manage the operations of a records center for the
low-cost storage of inactive records and as a facility for a centralized
micrographics program;



   (J)   Establish and monitor compliance with standards for filing and
storage equipment and supplies in all city offices and departments, and
report to the City Manager failure of any officer or department to comply
with standards. Keep careful records of savings in equipment, supplies and
staff costs realized by each department of the city through implementation of
the records management program. Report annually such cost savings to the City
Manager; the report shall include the amount of storage space and equipment
released for other uses;



   (K)   Develop a city-wide forms design and control system;



   (L)   Establish in cooperation with other responsible city officials
a disaster plan for each city office and department to ensure maximum
availability of records for reestablishing operations quickly and with
minimum disruption and expense;



   (M)   Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the
historically valuable records of the city;



   (N)   Protect privacy and assure availability of public information
from records stored in the records center; bring to the attention of the City
Manager any office not in compliance with laws or ordinances regarding public
access to information or protection of privacy; and



   (O)   Prepare and submit annually to the City Manager the budget
requirements of the records management department to enable it to fulfill the
records management goals of the city.



(Prior Code, § 1.03.035)  (Ord. 90-12-21, passed 12-19-1990)



§ 30.20  RESPONSIBILITIES OF DEPARTMENT HEADS.



   All city office and department heads are responsible for the
implementation and operation of effective files procedures, records transfers
and dispositions, and other activities within their areas of responsibility
in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter. They shall designate
Records Officers within their offices and provide the Records Manager the
names of such designees and of all file stations and file custodians under
their supervision. Persons designated as Records Officers shall report
directly to the head of their departments on matters relating to the records
management program and should have full access to all files in their
departments.



(Prior Code, § 1.03.036)  (Ord. 90-12-21, passed 12-19-1990)



§ 30.21  RESPONSIBILITIES OF RECORDS OFFICERS.



   The Records Officer in each office and department is responsible for
providing coordination between the Records Manager and personnel in his or
her office to ensure that provisions of this subchapter are complied with.
This responsibility shall include overseeing the application of records
schedules within the office or department.



(Prior Code, § 1.03.037)  (Ord. 90-12-21, passed 12-19-1990)



§ 30.22  CITY OFFICES TO USE RECORDS SCHEDULE.



   All city offices and departments shall adopt records retention and
disposition schedules and destroy, transfer, or otherwise dispose of records
only according to such schedules.



(Prior Code, § 1.03.038)  (Ord. 90-12-21, passed 12-19-1990)



§ 30.23  DEVELOPMENT OF RECORDS RETENTION AND DISPOSITION SCHEDULES.



   (A)   Retention periods to be included in records schedules shall be
submitted by the Records Manager to the City Finance Officer and City
Attorney, who shall notify the Records Manager within ten working days of
their approval or of any objection to a retention period. At the expiration
of the ten-day period, if no objection has been submitted, the records
schedule shall be adopted and shall have full force as sufficient
authorization for records destruction or other action. If objection is made,
the Records Manager shall determine a retention period satisfactory to the
office or department concerned, to the Finance Officer, and to the City
Attorney.



   (B)   When a records retention and disposition schedule is adopted,
it shall thenceforth constitute full authority to destroy, transfer, micro
photo graph or take other actions, and the City Council hereby directs that
such action be taken by the Records Manager or under his or her supervision.
The Records Manager shall notify the State Librarian of intended destruction,
as required by law, but no further notice to the City Council or other city
office shall be required.



   (C)   Revision of retention periods shall be submitted for review to
the City Attorney and the City Finance Officer in the same manner as the
original retention periods.



(Prior Code, § 1.03.039)  (Ord. 90-12-21, passed 12-19-1990)



§ 30.24  ONE-TIME DESTRUCTION OF RECORDS.



   Prior to the adoption of records schedules for an office, one-time
destruction of accumulated obsolete records of that office may be made by or
under the supervision of the Records Manager. Prior to such destruction, the
Records Manager shall submit lists of records to be destroyed to the City
Finance Officer and the City Attorney, who shall give notice within ten
working days of any records they believe should not be destroyed, and such
records shall be retained for a period suggested by either. The Records
Manager shall also submit notice as required by law to the State Librarian.
Obsolete records shall include those no longer created by the office or
department and no longer needed for administrative, legal, fiscal or other
research purposes.



(Prior Code, § 1.03.040)  (Ord. 90-12-21, passed 12-19-1990)



§ 30.25  RECORDS CENTER.



   The records center operation shall utilize one or more buildings to:



   (A)   Store inactive records;



   (B)   Ensure the security of such records from deterioration, theft
or damage during the period of storage;



   (C)   Permit fast and efficient retrieval of information from stored
records; and



   (D)   Provide facilities for a centralized micrographics program.



(Prior Code, § 1.03.041)  (Ord. 90-12-21, passed 12-19-1990)



§ 30.26  PRESERVATION OF PERMANENT RECORDS.



   The Records Manager shall develop procedures to ensure the permanent
preservation of the historically valuable records of the city. The Records
Manager shall provide housing under archival conditions for such records in
the records center or in another municipal facility and in such manner that
the records, unless their use is restricted by law or regulation, are open to
the public for research purposes. If city-owned facilities are not available,
the Records Manager shall arrange for the transfer of the records to the
state library for perpetual care and preservation in one of its nearby
regional historical resource depositories, or shall make other arrangements
for their permanent preservation not contrary to law or regulation. In no
circumstances shall the permanent records of the city be transferred to
private individuals, to private historical societies or museums, or to
private colleges or universities.



(Prior Code, § 1.03.042)  (Ord. 90-12-21, passed 12-19-1990)



§ 30.27  MAINTENANCE OF NONCURRENT RECORDS.



   Records no longer required in the conduct of current business by any
office or department of the city shall be promptly transferred to the records
center or archives or the state library, or be destroyed, at the time such
action is designated on an approved records schedule. Such records shall not
be maintained in current office files or equipment.



(Prior Code, § 1.03.043)  (Ord. 90-12-21, passed 12-19-1990)




ELECTIONS




§ 30.40  STATE LAW AND CHARTER TO GOVERN.



   All elections pertaining to municipal affairs shall be governed by the
election laws of the state and the applicable provisions of the Charter.



(Prior Code, § 1.04.001)



Statutory reference:



   Applicability of Election Code, see Tex. Election Code, § 1.002



§ 30.41  NOTICE OF WRITE-IN CANDIDACY.



   (A)   Written notice required. All persons desiring election by
write-in votes for the position of Mayor or for any City Council district
office shall file a written declaration of write-in candidacy with the City
Secretary at least 30 days prior to the election day for the office for which
election is sought.



   (B)   Forms. The City Secretary shall provide appropriate forms for
the purpose of declaring a write-in candidacy for elective office.



(Prior Code, § 1.04.002)



Charter reference:



   Election from district, see Art. III, § 3



   Election of officers, see Art. III, § 2



Statutory reference:



   Write-in candidates in city election, see Tex. Election Code, §§
146.051 et seq.




CLAIMS AGAINST CITY




§ 30.55  NOTICE.



   The city shall never be liable for any claim for property damage or for
personal injury, whether such personal injury results in death or not, unless
the person damaged or injured or someone in his or her behalf or, in the
event the injury results in death, the person who may have a cause of action
under the law by reason of such death or injury shall, within 60 days or
within six months for good cause shown from the date the damage or injury was
received, give notice in writing to the Mayor and City Council of the
following facts:



   (A)   The date and time when the injury occurred and the place where
the injured person or property was at the time when the injury was received;



   (B)   The nature of the damage or injury sustained;



   (C)   The apparent extent of the damage or injury sustained;



   (D)   A specific and detailed statement of how and under what
circumstances the damage or injury occurred;



   (E)   The amount for which each claimant will settle;



   (F)   The actual place of residence of each claimant by street,
number, city and state on the date the claim is presented;



   (G)   In the case of personal injury or death, the names and
addresses of all persons who, according to the knowledge or information of
the claimant, witnessed the happening of the injury of any part thereof and
the names of the doctors, if any, to whose care the injured person is
committed; and



   (H)   In the case of property damage, the location of the damaged
property at the time the claim was submitted along with the names and
addresses of all persons who witnessed the happening of the damage or any
part thereof.



(Prior Code, § 1.06.001)



Statutory references:



   Immunity of certain governmental functions, see Tex. Civil Practice and
Remedies Code, § 101.055



   Limitation on amount of liability, see Tex. Civil Practice and Remedies
Code, § 101.023



   Notice procedures, see Tex. Civil Practice and Remedies Code, § 101.101



   Texas Tort Claims Act, see Tex. Civil Practice and Remedies Code, Ch.
101



§ 30.56  DENIAL OF CLAIM PREREQUISITE TO SUIT.



   No suit of any nature whatsoever shall be instituted or maintained
against the city unless the plaintiff therein shall prove that previous to
the filing of the original petition, the plaintiff applied to the City
Council for redress, satisfaction, compensation or relief, as the case may
be, and that the same was by vote of the City Council refused.



(Prior Code, § 1.06.002)



§ 30.57  SERVICE OF NOTICE.



   All notices required by this subchapter shall be effectuated by serving
them upon the City Secretary at the following location: City Hall, 400 West
Main, Henderson, Texas 75652, and all such notices shall be effective only
when actually received in the office of the person named above.



(Prior Code, § 1.06.003)



§ 30.58  WAIVER OF NOTICE.



   (A)   The written notice requirements of this subchapter shall be
waived if the city has actual knowledge of death, injury or property damage
likely to result in a claim against the city. The city shall not be deemed to
have actual knowledge unless that knowledge is attributable to an appropriate
city official whose duties include the authority to investigate and/or settle
claims against the city.



   (B)   Notice requirements shall likewise be waived in cases in which
the plaintiff can demonstrate good cause or civil rights violations.



(Prior Code, § 1.06.004)



§ 30.59  AFFIRMATION TO NOTICE.



   The written notice required under this subchapter shall be sworn to by
the person claiming the damage or injuries or by someone authorized by him or
her to do so on his or her behalf. Failure to swear to the notice as required
herein shall not render the notice fatally defective, but failure to so
verify the notice may be considered by the City Council as a factor relating
to the truth of the allegations and to the weight to be given to the
allegations contained therein.



(Prior Code, § 1.06.005)



CHAPTER 31:  CITY COUNCIL



Section




Meetings




   31.01   Regular meetings



   31.02   Agenda items



   31.03   Public participation



   31.04   Special rules generally



   31.05   Responsibility for conducting meetings; speaking by public



   31.06   Special rules for press and media



   31.07   Security



   31.08   Town meetings and hearings




MEETINGS




§ 31.01  REGULAR MEETINGS.



   The regularly scheduled meetings of the City Council shall be on the
second Tuesday of each month at 6:00 p.m. Special meetings of the City
Council may be called by the Mayor or two Council persons at any time, so
long us the special called meetings comply with the provisions of the Texas
Open Meeting Act (Tex. Gov’t Code, Ch. 551). Regularly scheduled meetings
of the City Council may be canceled for good cause by the Mayor with proper
notice to the public and affected elected officials and staff.



(Prior Code, § 1.02.031)  (Ord. 02-05-14, passed 5-14-2002; Ord. 14-07-01,
passed 8-12-2014; Ord. 16-03-03, passed 4--2016)



§ 31.02  AGENDA ITEMS.



   In order for a matter or issue to appear as an agenda item on the
agenda of any regular or special meeting of the City Council, a request must
be filed with the City Manager or City Secretary by 12:00 noon on the
Wednesday prior to the meeting scheduled for the next week after such
request. Nine copies of written material and laws which the public wishes to
be considered by the City Council must be delivered to the City Secretary at
the time of such request. Incomplete requests will be denied. Only the Mayor,
a City Council member, the City Manager or the City Attorney may place items
on the agenda.



(Prior Code, § 1.02.032)  (Ord. 04-04-30, passed 4-27-2004)



§ 31.03  PUBLIC PARTICIPATION.



   (A)   The business of the city is conducted by and between of the
members of the City Council and by those members of the city staff, elected
officials, department heads, consultants, experts and/or members of the
public requested to be present and participate. While the public is invited
to attend all meetings of the City Council (except executive sessions) the
public’s participation therein is limited to that of observers unless a
member (or members) of the public completes a “public participation form”
and submits same to the City Secretary prior to the time the agenda item (or
agenda items) is addressed by the Council and is recognized by the Mayor at
his or her discretion. A sample of the City Council public participation form
is attached to Ord. 02-05-14 as Exhibit A.



   (B)   Each member of the public who appears before the City Council
may be limited to a maximum of three minutes to make his or her remarks. Time
for each speaker shall be maintained by the Mayor or such other person
designated by the Mayor. Each member of the public will be limited to
speaking one time at a Council meeting unless requested otherwise by the City
Council. No member of the public will be permitted to question any member of
the City Council or city staff since this is a meeting and not a public
forum, but the Mayor, any City Council member, the City Manager or the City
Attorney may make a response, if they desire, to clarify any matter addressed
by the public.



   (C)   Maximum discussion by the public of any agenda item,
regardless of the number of members of the public wishing to address the City
Council on such agenda item(s), shall be limited to 30 minutes. In the event
that more that six members of the public wish to address a particular agenda
item(s), then only the first six members of the public will be recognized. To
the extent possible, the six members of the public recognized to speak will
be divided equally between those members of the public wishing to speak for
the agenda item(s) and those members of the public wishing to speak against
the agenda item(s). Any exceptions will be made solely at the discretion of
the Mayor. All such discussion of agenda item(s) by the public must be
conducted during “presentation by citizens” time provided for herein
below unless the Mayor directs otherwise. As with the citizens’
participation forum, no member of the public will be permitted to question
any member of the City Council or city staff when a member of the public is
permitted to speak when an agenda item is taken up, but the Mayor, Any City
Council member, the City Manager, or the City Attorney may make a response,
if they desire, to clarify any matter addressed by the public.



   (D)   It is the intention of the City Council to provide an open
access to the citizens of the city to address the City Council and express
themselves on issues of city government. Accordingly, members of the public
in attendance at any regular, special and/or emergency meeting of the City
Council shall conduct themselves with proper respect and decorum in speaking
to and/or addressing the City Council, in participating in public discussions
before the City Council and all actions in the presence of the City Council.
All members of the public who address the City Council shall speak from
behind the podium which is set up for such speakers, not speak while some
other member of the public is addressing the City Council from such podium,
and not move from behind the podium to the dais where the City Council is
seated without the permission of the Mayor. Proper attire for men, women and
children is mandatory. Those members of the public who are inappropriately
attired and/or who do not conduct themselves in an orderly and appropriate
manner and as provided herein will be ordered to leave the meeting. Refusal
to abide by an order of the Mayor as the presiding officer of the City
Council and/or continued disruption of the meeting may result in appropriate
criminal and/or civil charges.



   (E)   It is not the intent of the City Council to provide a public
forum for the demeaning of any individual or group. Neither is it the
intention of the City Council to allow a member(s) of the public to insult
the honesty and/or integrity of the City Council, as a body, or any member or
members of the City Council, individually or collectively. Accordingly,
profane, insulting or threatening language directed toward the City Council
and/or any person in the City Council’s presence and/or racial, ethnic or
gender slurs or epithets will not be tolerated. Violation of these rules may
result in the following sanctions:



      (1)   Cancellation of a speaker’s remaining time;



      (2)   Removal from the City Council chamber; and/or



      (3)   Any other civil and/or criminal sanctions that may be
authorized under the constitution or statutes of the state or the charter or
ordinances of the city.



   (F)   Each agenda of the City Council shall include the agenda item
“Presentation by citizens”. Any citizen may make presentation at this
time; however, no action will be taken unless provided for on the agenda.
Citizens’ comments may be limited to a maximum of three minutes per person.



(Prior Code, § 1.02.033)  (Ord. 02-05-14, passed 5-14-2002; Ord. 04-04-30,
passed 4-27-2004)



Charter reference:



   City Council, see Art. III



§ 31.04  SPECIAL RULES GENERALLY.



   The following special rules shall apply during all City Council
meetings.



   (A)   Cellular telephones and pagers will be turned off before
entering the City Council chambers.



   (B)   No political advertising on clothing or political signs will
be allowed in the City Council chambers during City Council meetings.



   (C)   No drinks or food shall be allowed in the City Council
chambers during City Council meetings.



(Prior Code, § 1.02.034)  (Ord. 02-05-14, passed 5-14-2002)



§ 31.05  RESPONSIBILITY FOR CONDUCTING MEETINGS; SPEAKING BY PUBLIC.



   The Mayor or designated Mayor (Pro Tem), as presiding officer of the
City Council, is responsible for conducting all meetings and enforcing the
rules contained in this subchapter during all such meetings of the City
Council. Members of the public who have properly completed a “public
participation form” and submitted same to the City Secretary must wait to
be recognized by the Mayor before they will be allowed to address the City
Council and must, after speaking, return to their seat when the Mayor
determines that their time for speaking has expired.



(Prior Code, § 1.02.035)  (Ord. 02-05-14, passed 5-14-2002)



§ 31.06  SPECIAL RULES FOR PRESS AND MEDIA.



   The following special rules apply to the press and media.



   (A)   No media personnel or equipment, including lights, cameras or
microphones, will be located on the City Council dais nor closer than five
feet in front of the City Council dais.



   (B)   Reporters and media technicians are required to structure
their movements, equipment setup and take-down and adjustments and the like
in such a manner as to not disrupt the City Council deliberations or the
ability of the public to see, hear and participate in the proceedings.



   (C)   Interviews shall not be conducted inside the City Council
chamber during the time the City Council is in session.



   (D)   Media interviews which are conducted outside the City Council
chamber should be conducted in such a manner that the interview does not
disturb, impede or disrupt the proceedings of any regular, special, emergency
and/or executive session of the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 1.02.036)  (Ord. 02-05-14, passed 5-14-2002)



§ 31.07  SECURITY.



   Upon the request of the Mayor, the Chief of Police or his or her
designee shall provide security and enforce order during Council meetings.



(Prior Code, § 1.02.037)  (Ord. 02-05-14, passed 5-14-2002)



§ 31.08  TOWN MEETINGS AND HEARINGS.



   From time to time, the City Council may conduct town meetings and
hearings. These rules of procedure, conduct and decorum shall also apply to
such town meetings and hearings; however, the City Council may adopt such
additional and supplemental rules for such meetings as may be necessary and
appropriate to conduct such meetings in an orderly, efficient and proper
manner.



(Prior Code, § 1.02.038)  (Ord. 02-05-14, passed 5-14-2002)



CHAPTER 32:  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT



Section




   32.01   Organization





   32.02   Powers and duties of Director





   32.03   Plan





   32.04   Interjurisdictional program





   32.05   Emergency override of laws





   32.06   Liability





   32.07   Commitment of funds





   32.08   Offenses; violations




§ 32.01  ORGANIZATION.



   (A)   There exists the office of Emergency Management Director of
the city, which office shall be held by the Mayor or designee.



   (B)   An Emergency Management Coordinator may be appointed by and
serve at the pleasure of the Director.



   (C)   The Director shall be responsible for a program of
comprehensive emergency management within the city and for carrying out the
duties and responsibilities set forth in this chapter. He or she may delegate
authority for execution of these duties to the Coordinator, but ultimate
responsibility for such execution shall remain with the Director.



   (D)   The operational emergency management organization of the city
shall consist of the officers and employees of the city so designated by the
Director in the emergency management plan, as well as organized volunteer
groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed
among such officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the
emergency management plan.



(Prior Code, § 1.05.001)



§ 32.02  POWERS AND DUTIES OF DIRECTOR.



   The duties and responsibilities of the Emergency Management Director
shall include the following:



   (A)   Conduct an ongoing survey of actual or potential hazards which
threaten life and property within the city and an ongoing program of
identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures
which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such
hazards if a disaster did occur;



   (B)   Supervision of the development and approval of an emergency
management plan for the city and shall recommend for adoption by the City
Council all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary for the implementation
of such plan;



   (C)   Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The
declaration may not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven
days except by or with the consent of the City Council. Any order or
proclamation declaring, continuing or terminating a local state of disaster
shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with
the City Secretary;



   (D)   Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations or directives
which are necessary for carrying out the purposes of this chapter. Such
proclamations, regulations or directives shall be disseminated promptly by
means calculated to bring their contents to the attention of the general
public and, unless circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or impede,
promptly filed with the City Secretary;



   (E)   Direction and control of the operations of the Henderson/Rusk
emergency management organization as well as the training of emergency
management personnel;



   (F)   Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility
that may arise within the emergency management organization of the city;



   (G)   Maintenance of liaisons with other municipal, county,
district, state, regional or federal emergency management organizations;



   (H)   Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies
from any department of the city to aid in the carrying out of the provisions
of the emergency management plan;



   (I)   Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid
agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of the state and of other
local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if
deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which the city is
located and with other municipalities within the county for the countywide
coordination of emergency management efforts;



   (J)   Supervision of and final authorization for the procurement of
all necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private
contributions which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency
management within the city;



   (K)   Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the City
Attorney, for use of private property for public shelter and other purposes;



   (L)   Survey of the availability of existing personnel, equipment,
supplies and services which could be used during a disaster, as provided for
herein; and



   (M)   Other requirements as specified in Texas Disaster Act of 1975,
Tex. Gov’t Code, §§ 418.001 et seq.



(Prior Code, § 1.05.002)



Statutory reference:



   Local and interjurisdictional emergency management, see Tex. Gov’t
Code, Ch. 418.101



§ 32.03  PLAN.



   (A)   A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be developed
and maintained in a current state. The plan shall set forth the form of the
organization; establish and designate divisions and functions; assign
responsibilities, tasks, duties and powers; and designate officers and
employees to carry out the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   As provided by state law, the plan shall follow the standards
and criteria established by the state division of emergency management.
Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall
conform to the recommendations of the state division of emergency management.



   (C)   When approved, it shall be the duty of all departments and
agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their
portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The
emergency management plan shall be considered supplementary to this chapter
and has the effect of law during the time of a disaster.



(Prior Code, § 1.05.003)



§ 32.04  INTERJURISDICTIONAL PROGRAM.



   The Mayor is hereby authorized to join with the County Judge and the
Mayors of the other cities in the county in the formation of an Emergency
Management Council for the county, and shall have the authority to cooperate
in the preparation of a joint emergency management plan and in the
appointment of a joint Emergency Management Coordinator, as well as all
powers necessary to participate in a county-wide program of emergency
management insofar as the program may affect the city.



(Prior Code, § 1.05.004)



§ 32.05  EMERGENCY OVERRIDE OF LAWS.



   At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and
promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall be in effect, they shall supersede
and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar
as the latter may be inconsistent therewith.



(Prior Code, § 1.05.005)



§ 32.06  LIABILITY.



   (A)   This chapter is an exercise by the city of its governmental
functions for the protection of the public peace, health and safety, and
neither the city, the agents and representatives of the city, nor any
individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association or trustee,
nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or
attempting to comply with any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter shall be liable for any damage sustained to
persons as the result of the activity.



   (B)   Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises
who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the city a license or
privilege or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the
whole or any part or parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of
sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice enemy attack or
natural or human-made disaster shall, together with his or her successors in
interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any
person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege
or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person.



(Prior Code, § 1.05.006)



§ 32.07  COMMITMENT OF FUNDS.



   No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city
in carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this chapter
without prior approval by the City Council, nor shall any person have any
right to bind the city by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and
specific approval of the City Council unless during a declared disaster.
During a declared disaster, the Mayor may extend and/or commit public funds
of the city when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of health,
life or property.



(Prior Code, § 1.05.007)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 32.08  OFFENSES; VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct,
hinder or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the
enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or to
do any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the
authority contained in this chapter.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display
any emblem, insignia or any other means of identification as a member of the
emergency management organization of the city, unless authority to do so has
been granted to such person by the proper officials.



   (C)   It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to operate a siren
or other device so as to simulate a warning signal, or to terminate a warning.



   (D)   Convictions for violations of the provisions of this chapter
shall be punishable pursuant to § 10.99.



(Prior Code, § 1.05.008)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 33:  MUNICIPAL COURT



Section



Building Security Fee




   33.01   Amount and collection





   33.02   Use





Technology Fund





   33.15   Amount and collection of fee





   33.16   Created; use




Charter reference:



   Municipal Court, see Art. IV, § 7



Statutory reference:



   Municipal Courts generally, see Tex. Gov’t Code, §§ 29.001 et seq.




BUILDING SECURITY FEE




§ 33.01  AMOUNT AND COLLECTION.



   The Municipal Court of the city shall collect a security fee in the
amount as provided in the fee schedule in § 35.40 from each defendant
convicted of a misdemeanor in the Municipal Court.



(Prior Code, § 7.02.001)  (Ord. 97-8-10, passed 8-26-1997)



§ 33.02  USE.



   The fee collected pursuant to this subchapter shall be used for
security for the Municipal Court as authorized by state law.



(Prior Code, § 7.02.002)  (Ord. 97-8-10, passed 8-26-1997)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to establish Municipal Court Building Security Fund, see Tex.
Code of Criminal Proc., Art. 102.017




TECHNOLOGY FUND




§ 33.15  AMOUNT AND COLLECTION OF FEE.



   There shall be collected by the Municipal Court of the city a fee,
designated as the technology fee, from all persons convicted of an offense in
said court, as defined by the Tex. Code of Criminal Procedure, § 102.0172.
The amount of the fee shall be as provided in the fee schedule in § 35.40
for each conviction.



(Prior Code, § 7.03.001)  (Ord. 99-8-19, passed 8-24-1999)



§ 33.16  CREATED; USE.



   There is hereby created a Technology Fund for the Municipal Court of
the city. All proceeds collected from the technology fee assessed against
persons convicted of an offense in the Municipal Court shall be paid into the
said fund. The fund shall be used to purchase the equipment and software
authorized by the Tex. Code of Criminal Procedure, § 102.0172, as hereafter
amended. All purchases from the fund created hereby shall be approved by a
majority of the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 7.03.002)  (Ord. 99-8-19, passed 8-24-1999)



Statutory reference:



   Authority of municipality to establish Municipal Court Technology Fund,
see Tex. Code of Criminal Proc., Art. 102.0172



CHAPTER 34:  PERSONNEL



Section




General Provisions





   34.01   Appeals of decisions or actions of city officers or employees





   34.02   Bond of officers and employees





Pensions and Retirement





   34.15   Texas Municipal Retirement System





Reserve Police Force





   34.30   Title; purpose





   34.31   Number of officers





   34.32   Appointment, termination and service





   34.33   Remuneration





   34.34   Training, educational and other qualifications





Unclaimed Property





   34.45   Disposition





   34.46   Proceeds credited to General Fund





   34.47   Worthless property




Statutory references:



   Authority to provide for police reserve force, see Tex. Local Gov’t
Code, § 341.015



   Police force in home-rule municipality, see Tex. Local Gov’t Code, §
341.003




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 34.01  APPEALS OF DECISIONS OR ACTIONS OF CITY OFFICERS OR EMPLOYEES.



   Unless otherwise provided in this code, if any person is aggrieved due
to any decision or act of any officer or employee of the city in the
discharge of such officer’s or employee’s duties, such person shall have
the right to appeal such decision or act to the City Council by filing notice
of such appeal with the City Secretary within 15 days from such decision or
act.



(Prior Code, § 9.01.001)



§ 34.02  BOND OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.



   All officers and employees of the city, when required by the City
Council, shall execute a bond to the city, for such amount and for such
sureties as are approved by the Council, conditioned upon the faithful
performance of the duties of such officers and employees.



(Prior Code, § 9.01.002)



Charter reference:



   Administrative departments, see Art. IV, § 4



   City Attorney, see Art. IV, § 6



   City Manager, see Art. IV, §§ 1 through 3



   City Secretary, see Art. IV, § 8



   Directors of departments, see Art. IV, § 5



Statutory reference:



   Authority of city to appoint, remove and prescribe duties for officers,
see Tex. Local Gov’t Code, § 26.041



   Official bonds, see Tex. Gov’t Code, Ch. 604




PENSIONS AND RETIREMENT




§ 34.15  TEXAS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM.



   Ordinances pertaining to the Texas Municipal Retirement System have not
been included in this code. Such ordinances are on file in the City
Secretary’s office and are specifically saved from repeal upon adoption of
this code.



(Prior Code, § 9.02.001)



Statutory reference:



   Texas Municipal Retirement System generally, see Tex. Gov’t Code, Ch.
851 et seq.




RESERVE POLICE FORCE




§ 34.30  TITLE; PURPOSE.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall be known as the reserve police
officer ordinance of the city, and the purposes of this subchapter shall be
to establish a reserve police force for the city and to provide for the
appointment, termination, powers, duties and remuneration of reserve police
officers appointed hereunder.



(Prior Code, § 9.03.031)



§ 34.31  NUMBER OF OFFICERS.



   The reserve police officer force shall not exceed in number the total
number of regular certified police officers as authorized by the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 9.03.032)



§ 34.32  APPOINTMENT, TERMINATION AND SERVICE.



   Members of the police reserve force shall be appointed or relieved from
duty at the discretion of the Chief of Police and shall serve as police
officers during the actual discharge of duties by the Police Department. Any
member may be called into active service at any time by the Chief of Police,
as deemed necessary to have additional police officers to perform the duties
of the regular Police Department in preserving the peace and enforcing the
law. The reserve officers will act only in a supplementary capacity to the
regular police force and shall in no case assume the full-time duties of
regular police officers.



(Prior Code, § 9.03.033)



§ 34.33  REMUNERATION.



   Members of the police reserve force shall serve without compensation.
Uniforms and uniform compensation may be provided to the reserve officers at
the discretion of the Chief of Police. The uniform compensation shall be
based solely upon time served while in training for or in the performance of
official duties. The city may provide hospital and medical assistance to
members of the police reserve force who sustain injury in the course of
performing official duties in the same manner as provided by the city for its
full-time police officers, and reserve officers shall be eligible for death
benefits as set out in Tex. Local Gov’t Code, § 142.003; provided,
however, that nothing in this division shall be construed to authorize or
permit a member of the reserve police force to become eligible for
participation in any pension fund created pursuant to state statute or city
ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 9.03.034)



§ 34.34  TRAINING, EDUCATIONAL AND OTHER QUALIFICATIONS.



   (A)   Reserve police officers must comply with the minimum training
standards established by the State Commission on Law Enforcement Officer
Standards and Education established for all reserve law enforcement officers
identical to the standards so established which must be fulfilled before a
person appointed as a reserve law enforcement officer may carry a weapon or
otherwise act as a peace officer.



   (B)   The Chief of Police shall establish other qualifications and
standards of training for members of the police reserve force and shall
establish rules and regulations governing reserve police officers. The Chief
of Police may establish minimum physical, mental, educational and moral
standards as used by the regular Police Department; but, in no case, shall
the standards be less than those established by the State Commission on Law
Enforcement Officer Standards and Education.



(Prior Code, § 9.03.035)




UNCLAIMED PROPERTY




§ 34.45  DISPOSITION.



   All abandoned, stolen and recovered property which shall remain
unclaimed with the Police Department shall be disposed of pursuant to Tex.
Code of Criminal Procedure, Arts. 18.17 and 47.06.



(Prior Code, § 9.03.061)



§ 34.46  PROCEEDS CREDITED TO GENERAL FUND.



   The Finance Director is hereby required to place all funds received
under and by virtue of this subchapter to the credit of the General Fund to
be thereafter disbursed as the City Council shall order.



(Prior Code, § 9.03.062)



Statutory reference:



   Disposition of abandoned or unclaimed property, see Tex. Code of
Criminal Proc., Art. 18.17



§ 34.47  WORTHLESS PROPERTY.



   Any property which has been listed and offered for sale and for which
no price or sum has been offered, if deemed in the opinion of the independent
contractor to be worthless and without value, shall be disposed of in such
manner as he shall prescribe. The description of all property destroyed or
disposed of as worthless or without value shall be reported to the City
Council, together with the date and manner of disposal.



(Prior Code, § 9.03.063)



CHAPTER 35:  TAX AND FINANCE



Section




Hotel Occupancy Tax





   35.01   Definitions





   35.02   Levy; exemptions





   35.03   Purpose





   35.04   Collection





   35.05   Report





   35.06   Compensation for collector





   35.07   Rules and regulations





   35.08   Administration





   35.09   Failure to collect tax or file report





   35.10   Collection on termination of business





   35.11   Lien





   35.12   Tax collection suit





Property Taxes





   35.25   Residence homestead exemption





   35.26   Goods in transit





   35.27   Ad valorem tax; adoption





Fees





   35.40   Fee schedule




Charter reference:



   Taxation, see Art. V



Cross-reference:



   Municipal Court; building security fee, see §§ 33.01 and 33.02



   Municipal Court; Technology Fund, see §§ 33.15 and 33.16 



Statutory reference:



   Authority of municipality to impose hotel occupancy tax, see Tex. Tax
Code, Ch. 351




HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX




§ 35.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CONSIDERATION.  The cost of the room in such hotel only if the room is
one ordinarily used for sleeping, and shall not include the cost of any food
served or personal services rendered to the occupant of such room except for
those services related to the cleaning and readying of such room for
occupancy.



   HOTEL. Any building or buildings in which the public may, for
consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations. The term shall include hotels,
motels, tourist homes, houses or courts, lodging houses, inns, rooming houses
or other buildings where rooms are furnished for consideration, but HOTEL
shall not be defined so as to include hospitals, sanitariums or nursing homes.



   OCCUPANCY.  The use or possession, or the right to use or possession,
of any room in a hotel if the room is one ordinarily used for sleeping and if
the occupant’s use, possession or right to use or possession extends for a
period of less than 30 days.



   OCCUPANT. Anyone who, for consideration, uses, possesses or has the
right to use or possess any room in a hotel if the room is ordinarily used
for sleeping.



   PERSON. Any individual, company, corporation or association owning,
operating, managing or controlling any hotel.



   QUARTERLY PERIOD.  The regular calendar quarters of the year, the
first quarter being composed of the months of January, February and March;
the second quarter being the months of April, May and June; the third quarter
being the months of July, August and September; and the fourth quarter being
the months of October, November and December.



(Prior Code, § 11.02.001)



§ 35.02  LEVY; EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   There is hereby levied a tax upon the occupancy of any
sleeping room furnished by any hotel, where the cost of occupancy is at the
rate of $2 or more per day; such tax to be equal to 7% of the consideration
paid by the occupant of such hotel.



   (B)   No tax shall be imposed under this section upon a corporation
or association organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable
or educational purposes, in which no part of the net earnings inure to the
benefit of any private shareholder or individual.



(Prior Code, § 11.02.002)



§ 35.03  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The revenue obtained from collection of the hotel occupancy
tax shall be used in accordance with Tex. Tax Code, § 351.101.



   (B)   There shall be preserved from such tax revenue at least 1% of
the cost of occupancy of hotel rooms for the purpose of advertising and
conducting solicitation programs to acquaint potential users with public
meeting and convention facilities, and for promotion of tourism and
advertising of the city and its vicinity either by the city or through
contacts with persons or organizations selected by the city.



(Prior Code, § 11.02.003)



§ 35.04  COLLECTION.



   Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel
within the city shall collect the tax imposed in § 35.02 for the city.



(Prior Code, § 11.02.004)



§ 35.05  REPORT.



   (A)   Each person required to collect the tax must make records
available for inspection by the city.  The auditor selected by the city
shall, upon reasonable notice, have access to books and records necessary to
determine the correctness of a report filed under this subchapter or the
amount of taxes due under this subchapter. The city shall have authority to
require additional information to determine the correctness of a report filed
under this subchapter or the amount of taxes due under this subchapter.  The
auditor selected by the city shall report any amount of taxes, penalty and/or
interest found due to the city for collection by the city.



   (B)   Every person required to collect the tax imposed in this
subchapter shall file a monthly report with the city in the form required by
the city accurately reflecting the amount of taxes owed, the amount
collected, and the consideration paid for all room occupancies in the
preceding month.  This report shall be filed with the city no later than the
twentieth day of the month following the reported monthly period.  Persons
who owe less than $500 per month or less than $1,500 per calendar quarter may
file a quarterly report. The person filing the report shall pay the tax due
at the time of filing such report.



   (C)   The city is authorized to assess a $25 late fee to any person
who fails to timely file a zero report for any property having no rental
activity.



   (D)   Persons may pay with credit cards and shall be charged a
convenience fee based on the payment amount. All automated clearing house
("ACH") payments may be made and shall be charged up to a $2 fee per
transaction regardless of the amount of the check.



   (E)   The city is authorized to establish hotel occupancy tax
payment options as allowed by law.



(Prior Code, § 11.02.005)  (Ord. 93-8-5, passed 8-24-1993; Ord. 16-09-12,
passed ---)



§ 35.06  COMPENSATION FOR COLLECTOR.



   A person required to file a hotel occupancy tax report may withhold 1%
of the tax due shown on the report as reimbursement for the cost of
collecting the tax; however, a person who fails to report the tax when due or
fails to pay the tax within the required time may not claim the reimbursement.



(Prior Code, § 11.02.006)



§ 35.07  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The City Manager shall have the power to make such rules and
regulations as are necessary to effectively collect the tax levied in this
subchapter and shall, upon reasonable notice, have access to books and
records necessary to enable him or her to determine the correctness of any
report filed as required by this subchapter and the amount of taxes due under
the provisions of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 11.02.007)



§ 35.08  ADMINISTRATION.



   The City Council shall each year approve an amount in the annual budget
from the monies derived from the collection of taxes under this subchapter to
be used according to the purposes of this subchapter. All monies derived from
this tax shall be placed in a designated fund to be used as specified in §
35.03, and shall be budgeted upon approval of the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 11.02.008)



§ 35.09  FAILURE TO COLLECT TAX OR FILE REPORT.



   (A)   A person commits an offense if he or she:



      (1)   Fails to collect the tax imposed by this subchapter;



      (2)   Fails to file a report as required by this subchapter;



      (3)   Fails to pay the city the tax when payment is due;



      (4)   Files a false report; or



      (5)   Fails to comply with this subchapter when purchasing a
hotel.



   (B)   An offense committed under division (A) of this section is
punishable by a fine not to exceed  $500.  Each day a violation is allowed
to continue shall constitute a separate offense.



   (C)   In addition to any criminal penalties imposed under division
(B) of this section, a person shall pay 5% of the tax due as a penalty if the
person fails to pay the tax or file the report as required by this subchapter
by the due date.  And additional penalty of 5% of the tax due shall be paid
if the tax is not paid within 30 days from the date the tax was due. 
Another penalty of 5% of the tax due shall be paid if the tax is not paid
within 60 days from the date the tax was due. The penalties provided by this
division may never be less than $5. Delinquent taxes shall draw interest at
the rate of 10% per annum beginning 60 days from the date the tax was due.



   (D)   In addition to the amount of any tax owed, a person is liable
to the city for all reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the city in
enforcing this subchapter against the person and in collecting any tax owed
by the person under this subchapter.



   (E)   The city may release, relinquish, compromise and/or settle the
penalty and/or interest due as a result of an act or omission of an employee
or officer of the city.



   (F)   This subchapter shall not be construed to limit or restrict
the Council's powers to release, relinquish, compromise and/or settle the
penalty and/or interest due for delinquent hotel occupancy taxes as provided
by the Texas Constitution or other applicable laws.  All penalties shall be
deposited into the city's general fund.



(Prior Code, § 11.02.009) (Ord. 16-09-12, passed ---)



§ 35.10  COLLECTION ON TERMINATION OF BUSINESS.



   (A)   If a person who is liable for the payment of an amount of
hotel tax to the city is the owner of the hotel and sells the hotel, the
successor to the seller or the seller’s assignee shall withhold an amount
of the purchase price sufficient to pay the amount of tax due until the
seller provides a receipt from the Director of Finance of the city, showing
that the amount due has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is
due.



   (B)   The purchaser of a hotel who fails to withhold an amount of
the purchase price as required by this section is liable for the amount
required to be withheld to the extent of the value of the purchase price.



   (C)   The purchaser of a hotel may request that the Director of
Finance issue a certificate stating that no tax is due or issue a statement
of the amount required to be paid before a certificate may be issued. The
Director of Finance shall issue the certificate or statement within 60 days
after receiving the request or within 60 days after the day on which the
records of the former owner of the hotel are made available for audit,
whichever period expires later, but in either event the Director of Finance
shall issue the certificate or statement within 90 days after the date of
receiving the request.



   (D)   If the Director of Finance fails to mail the certificate or
statement within the applicable period provided by division (C) above, the
purchaser is released from the obligation to withhold the purchase price or
pay the amount due.



   (E)   The period of limitation during which the Director of Finance
may assess tax against the purchaser under this section is four years from
the date when the former owner of the hotel sells the hotel or when a
determination is made against the former owner, whichever event occurs later.
At any time within three years after a deficiency determination against the
purchaser has become due and payable, the Director of Finance may bring an
action in a county court at law or district court of the county or a court of
any other state of the United States in the name of the city to collect the
delinquent amounts together with penalties and interest.



(Prior Code, § 11.02.010)



§ 35.11  LIEN.



   (A)   Any hotel as defined by Texas Tax Code § 156.001(1), which
fails to pay all hotel occupancy taxes or fails to file a tax report in a
timely fashion as provided by § 35.05, as amended in this division, shall
stand charged with a tax lien in favor of the city which lien shall attach to
and run with the land.  The tax lien shall attach to the property of a
person liable for tax on the day the tax becomes due and payable and this tax
lien, including the tax assessed, together with any penalties provided by
statute, shall be a prior and superior lien on all property of the motel or
hotel.



   (B)   The city may issue a tax lien notice which shall be mailed to
the owner of the property at the owner's last known address by certified
mail, return receipt requested, and to any other persons with an interest,
including but not limited to persons managing, controlling, or operating the
hotel as well as all recorded lien holders as reflected by the Rusk County
Clerk's real property records.  Should the property owner fail to pay the
delinquent hotel occupancy taxes within ten days of the notice the Director
of Finance may file the tax lien including all hotel occupancy taxes owed to
date including interest, if any, and cost of filing the lien with the Rusk
County Clerks' office.  Such lien shall be second only to ad valorem tax
liens and liens for street improvements, and the amount thereof shall bear
interest at the rate of 10% per annum from the date the statement is filed. 
Suit may be instituted and recovered and foreclosure of the lien may be had
in the name of the city in accordance with the law. A certified copy of the
tax lien filed with the County Clerk shall be prima facie proof of the amount
owed.



   (C)   The remedies allowed by this section are not exclusive but in
addition to remedies provided by Texas Tax Code § 351.004 and any other
remedies provided for by law.



(Prior Code, § 11.02.011) (Ord. 16-09-12, passed --)



§ 35.12  TAX COLLECTION SUIT.



   (A)   The City Attorney may bring suit against a person who is
required to collect the tax imposed by this subchapter and pay the
collections over to the city and who has failed to file a tax report or pay
the tax when due, to collect the tax not paid, or to enjoin the person from
operating a hotel in the city until the tax is paid or the report filed, as
applicable, as provided by the court's order. In addition to the amount of
any tax owed under this subchapter, the person is liable to the city for:



      (1)   Reasonable attorney's fees;



      (2)   The costs of an audit conducted under division (B), as
determined by the city using a reasonable rate, but only if the tax has been
delinquent for at least two complete municipal fiscal quarters at the time
the audit is conducted;



      (3)   A penalty equal to 15% of the total amount of the tax
owed; and



      (4)   Interest on the delinquent taxes at the rate of 10% per
annum.



   (B)   If a person required to file a tax report under this
subchapter does not file the report as so required, the City Attorney may
determine the amount of tax due under this subchapter by:



      (1)   Conducting an audit of each hotel in relation to which
the person did not file the report as required by this subchapter; or



      (2)   Using the tax report filed for the appropriate reporting
period under Texas Tax Code § 156.151, as amended, in relation to that hotel.



   (C)   If the person did not file a tax report under Texas Tax Code
§ 156.151, as amended, for that reporting period in relation to that hotel,
the City Attorney may estimate the amount of tax due by using the tax reports
in relation to that hotel filed during the previous calendar year under this
subchapter or Texas Tax Code § 156.151, as amended.  An estimate made under
this division is prima facie evidence of the amount of tax due for that
period in relation to that hotel.



   (D)   The authority to conduct an audit under this subchapter is in
addition to any other audit authority provided by state law, charter or
ordinance.



   (E)   There is no limitation period on either the time allowed to
assess taxes or to bring a suit to collect taxes imposed under this
subchapter if a false or fraudulent report is filed or in the event no report
is filed.



   (F)   The city is further authorized to pursue any additional
actions and any other available remedies to collect local hotel occupancy
taxes as authorized by state law.



(Ord. 16-09-12, passed --)




PROPERTY TAXES




§ 35.25  RESIDENCE HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION.



   All qualified residence homesteads within the city are exempted from ad
valorem taxation in an amount equal to 20% of the market value of such
residence homesteads, which amount shall not be less than $5,000.



(Prior Code, § 11.03.001)  (Ord. 93-8-4, passed 8-24-1993)



Statutory reference:



   Residence homestead tax exemptions, see Tex. Tax Code, § 11.13



§ 35.26  GOODS IN TRANSIT.



   Goods in transit, as defined in Tex. Tax Code, § 11.253, entitled
Tangible Personal Property in Transit, enacted by the 80th Texas Legislature
in Regular Session, shall remain subject to taxation by the city.



(Prior Code, § 11.03.002)  (Ord. 07-11-19, passed 11-13-2007)



Statutory references:



   Authority of municipality to impose property taxes, see Tex. Tax Code,
§ 302.001



   Property Tax Code, see Tex. Tax Code, Ch. 1 et seq.



   Tax exemption for goods in transit, see Tex. Tax Code, § 11.253



§ 35.27  AD VALOREM TAX; ADOPTION.



   The ad valorem tax ordinances of the city are hereby adopted by
reference and incorporated herein as fully as if set out at length herein.



(Ord. 12-09-09, passed 9-11-2012; Ord. 13-09-02, passed 9-24-2013; Ord.
14-09-02, passed 9-23-2014)




FEES




§ 35.40  FEE SCHEDULE.



 


Code Section

 

Subject

 

Fee Reason

 

Amount






112.45

 
Alarm systems; permit
 
Charge for each alarm system direct line monitored by city for either
business or residential location, per year
 

$20




116.031

 
Annual usage fee
 
Annual usage fee
 

$2 per linear foot




54.34

 
Drought contingency plan, enforcement
 
Reconnect charge for services discontinued for three or more violations
 

$45




92.63

 
Fire prevention and protection
 
Historic District, fees
 

$100 for each inspection




33.01

 
Municipal Court
 
Building security fee
 

$3




116.027

 
Oil and gas;  permits
 
Permit filing fee
 

$5,000




116.078

 
Pollution control; prerequisites when well is within 5,000 feet of city limits
 
Fees to defray city’s expenses in connection with inspection of operations
 

$2,000




114.08

 
Sexually oriented businesses
 
License application fee
 

$1,000



License renewal fee
 

$500




33.15

 
Technology Fund
 
Technology fee, for each conviction
 

$4





 



(Prior Code, App. A)  (Ord. 95-6-5, passed 6-27-1995; Ord. 97-8-10, passed
8-26-1997; Ord. 99-8-19, passed 8-24-1999; Ord. 02-07-09, passed 7-9-2002;
Ord. 08-09-05, passed 9-9-2008; Ord. 11-06-07, passed 6-28-2011; Ord.
11-07-08, passed 7-26-2011)



Editor’s note:



   The fees included in this section are the monetary amounts that
actually appeared in the 2007 Code of Ordinances. All other fees mentioned in
the 2007 Code of Ordinances were not specifically mentioned and/or were
generally stipulated as being on file in the city offices



CHAPTER 36: CITY POLICIES



Section



   36.01   Medically necessary transports within the city



§ 36.01  MEDICALLY NECESSARY TRANSPORTS WITHIN THE CITY.



   The city, the corporate city limits will be served by one EMS ambulance
provider, for the provision of medically necessary transports within the city
as designated by the City Council. At its discretion, the City Council may
enter into contractual agreement for the providing of these services.



(Ord. 16-12-15, passed 1-10-2017)



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS



   Chapter



      50.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      51.   SANITATION; POLLUTION CONTROL



      52.   INDUSTRIAL WASTE CONTROL



      53.   SOLID WASTE



      54.   WATER CONSERVATION AND DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLANS



      55.   CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL



CHAPTER 50:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section




General Provisions




   50.01   Cover required for wells, cisterns



   50.02   Water, sewer main extensions



   50.03   Water rates




Private Individual Disposal Systems




   50.15   When sewer connection required



   50.16   Owner to bear cost



   50.17   Cesspools prohibited




Rates and Charges




   50.30   Application for service; charges, failure to pay



   50.31   Meters; required



   50.32   Installation, maintenance of meters



   50.33   Ownership of meters



   50.34   Tampering of meters



   50.35   Utility deposit



   50.36   Rates and charges of city-furnished utilities



   50.37   Payment of rates and charges



   50.38   Disconnection of service for non-payment



   50.39   Resumption of service



   50.40   Rates and charges of franchised public utilities



   50.41   Water service rates



   50.42   Unauthorized use of water



   50.43   Tampering with city water supply property



Charter references:



   Franchises, see Art. II, § 14



   Operation of public utility by city, see Art. II, § 9



   Public utility systems, see Art. II, § 8



Statutory references:



   Authority for municipal public services and utility systems in
home-rule municipalities, see Tex. Local Gov’t Code, § 552.002



   Municipal utilities, see Tex. Local Gov’ Code, §§ 552.001 et seq.



   Public Utility Regulatory Act, see Tex. Utilities Code, Ch. 11 et seq.




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 50.01  COVER REQUIRED FOR WELLS, CISTERNS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any well or
cistern which is at least ten feet deep and not less than ten inches nor more
than six feet in diameter to fail to keep it entirely covered at all times
with a covering capable of sustaining weight of not less than 200 pounds,
except when such well or cistern is in actual use by the owner or operator
thereof.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person who shall dig or otherwise
create, or cause to be dug or created, any well or cistern at least ten feet
deep and not less than ten inches in diameter to abandon such well or cistern
without first completely plugging the same with a permanent type plug at a
depth of not less than ten feet from the surface and completely filling the
same from such plug to the surface.



(Prior Code, § 13.01.001)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.02  WATER, SEWER MAIN EXTENSIONS.



   (A)   Unless waived or discounted as provided hereinafter, any
customer request for extensions of water or sewer mains shall be at the
customer’s expense.



   (B)   The charges for water and/or sewer main extensions may be
discounted or waived entirely, when it is determined by a majority vote of
the City Council that such waiver or discount would be in the best interest
of the city and each of the following criteria has been met.



      (1)   The customer must be an industry which is locating to
the city or relocating in the city due to expansion.



      (2)   The industry must employ at least 45 individuals.



      (3)   The requested amount of water and/or sewer main
extension may be no more than an estimated 1,000 feet, with no greater than a
5% variance.



(Prior Code, § 13.01.002)



§ 50.03  WATER RATES.



   (A)   The city, from and after the effective date of this section
and pursuant to the authority granted in § 50.36, shall charge for the
furnishing of utility services to consumers within and without the city.



   (B)   A copy of such rate schedule is adopted by the City Council
and maintained within the office of the City Secretary. Such Master Schedule
is set as determined by appropriate action by the City Council.Water rates
outside the city limits shall be one and one-half times the inside city rate.



(Ord. 12-10-11, passed 10-23-2012)




PRIVATE INDIVIDUAL DISPOSAL SYSTEMS




§ 50.15  WHEN SEWER CONNECTION REQUIRED.



   Every building intended for human habitation or occupancy abutting on a
street or alley in which there is a public sewer, or within 200 feet of a
public sewer, shall be connected with the sewer by the owner or agent of the
premises in the most direct manner possible.



(Prior Code, § 13.02.001)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.16  OWNER TO BEAR COST.



   The cost of installing a sanitary flush toilet and connection to the
public sewer system shall be borne by the owner of the property on which the
improvement is to be located.



(Prior Code, § 13.02.002)



§ 50.17  CESSPOOLS PROHIBITED.



   Cesspools of any kind are hereby prohibited within the city limits.



(Prior Code, § 13.02.003)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   On-site sewage disposal systems, see Tex. Health and Safety Code, Ch.
366




RATES AND CHARGES




§ 50.30  APPLICATION FOR SERVICE; CHARGES, FAILURE TO PAY.



   (A)   Written application shall be made to the city for water, sewer
and garbage collection upon forms furnished therefor and available to the
public. Such application shall state the name and address of the applicant,
the purposes for which the application is made, and such other information as
the city may request.



   (B)   (1)   All owners, occupants, tenants or lessees of a
building, house, structure or premises shall be charged for the removal and
disposal of garbage and trash according to rates established by the city
council where such garbage or trash removal is available to such building,
house, structure or premises if such building, house, structure or premises
is receiving water services from the city.



      (2)   Failure to pay the assessed charge for any utility
service available will result in the discontinuance of all utility services.



(Prior Code, § 13.03.001)



§ 50.31  METERS; REQUIRED.



   Meters shall be required to measure the consumption of the water
service furnished by the city.



(Prior Code, § 13.03.002)



§ 50.32  INSTALLATION, MAINTENANCE OF METERS.



   All meters required by this subchapter and used to measure the
consumption of water services furnished by the city shall be installed and
maintained by the city.



(Prior Code, § 13.03.003)



§ 50.33  OWNERSHIP OF METERS.



   (A)   All meters used for the measurement of the consumption of any
water service furnished by the city shall be the property of the city.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to install or maintain any
meter for such purposes anywhere within the city which is not owned by the
city.



(Prior Code, § 13.03.004)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.34  TAMPERING OF METERS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a duly authorized
employee of the city, to tamper with any meter, or to in any manner injure
any meter or to manipulate or attempt to manipulate any meter in any manner
so as to affect its registration or measurement of the metered water service.



(Prior Code, § 13.03.005)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Municipal jurisdiction over water and sewer utility rates, operations
and services, see Tex. Water Code, § 13.042



§ 50.35  UTILITY DEPOSIT.



   (A)   Along with the application for utility services, the applicant
shall pay to the city a deposit as shall be determined by the City Council
from time to time. A copy of the latest such deposits shall be on file in the
office of the City Secretary.



   (B)   In the event a bill for services to a customer has not been
paid in the manner required by this subchapter, the customer shall forfeit so
much of the utility deposit as shall be required to pay the delinquent bill.



   (C)   After discontinuance of utility services, any balance of the
utility deposit, after payment of all outstanding charges, shall be refunded
to the depositor.



   (D)   The City Finance Director may refund a utility deposit held by
the city upon satisfactory proof of prompt payment for a period of two years.



   (E)   (1)   The City Finance Director is hereby authorized to
accept guaranty agreements to secure the payment of charges for city utility
services by city utility customers for single-family residential use only.



      (2)   Each guaranty agreement accepted pursuant to the
authority herein shall be approved by the City Finance Director prior to
acceptance. Said guaranty agreement accepted shall be in lieu of the regular
utility deposit normally required for single-family residential customers.



      (3)   The City Finance Director may require any guaranty
agreement accepted pursuant to the authority herein to have more than one
guarantor. At least one of the guarantors on each guaranty agreement shall be
a current utility customer whose account with the city is current and in good
standing.



   (F)   (1)   The City Finance Director is hereby authorized to
accept from commercial and industrial customers an irrevocable letter of
credit in lieu of the deposit required by this section. Such irrevocable
letter of credit shall be drawn in favor of the city and shall be issued by a
financial institution acceptable to the city. The letter of credit shall be
irrevocable and payable upon presentment (demand), without contingency, by
the city for a period of at least five years from the date services are first
provided to the customer. A letter of credit open for a stated period of one
year that is automatically annually renewable for an additional four years
will satisfy the five-year requirement.



      (2)   The customer shall renew and maintain the letter of
credit required by this division (F) until the customer has demonstrated a
record of prompt payments for a period of five years and is deemed to be a
good financial risk by the Finance Director.



      (3)   Upon prompt payment for all utility services provided by
the city for a period of five years, the Finance Director may release the
letter of credit provided pursuant to this division (F); however, if the
customer is deemed to be a financial risk by the Finance Director, due to
late payment history or other factors known to the Finance Director, the
Finance Director shall require the customer to renew the letter of credit for
an additional five-year period on the same terms and conditions as set out in
division (F)(1) above.



      (4)   In order to assist the Finance Director in the
determination of financial risk to the city, the Finance Director is
authorized to require submission of current financial reports and credit
reports from any commercial or industrial customer seeking to avoid renewal
of the letter of credit.



      (5)   The city is under no obligation to accept or release a
letter of credit allowed by this division (F) in lieu of the deposit normally
required, but will not discriminate against any customer based on racial,
ethnic, sex or age classifications.



(Prior Code, § 13.03.006)  (Ord. 95-6-4, passed 6-27-1995)



§ 50.36  RATES AND CHARGES OF CITY-FURNISHED UTILITIES.



   The rates and charges for all utility services furnished by the city to
consumers within or without the city shall be as determined by the City
Council from time to time. A copy of the latest such rates and charges shall
be on file in the office of the City Secretary.



(Prior Code, § 13.03.007)



§ 50.37  PAYMENT OF RATES AND CHARGES.



   The rates and charges fixed and prescribed for utility services
furnished by the city by this chapter shall be due and payable in the water
office on or before the fifteenth day following the date bills therefor shall
be mailed. In the event that such rates and charges are not paid in full by
such due date, a penalty of 10% of the amount due and payable shall be added
to such rates and charges.



(Prior Code, § 13.03.008)



§ 50.38  DISCONNECTION OF SERVICE FOR NON-PAYMENT.



   In the event that any consumer of utilities services furnished by the
city does not pay the rates and charges, plus the penalties, on or before the
nineteenth day following the date bills therefor are mailed, the Director of
Finance shall have the authority to disconnect or terminate, or cause to be
disconnected or terminated, all utilities services furnished such consumer.



(Prior Code, § 13.03.009)



§ 50.39  RESUMPTION OF SERVICE.



   Any consumer of the utility services furnished by the city, whose
utility services have been disconnected or terminated for non-payment of the
rates and charges therefor, may have such utility services resumed by paying
all rates, charges and penalties, and, in addition, a disconnect fee in an
amount as fixed by the City Council from time to time. A copy of the latest
such rates and charges and disconnection fees shall be on file in the office
of the City Secretary. Any consumer not paying the rates, charges, penalties
and disconnection fees within a reasonable time may be required to pay a new
deposit fee.



(Prior Code, § 13.03.010)



§ 50.40  RATES AND CHARGES OF FRANCHISED PUBLIC UTILITIES.



   The City Council shall approve the rates charged by any private public
utility company franchised by the city and doing business within the city. It
shall be unlawful for any such public utility company or any officer or
employee thereof to assess or charge for services rendered any rate other
than the rate so fixed or approved.



(Prior Code, § 13.03.011)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.41  WATER SERVICE RATES.



   The water rates charged to customers inside and outside the city limits
are on file in the City Secretary’s office.



(Prior Code, § 13.03.012)



§ 50.42  UNAUTHORIZED USE OF WATER.



   No person shall, without authority of the Public Services Director or
his or her designee, open or close any fire hydrant or stopcock (curb stop)
connected to the city water system or lift or remove the covers of any gate
valves or shutoff valves thereof, or take water from any city water line
without the same passing through a meter duly installed and maintained by the
city or turn on the city water supply to any meter or line which has been
turned off by reason of non-payment of monthly water charges.



(Prior Code, § 13.03.013)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.43  TAMPERING WITH CITY WATER SUPPLY PROPERTY.



   No person shall cover, conceal, remove, tamper with or obstruct any
fire hydrant, city water line or city water meter, water valve box, service
or meter box, or place within three feet of any fire hydrant any pole, post
or other obstruction.



(Prior Code, § 13.03.014)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 51:  SANITATION; POLLUTION CONTROL



Section



   51.01   Purpose



   51.02   Definitions



   51.03   Prohibited activities



   51.04   Right of entry



   51.05   Required removal



   51.06   Superseding regulation or statute



 



   51.99   Penalty



§ 51.01  PURPOSE.



   (A)   This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for the users and
the construction of facilities in or on land within 150 feet of the wells in
order to promote sanitary conditions in and around such wells, to secure all
such land from pollution hazards and to enable the city to comply with all
applicable state and local regulations.



   (B)   The objective of this chapter is to prevent certain uses and
the construction of facilities in or on land surrounding the wells, which
might create a danger of pollution to the water produced from such wells.



(Ord. 12-02-02, passed 2-28-2012)



§ 51.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CITY.  The City of Henderson, Texas.



   CITY COUNCIL.  The City Council of the City of Henderson, Texas



   ORDINANCE or CHAPTER.  This chapter, derived from the “Ordinance
Establishing Rules and Regulations Regarding Sanitary and Pollution Control
of the Area in Proximity to the City’s Public Water Supply Wells within the
city”.



   PERSON.  Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity or any other legal entity, or its legal representatives, agents,
successors or assigns.



   WELLS.  All water wells owned and operated by the city within the city
limits of the city, whether now in operation or which might hereafter be
drilled and/or made operational.



(Ord. 12-02-02, passed 2-28-2012)



§ 51.03  PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.



   The following activities are prohibited within the designated areas of
land surrounding the wells.



   (A)   Construction and/or operation of any underground petroleum
and/or chemical storage tank, liquid transmission pipeline, stock pen,
feedlot, dump grounds, privy, cesspool, septic tank, sewage treatment plant,
sewage wet well, sewage pumping station, drainage ditch which contains
industrial waste discharges or the wastes from sewage treatment systems,
solid waste disposal site, land on which sewage plant or septic tank sludge
is applied, land irrigated by sewage plant effluent, septic tank perforated
drain field, absorption bed, evapo-transpiration bed, area irrigated by
low-dosage, low-angle spray on-site sewage facility, military facility,
industrial facility, wood treatment facility, liquid petroleum and
petrochemical production, storage and/or transmission facility, Class 1, 2, 3
and/or 4 injection well, pesticide storage and/or mixing facility, abandoned
well, inoperative well, improperly constructed water well of any depth, and
all other construction or operation that could create an unsanitary condition
is prohibited within, upon or across all areas of land within a 150-foot
radius of the wells. For the purposes of this chapter, IMPROPERLY CONSTRUCTED
WATER WELLS are those wells that do not meet the surface and subsurface
construction standards for a public water supply well.



   (B)   Construction and/or operation of tile or concrete sanitary
sewers, sewer appurtenances, septic tanks, storm sewers and cemeteries is
specifically prohibited within, upon or across and area of land within a
50-foot radius of the wells.



   (C)   Construction of homes or buildings upon any area of land
within a 150-foot radius of the wells is permitted, provided the restrictions
described in divisions (A) and (B) above are met.



   (D)   Normal farming and ranching operations are not prohibited by
this chapter; provided, however, livestock shall not be allowed within a
50-foot radius of the wells.



(Ord. 12-02-02, passed 2-28-2012)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.04  RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   City employees, or authorized representatives of the city, bearing
proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to immediately
enter upon any premises located within a 150-foot radius of any well to
conduct any inspection or observation necessary to enforce this chapter.



(Ord. 12-02-02, passed 2-28-2012)



§ 51.05  REQUIRED REMOVAL.



   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be
required to remove the prohibited construction or potential source of
contamination within ten days after notification that he or she is in
violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 12-02-02, passed 2-28-2012)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.06  SUPERSEDING REGULATION OR STATUTE.



   Whenever any applicable statute, regulation or permit of any state,
federal or other agency, having jurisdiction over the subject matter of this
chapter, is in conflict herewith, the stricter requirement shall apply,
unless mandated otherwise.



(Ord. 12-02-02, passed 2-28-2012)



§ 51.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined in an
amount not to exceed $2,000. Each day of violation shall constitute a
separate offense.



(Ord. 12-02-02, passed 2-28-2012)



CHAPTER 52:  INDUSTRIAL WASTE CONTROL



Section



   52.01   Definitions



   52.02   Prohibited discharges



   52.03   Chemical discharges



   52.04   Heavy metals and toxic materials



   52.05   Garbage



   52.06   Stormwater and other unpolluted drainage



   52.07   Temperature



   52.08   Radioactive wastes



   52.09   Impairment of facilities



   52.10   Compliance with existing authority



   52.11   Approving authority requirements



   52.12   Approving authority review and approval



   52.13   Requirements for traps



   52.14   Requirements for building sewers



   52.15   Sampling and testing



   52.16   Payment and agreement required



   52.17   Industrial waste charge



   52.18   Surcharge



   52.19   Power to enter property



   52.20   Authority to disconnect service



   52.21   Notice



   52.22   Continuing prohibited discharges



   52.23   Failure to pay



   52.24   Criminal mischief



   52.25   Permits for discharge of industrial waste



   52.26   Conditions to permit issuance



   52.27   Pretreatment program fees



   52.28   Self-reporting system requirements



 



   52.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   General public works provisions, see Chapter 50



Statutory references:



   Adoption of rules to control and regulate disposal system waste, see
Tex. Water Code, § 26.176



   Water pollution control duties, see Tex. Water Code, § 26.177



§ 52.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPROVING AUTHORITY.  The City Manager or his or her duly authorized
representative.



   BOD (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND).  The quantity of oxygen by weight,
expressed in mg/l, utilized in the biochemical oxidation in five days at a
temperature of 20°C.



   BUILDING SEWER.  The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal, also called LATERAL AND HOUSE CONNECTION.



   CATEGORICAL STANDARDS OR CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Those
national pretreatment standards specifying quantities and concentrations of
pollutants or pollutant properties which may be discharged to the city’s
publicly owned treatment works (POTW) by existing or new industrial users in
specific industrial subcategories.



   CITY.  The City of Henderson, Texas, or any authorized person acting
in its behalf.



   COD (CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND).  Measure of the oxygen consuming
capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in the water or wastewater
expressed in mg/l as the amount of oxygen consumed.



   CONTROL MANHOLE.  A manhole giving access to a course of discharge
before the discharge mixes with any other discharge in the public sewer.



   CONTROL POINT.  A point of access to a course of discharge before the
discharge mixes with the other discharge in the public sewer.



   DIRECT DISCHARGE.  The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater
directly to the waters of the state.



   GARBAGE. Animal and vegetable wastes and residue from preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food; and from the handling, processing, storage
and sale of food products and produce.



   INDIRECT DISCHARGE. The introduction of pollutants into a POTW from any
nondomestic source regulated under § 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Clean Water
Act, as amended, being 33 U.S.C. § 1317(b), (c) or (d).



   INDUSTRIAL USER.  A source of indirect discharge.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTE.  Waste resulting from any process of industry,
manufacturing, trade or business from the development of any natural
resource, or any mixture of the waste with water or normal wastewater, or
distinct normal wastewater.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTE CHARGE.  The charge made on those persons who
discharge industrial waste into the city’s sewer system.



   INTERFERENCE.  The inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment
processes, operations or sludge processes, use or disposal, which is a cause
or significantly contributes to either a violation of any requirement of the
POTW’s NPDES or TPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or
duration of a violation) or to the prevention of sewage sludge use of
disposal by the POTW in accordance with § 405 of the Clean Water Act, the
Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) being 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq., including
Title II, Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) being 42 U.S.C. §§
6901 et seq., the Clean Air Act being 42 U.S.C. §§ 7401 et seq. and the
Toxic Substances Control Act being 15 U.S.C. §§ 2601 et seq., or more
stringent state criteria.



   MILLIGRAMS PER LITER (MG/L).  The same as parts per million and is a
weight to volume ratio; the milligram per liter value multiplied by the
factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water.



   NATIONAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD.  Any regulation containing pollutant
discharge limits promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency in
accordance with § 307(b) and (c) of the Clean Water Act of 1977, being 33
U.S.C. § 1317(b) and (c), which applies to industrial users.



   NATURAL OUTLET.  Any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, lake or other
body of surface water or groundwater.



   NORMAL DOMESTIC WASTEWATER.  Wastewater excluding industrial
wastewater discharged by a person into sanitary sewers and in which the
average concentration of total suspended solids is not more than 200 mg/l and
five-day biochemical oxygen demand is not more than 200 mg/l.



   OVERLOAD.  The imposition of organic or hydraulic loading on a
treatment facility in excess of its engineered design capacity.



   PASS THROUGH.  The discharge of pollutants through the POTW into
navigable waters in quantities or concentrations that are a cause of or
significantly contribute to a violation of any requirement of the POTW’s
NPDES or TPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of
a violation).



   PERSON.  Includes corporation, organization, government or
governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership, association and any other legal entity.



   pH.  A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution expressed in
standard units.



   POLLUTANT.  Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerated residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials,
radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand,
cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into
water.



   PRETREATMENT.  The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of
discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a treatment works.
The reduction and alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or
biological process.



   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS.  Any substantive or procedural requirement
related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard imposed
on an industrial user.



   PROPERTY SHREDDED GARBAGE.  Waste from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that has been shredded to such degree that all particles
shall be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in
public sewers, with no particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension.



   PUBLIC SEWER.  Pipe or conduit carrying wastewater or unpolluted
drainage in which owners of abutting properties shall have the use, subject
to control by the city.



   SANITARY SEWER.  A public sewer that conveys domestic wastewater or
industrial wastes or a combination of both, and into which stormwater,
surface water, groundwater and other unpolluted wastes are not intentionally
passed.



   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER (SIU).



      (1)   A person subject to categorical pretreatment standards;
or



      (2)   A person that either:



         (a)   Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or
more of process water to the POTW;



         (b)   Contributes a process wastestream that makes up 5%
or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW
treatment plant; or



         (c)   Is designated as such by the city on the basis
that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the operation of
the POTW or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.



   SLUG.  Any discharge of water, wastewater or industrial waste which,
in concentration of any given constituent or in any quantity of flow, exceeds
for any period/duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the
average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation.



   STANDARD METHODS.  The examination and analytical procedures set forth
in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater, as prepared, approved and published
jointly by the American Public Health Association and the Water Environment
Federation.



   STORM SEWER.  A public sewer that carries stormwaters and surface
waters and drainage and into which domestic wastewater or industrial wastes
are not intentionally passed.



   STORMWATER.  Rainfall, or any other forms of precipitation.



   SUPERINTENDENT.  The Water and Wastewater Superintendent of the city
of his or her duly authorized deputy, agent or representative.



   TO DISCHARGE.  Includes to deposit, conduct, drain, emit, throw, run,
allow to seep or otherwise release or dispose of, or to allow, permit or
suffer any of these acts or omissions.



   TOXIC POLLUTANT.  Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as
toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the Environmental
Protection Agency under the provisions of the Clean Water Act, § 307(a),
being 33 U.S.C. § 1317(a) or other acts.



   TRAP.  A device designed to skim, settle or otherwise remove grease,
oil, sand, flammable wastes or other harmful substances.



   TSS (TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS).  Solids measured in mg/l that either
float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, wastewater or other
liquids, and which are largely removed by a laboratory filtration device.



   UNPOLLUTED WASTEWATER.  Water containing:



      (1)   No free or emulsified grease or oil;



      (2)   No acids or alkalis;



      (3)   No phenols or other substances producing taste or odor
in receiving water;



      (4)   No toxic or poisonous substances in suspension,
colloidal state or solution;



      (5)   No noxious or otherwise obnoxious or odorous gases;



      (6)   No more than 10 mg/l each of suspended solids and BOD;
and



      (7)   No more than 50 units of color as measured by the
platinum-cobalt method of determination as specified in Standard Methods.



   WASTE.  Rejected, unutilized or superfluous substances in liquid,
gaseous or solid form resulting from domestic, agricultural or industrial
activities.



   WASTEWATER.  A combination of the water-carried waste from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with
any groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present.



   WASTEWATER FACILITIES.  Includes all facilities for collection,
pumping, treating and disposing of wastewater and industrial wastes.



   WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGE.  The charge on all users of the public
sewer system whose wastes do not exceed in strength the concentration values
established as representative of normal wastewater.



   WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT.  City-owned facilities, devices and
structures used for receiving and treating wastewater, industrial waste and
sludges from the city wastewater facilities.



   WATERCOURSE.  A natural or human-made channel in which a flow of water
occurs, either continuously or intermittently.



(Prior Code, § 13.04.001)



§ 52.02  PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.



   (A)   No person may discharge or cause the discharge to the public
sewers any waste which by itself or by interaction with other wastes:



      (1)   Causes the injuring or interference of wastewater
treatment processes or facilities;



      (2)   Constitutes a hazard to humans or animals; or



      (3)   Creates a hazard in receiving waters of the wastewater
treatment plant effluent.



   (B)   All discharges shall conform to requirements of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 13.04.002)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.03  CHEMICAL DISCHARGES.



   No discharge to the public sewers may contain:



   (A)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas;



   (B)   Any cyanide greater than one mg/l;



   (C)   Fluoride other than that contained in the public water supply;



   (D)   Chlorides in concentrations greater than 250 mg/l;



   (E)   Substances causing an excessive COD;



   (F)   Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils,
whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances
which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150°F (0
and 65°C);



   (G)   Strong acids, iron pickling wastes or concentrated plating
solutions, whether neutralized or not;



   (H)   Any waters or wastes containing objectionable or toxic
substances, or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such
degree than any such material received in the composite wastewater at the
wastewater treatment plant exceeds the limits established by the approving
authority for such materials;



   (I)   Any waters or wastes containing obnoxious, toxic or poisonous
solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to injure or cause interference with any
wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard in the receiving waters of
the wastewater treatment plant;



   (J)   Any substance, whether solid, liquid or gas, in concentrations
in excess of maximum concentrations allowed under all applicable federal and
state regulations;



   (K)   Any waste, wastewater or other substances which have a pH
lower than six or higher than nine, or any other corrosive property capable
of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and/or personnel at the
wastewater facilities; and



   (L)   Any waste, wastewater or other substances containing phenols
in excess of two mg/l, the sulfide ion in excess of five mg/l, or other
deleterious substances, in such concentration exceeding limits which may be
established by the approving authority, as necessary, after treatment of the
composite wastewater, to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other
public agencies having jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving
waters.



(Prior Code, § 13.04.003)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.04  HEAVY METALS AND TOXIC MATERIALS.



   (A)   No discharges may contain concentrations of heavy metals
greater than amounts specified in division (B) below.



   (B)   The maximum allowable concentrations of heavy metals stated in
terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l), determined on the basis of individual
sampling in accordance with Standard Methods, are:



 


Metal

 

Grab Sample

 

Normal Operation Composite Sample





Arsenic
 

0.1

 

0.05



Barium
 

4.0

 

2.0



Cadmium
 

0.1

 

0.02



Chromium (total)
 

5.0

 

1.0



Copper
 

0.5

 

0.1



Lead
 

0.5

 

0.1



Manganese
 

3.0

 

2.0



Acidity
 

0.01

 

0.005



Nickel
 

2.0

 

1.0



Selenium
 

0.1

 

0.02



Silver
 

0.2

 

0.1



Zinc
 

6.0

 

2.0



Total toxic organics*
 

N/A

 

2.0



* The total toxic organics (TTO) limit applies to the sum of the
concentrations of toxic organics listed in Table II of Appendix D, 40 C.F.R.
part 122




 



   (C)   No other heavy metals or toxic materials may be discharged
into the public sewers without specific permit discharge limits and
conditions of pretreatment approved by the approving authority.



   (D)   Prohibited heavy metals toxic materials include, but are not
limited to:



      (1)   Antimony;



      (2)   Beryllium;



      (3)   Bismuth;



      (4)   Cobalt;



      (5)   Molybdenum;



      (6)   Uranylion;



      (7)   Rhenium;



      (8)   Strontium;



      (9)   Tellurium;



      (10)   Herbicides;



      (11)   Fungicides; and



      (12)   Pesticides.



(Prior Code, § 13.04.004)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.05  GARBAGE.



   (A)   No person may discharge garbage in the public sewers unless it
properly shredded (see definitions for properly shredded garbage).



   (B)   The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped
with a motor of three-fourths horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be
subject to the review and approval of the approving authority.



(Prior Code, § 13.04.005)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.06  STORMWATER AND OTHER UNPOLLUTED DRAINAGE.



   (A)   No person may discharge to public sanitary sewers:



      (1)   Unpolluted stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage;



      (2)   Unpolluted cooling water;



      (3)   Unpolluted industrial process waters; or



      (4)   Other unpolluted drainage.



   (B)   In compliance with the Texas Water Quality Act, being Tex.
Water Code, §§ 26.001 et seq., and other statutes, unpolluted drainage
shall be discharged to a natural watercourse.



(Prior Code, § 13.04.006)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.07  TEMPERATURE.



   No person may discharge liquid or vapor having a temperature higher
than 150°F (65°C), or any substance which causes the temperature of the
total wastewater treatment plant influent to increase in temperature at a
rate of 10°F or more per hour, or a combined total increase of plant
influent temperature to 110°F.



(Prior Code, § 13.04.007)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.08  RADIOACTIVE WASTES.



   No person may discharge radioactive wastes or isotopes into the public
sewers without the permission of the approving authority. The approving
authority may establish, in compliance with applicable state and federal
regulations, regulations for discharge of radioactive wastes into the public
sewer.



(Prior Code, § 13.04.008)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.09  IMPAIRMENT OF FACILITIES.



   (A)   No person may discharge into public sewers any substance
capable of causing:



      (1)   Obstruction to the flow in sewers;



      (2)   Interference with the operation of treatment process of
facilities; or



      (3)   Excessive loading of treatment facilities.



   (B)   Discharges prohibited by division (A) above include, but are
not limited to, materials which exert or cause concentration of:



      (1)   Inert suspended solids greater than 250 mg/l including,
but not limited to:



         (a)   Fuller’s earth;



         (b)   Lime slurries; and



         (c)   Lime residues.



      (2)   Dissolved solids greater than 250 mg/l including, but
not limited to:



         (a)   Sodium chloride; and



         (b)   Sodium sulfate.



      (3)   Excessive discoloration including, but not limited to:



         (a)   Dye waste;



         (b)   Vegetable tanning solutions; and



         (c)   Whole blood.



      (4)   BOD, COD or chlorine demand in excess of normal plant
capacity.



   (C)   No person may discharge into the public sewers any substance
that may:



      (1)   Deposit grease or oil in the sewer lines in such a
manner as to clog sewers;



      (2)   Overload skimming and grease handling equipment;



      (3)   Pass to the receiving waters without being effectively
treated by normal wastewater treatment process due to the non-amenability of
the substance to bacterial action; or



      (4)   Deleteriously affect the treatment process due to
excessive quantities.



   (D)   No person may discharge any substance into public sewers which:



      (1)   Is not amenable to treatment or reduction by the process
and facilities employed; or



      (2)   Is amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the
treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of federal and state
agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.



   (E)   The approving authority shall enforce the regulation of the
flow and concentration of slugs from an industrial user when they may:



      (1)   Impair the treatment process;



      (2)   Cause damage to collection facilities;



      (3)   Incur treatment costs exceeding those for normal
wastewater; or



      (4)   Render the waste unfit for stream disposal or industrial
use.



   (F)   No person may discharge into the public sewers solid or
viscous substances which may violate division (A) above if present in
sufficient quantity or size including, but not limited to:



      (1)   Ashes;



      (2)   Cinders;



      (3)   Sand;



      (4)   Mud;



      (5)   Straw;



      (6)   Shavings;



      (7)   Metal;



      (8)   Glass;



      (9)   Rags;



      (10)   Feathers;



      (11)   Tar;



      (12)   Plastics;



      (13)   Wood;



      (14)   Ungrounded garbage;



      (15)   Whole blood;



      (16)   Paunch manure;



      (17)   Hair and fleshings;



      (18)   Entrails;



      (19)   Paper products, either whole or ground by garbage
grinders;



      (20)   Slops;



      (21)   Chemical residues;



      (22)   Paint residues; or



      (23)   Bulk solids.



(Prior Code, § 13.04.009)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.10  COMPLIANCE WITH EXISTING AUTHORITY.



   (A)   Unless exception is granted by the approving authority, the
public sanitary sewer system shall be used by all persons discharging:



      (1)   Wastewater;



      (2)   Industrial waste; or



      (3)   Polluted liquids.



   (B)   Unless authorized by the State Commission on Environmental
Quality, no person shall deposit or discharge without the approval of the
approving authority any waste included in division (A) above on public or
private property in or adjacent to any:



      (1)   Natural outlets;



      (2)   Natural watercourses;



      (3)   Storm sewer; or



      (4)   Other area within the jurisdiction of the city.



   (C)   The approving authority shall verify prior to discharge that
wastes authorized to be discharged will receive suitable treatment within the
provisions of laws, regulations, ordinances, rules and orders of federal,
state and local governments.



(Prior Code, § 13.04.010)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.11  APPROVING AUTHORITY REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   If discharge or proposed discharge to public sewers may:



      (1)   Deleteriously affect wastewater facilities, processes,
equipment or receiving waters;



      (2)   Create a hazard to life or health; or



      (3)   Create a public nuisance; the approving authority shall
require:



         (a)   Pretreatment to an acceptable condition for
discharge to the public sewers;



         (b)   Control over the quantities and rates of
discharge; and



         (c)   Payment to cover cost of handling and treatment of
the wastes.



   (B)   The approving authority is entitled to determine whether a
discharge is included under division (A) above.



   (C)   The approving authority shall reject waste when:



      (1)   It determines that a discharge or proposed discharge is
included under division (A) above; and



      (2)   The discharge does not meet the requirements of division
(A) above.



   (D)   The approving authority may, following informal notice to the
discharger, immediately and effectively halt or prevent any discharge of
pollutants to the POTW which reasonably appears to present an imminent
endangerment to the health or welfare of persons.



(Prior Code, § 13.04.011)



§ 52.12  APPROVING AUTHORITY REVIEW AND APPROVAL.



   (A)   If the approving authority permits the pretreatment or
equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plant and
equipment shall be subject to review by the approving authority, and subject
to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. These
facilities shall be maintained in an effective operating condition at the
discharger’s own expense.



   (B)   Except where expressly authorized to do so by an applicable
categorical pretreatment standard, no user shall ever increase the use of
production water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or
complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the
limitations contained in this chapter, or in any other pollution specific
limitation developed by the state or federal government, including a
categorical pretreatment standard.



   (C)   Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge
of prohibited materials and other substances regulated by categorical
pretreatment standards. The approving authority is entitled to require the
industrial user to install flammable gas detection where the potential for
accidental discharge may occur. The approving authority is authorized to
require any person discharging wastewater with the potential to discharge
flammable substances to install and maintain an approved combustible gas
detection meter. All facilities and procedures to prevent accidental
discharge of prohibited materials shall be approved by the approving
authority and be provided and maintained in accordance with all manufacturers
respective equipment.



(Prior Code, § 13.04.012)



§ 52.13  REQUIREMENTS FOR TRAPS.



   (A)   Discharges requiring a trap include:



      (1)   Grease or waste containing grease in excessive amounts;



      (2)   Oil;



      (3)   Sand;



      (4)   Flammable wastes; and



      (5)   Other harmful ingredients.



   (B)   Any person responsible for discharges requiring a trap shall,
at his or her own expense and as required by the approving authority:



      (1)   Provide equipment and facilities of a type and capacity
approved by the approving authority;



      (2)   Locate the trap in a manner that provides ready and easy
accessibility for cleaning and inspection; and



      (3)   Maintain the trap in effective operating condition at
the person’s own expense.



(Prior Code, § 13.04.013)



§ 52.14  REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDING SEWERS.



   Any person responsible for discharges through a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall, at his or her own expense, and as required by the
approving authority:



   (A)   Install an accessible and safely located control manhole;



   (B)   Install meters and other appurtenances to facilitate
observation, sampling and measurement of the waste; and



   (C)   Maintain the equipment and facilities.



(Prior Code, § 13.04.014)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.15  SAMPLING AND TESTING.



   (A)   Sampling shall be conducted according to customarily accepted
methods, reflecting the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and
determining the existence of hazards to health, life, limb and property.



   (B)   Examination and analysis of the characteristics of waters and
wastes required by this chapter shall be:



      (1)   Conducted in accordance with the latest edition of
Standard Methods; and



      (2)   Determined from suitable samples taken at the control,
manhole provided or other control point authorized by the approving authority.



   (C)   BOD and TSS shall be determined from composite sampling,
except to detect unauthorized discharges. Where applicable, 24-hour, 16-hour,
eight-hour or some other period for composite sampling will be required. The
time and length of composite sampling shall fall in and reflect discharges
made by the person during the person’s normal operating hours.



   (D)   The city may select an independent firm or laboratory to
determine flow, BOD and TSS.



   (E)   The city is entitled to select the time of sampling at its
sole discretion so long as samples are taken at least annually.



(Prior Code, § 13.04.015)



§ 52.16  PAYMENT AND AGREEMENT REQUIRED.



   (A)   Persons making discharges of industrial waste shall pay a
charge to cover the cost of collection and treatment.



   (B)   When discharges of industrial waste are approved by the
approving authority, he or she shall enter into an agreement or arrangement
providing:



      (1)   Terms of acceptance by the city; and



      (2)   Payment by the person making the discharge.



(Prior Code, § 13.04.016)



§ 52.17  INDUSTRIAL WASTE CHARGE.



   (A)   If the volume or character of the waste to be treated by the
city does not cause overloading the sewage collection, treatment or disposal
facilities of the city, then prior to approval the city and the person making
the discharge shall enter into an agreement which provides that the
discharger pay an industrial waste charge to be determined from the schedule
of charges filed with the City Secretary.



   (B)   If the volume or character of the waste to be treated by the
city requires that wastewater collection, treatment or other disposal
facilities of the city be improved, expanded or enlarged in order to treat
the waste, then prior to approval the city and the person making the
discharge shall enter into an agreement which provides that the discharger
pay in full all added costs the city may incur due to acceptance of the waste.



   (C)   The agreement entered into pursuant to division (A) above
shall include, but not be limited to:



      (1)   Amortization of all capital outlay for collection and
treating the waste, including new capital outlay and the proportionate part
of the value of the existing system used in handling and treating the waste;
and



      (2)   Operation and maintenance costs including salaries and
wages, costs of power, chemical and supplies, proper allowances for
maintenance, depreciation, overhead and office expense.



(Prior Code, § 13.04.017)



§ 52.18  SURCHARGE.



   (A)   Where the approving authority determines that a surcharge is
applicable to a contributing industry on the basis of strength of waste
discharged, said surcharge shall be in full force and effect for a minimum
period of six months.



   (B)   When water and wastewater concentrations from an industrial
user exceed concentrations of BOD and TSS above a base level of 200
milligrams per liter (mg/l), a surcharge will be levied according to the
following formula:



   Cs = [(BOD - 200) A + B (TSS - 200)] x 8.34 x Vu



 



Cs =
 
Surcharge, in dollars, for wastewater of excessive concentration, $


DOD =
 
Concentration of five-day BOD from an industrial user above 200 mg/l


TSS =
 
Concentration of TSS from an industrial user above 200 mg/l


A =
 
Cost of BOD overloading above plant capacity, $/lb


B =
 
Cost of TSS overloading above plant capacity, $/lb


8.34 =
 
Conversion of mg/l to lb/million gallons of wastewater


Vu =
 
Volume of wastewater discharged in million gallons. Calculated by water usage
in million gallons multiplied by 0.75. (1,000,000 gallons - 1.0 MG)


The Vu calculation will be used unless a wastewater flow meter is used and
properly operated and maintained in accordance with the city’s wastewater
permit under item 5 of Monitoring and Reporting Requirements which states
“All automatic flow measuring and/or recording devices and/or totalizing
meters for measuring flows shall be accurately calibrated by a trained person
at plant start-up and as often thereafter as necessary to ensure accuracy,
but not less often than annually...”




 



   (C)   The approving authority may update, as deemed necessary, the
cost of BOD and TSS overloading above plant capacity.



(Prior Code, § 13.04.018)



§ 52.19  POWER TO ENTER PROPERTY.



   (A)   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the
city bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled to enter any
public or private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of
enforcing this chapter.



   (B)   Anyone acting under this authority shall observe the
establishment’s rules and regulations concerning safety, internal security
and fire protection.



   (C)   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the
city bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled to enter all
private property through which the city holds a negotiated easement for the
purpose of:



      (1)   Inspection, observation, measurement, sampling or repair;



      (2)   Maintenance of any portion of the sewer system lying
within the easements; and



      (3)   Conducting any other authorized activity.



   (D)   No person, acting under authority of this provision, may
inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining,
ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing
on the kind and source of discharge to the public sewers.



(Prior Code, § 13.04.019)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.20  AUTHORITY TO DISCONNECT SERVICE.



   (A)   The city may terminate water and wastewater disposal service
and disconnect an industrial customer from the system when:



      (1)   Acids or chemicals damaging to sewer lines or treatment
process are released to the sewer causing rapid deterioration of these
structures or interfering with proper conveyance and treatment of wastewater;



      (2)   A governmental agency informs the city that the effluent
from the wastewater treatment plant is no longer of a quality permitted for
discharge to a watercourse, and it is found that the customer is delivering
wastewater to the city’s system that cannot be sufficiently treated or
requires treatment that is not provided by the city as normal domestic
treatment; or



      (3)   The industrial customer:



         (a)   Discharges industrial waste or wastewater that is
in violation of the permit issued by the approving authority;



         (b)   Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable
rate in sufficient quantity to cause an imbalance in the wastewater treatment
system;



         (c)   Fails to pay monthly bills for water and sanitary
sewer services when due; or



         (d)   Repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes to public
sewers.



   (B)   If service is discontinued pursuant to division (A)(2) above,
the city shall:



      (1)   Disconnect the customer;



      (2)   Supply the customer with the governmental agency’s
report and provide the customer with all pertinent information; and



      (3)   Continue disconnection until such time as the industrial
customer provides additional pretreatment or other facilities designed to
remove the objectionable characteristics from his or her industrial wastes.



(Prior Code, § 13.04.020)



§ 52.21  NOTICE.



   The city shall serve persons discharging in violation of this chapter
with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a
reasonable time limit for satisfactory compliance.



(Prior Code, § 13.04.021)



§ 52.22  CONTINUING PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.



   No person may continue discharging in violation of this chapter beyond
the time limit provided in the notice.



(Prior Code, § 13.04.022)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.23  FAILURE TO PAY.



   In addition to sanctions provided for by this chapter, the city is
entitled to exercise sanctions provided for by the other ordinances of the
city for failure to pay the bill for water and sanitary sewer service when
due.



(Prior Code, § 13.04.024)



§ 52.24  CRIMINAL MISCHIEF.



   The city may pursue all criminal and civil remedies to which it is
entitled under authority of federal and state statutes and city ordinances
against a person negligently, willfully or maliciously causing loss by
tampering with or destroying public sewers or treatment facilities.



(Prior Code, § 13.04.025)



§ 52.25  PERMITS FOR DISCHARGE OF INDUSTRIAL WASTE.



   (A)   After March 1, 2002, no person shall deposit or discharge any
industrial waste into any sanitary sewer which leads to any of the city’s
treatment plants, or deposit or discharge any waste without first obtaining
an industrial waste permit.



   (B)   Permits shall be issued for a specified time period not to
exceed three years. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to
modification by the approving authority during the term of the permit as
limitations or requirements as identified in § 52.04 are modified or other
just cause exists. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his
or her permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of the change.



   (C)   Upon promulgation of categorical pretreatment standards,
permits of industries subject to the regulatory requirements of those
standards shall be revised and modified to require compliance with such
standard within the time frame prescribed by such standard. These permit
revisions and modifications will be issued within 180 days after the
effective date of the categorical pretreatment standard or 180 days after the
final administrative decision made upon the category determination submission
in accordance with federal directives, whichever is later.



   (D)   Permits to discharge industrial waste shall be issued to a
specific user for a specific operation. The discharge permit shall not be
reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different
premises or a new or changed operation without the approval of the approving
authority. Any succeeding owner or user shall comply with the terms and
conditions of the existing permit.



   (E)   Any person violating the following conditions of the permit,
or applicable state and federal regulations, is subject to having his or her
permit revoked in accordance with applicable local statutes and ordinances:



      (1)   Failure of the industrial user to factually report the
wastewater constituents and characteristics of his or her discharge;



      (2)   Failure of the industrial user to report significant
changes in operations, or wastewater constituents and characteristics;



      (3)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises
for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or



      (4)   Violations of the conditions of the permit.



(Prior Code, § 13.04.026)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.26  CONDITIONS TO PERMIT ISSUANCE.



   Permits granted after March 1, 2001, will be issued only after the
following conditions are met:



   (A)   New users:



      (1)   Formal application is submitted by the industrial user
on a form issued by the approving authority;



      (2)   Flow regulating and metering devices approved by the
approving authority;



      (3)   Estimated amount and strength of any wastes have been
agreed upon by both parties. When a discharger discharges 20,000 gallons or
more daily, strength shall be based on actual samples from the point or
points of discharge;



      (4)   Agreement forms have been completed by the discharger
agreeing to payment of any surcharges as required and/or agreeing to the
installation of pretreatment facilities, and operation and maintenance of any
pretreatment facilities where applicable; and



      (5)   All new dischargers shall provide a sampling point
subject to the provisions of § 52.14 and approval of the approving authority.



   (B)   Existing users:



      (1)   Formal application is submitted on a form issued by the
approving authority before January 1, 2002;



      (2)   Plans and specifications for flow regulating and
metering facilities have been approved by the approving authority;



      (3)   Estimated amount and strength of any wastes have been
agreed upon by both parties. When a discharger discharges 20,000 gallons or
more daily, strength shall be based on actual samples from the point or
points of discharge;



      (4)   Agreement forms have been completed by the discharger
agreeing to payment of any surcharges as required and/or agreeing to the
installation of pretreatment facilities by (date) and operation and
maintenance of any pretreatment facilities where applicable; and



      (5)   Provides a sampling point subject to the provisions of
§ 52.14 and approval of the approving authority.



(Prior Code, § 13.04.027)



§ 52.27  PRETREATMENT PROGRAM FEES.



   (A)   The approving authority may adopt charges and fees, which may
include:



      (1)   Fees for reimbursement and costs of setting up and
operating the city’s pretreatment program;



      (2)   Fees for monitoring, inspection and surveillance
procedures;



      (3)   Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and
construction;



      (4)   Fees for permit application; and



      (5)   Other fees as the approving authority may deem necessary
to carry out the requirements contained herein.



   (B)   These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this
chapter and are separate from all other fees chargeable by the city.



(Prior Code, § 13.04.028)



§ 52.28  SELF-REPORTING SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   In the case of accidental discharge, it is the responsibility
of the user to immediately telephone and notify the POTW of the incident to
enable POTW officials to take any protective and mitigative measures
necessary. Within five days following an accidental discharge, the user shall
submit to the approving authority a detailed written report describing the
cause of the discharge and the measures taken by the user to prevent similar
future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any
expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of
damage to the POTW, fish kills or any other damage to person or property; nor
shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or
other liability which may be imposed by the POTW or other applicable law.



   (B)   Industrial users that have national pretreatment requirements
promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency shall follow the
self-monitoring and reporting requirements published in the Federal Register.
To the extent permitted by the terms of a wastewater discharge permit issued
under this chapter, persons engaged in any other industry that discharges
wastes to the sanitary sewer system of the city that is regulated by this
chapter may, at the approving authority’s option, take periodic samples,
analyze the samples for the presence and/or quantity of pollutants listed in
this chapter and report the results to the approving authority.



   (C)   Baseline monitoring reports required from existing categorical
users are required. Within either 180 days after the effective date of a
categorical pretreatment standard or the final administrative decision on a
category determination under 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later,
existing categorical users currently discharging or scheduled to discharge to
the POTW shall be required to submit to the approving authority a report
which contains the information listed in this section.



   (D)   Baseline monitoring reports required from new sources of
categorical users are required. At least 90 days prior to commencement of
their discharge, new sources that become industrial users subsequent to the
promulgation of an applicable categorical standard shall be required to
submit to the city a report which contains the information required in this
section together with a report concerning the method of pretreatment it
intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards.



   (E)   Existing or new source categorical users described in this
section are required to submit the following information:



      (1)   The name and address of the facility including the name
of the owner, operator or manager of the facility;



      (2)   A list of any environmental control permits held by or
for the facility;



      (3)   A brief description of the nature, average rate of
production and Standard Industrial Classifications of the operations
conducted by such industrial user including, without limitations, a schematic
process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the
regulated processes;



      (4)   Information showing the measured average daily and
maximum daily flow in gallons per day to the POTW from regulated process
streams and other wastestreams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined
wastestream formula set out in 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(e);



      (5)   Pollutants from categorical users described in this
section shall:



         (a)   Identify the categorical pretreatment standards
applicable to each regulated process; and



         (b)   Submit the results of sampling and analysis
representative of daily operations in accordance with approved techniques set
out in 40 C.F.R. part 136 identifying the nature and concentration (and/or
mass, where required by the standard or by the city) of regulated pollutants
in the discharge from each regulated process including without limitations
instantaneous, daily maximum and long-term average or mass where required by
the approving authority.



      (6)   A statement reviewed by the industrial user’s
authorized representative signed and certified by a qualified professional in
accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(a)(2) indicating whether pretreatment
standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional
operation and maintenance and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet
the pretreatment standards and requirements.



      (7)   If additional pretreatment and/or operation and
maintenance will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest
schedule by which the industrial user will provide such additional
pretreatment and/or operations and maintenance. The completion date in this
schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the
applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this
section must meet the requirements set by the approving authority for the
achievement of compliance.



      (8)   The compliance schedule describe above shall include
progress increments or benchmarks in the form of dates for commencement and
completion of major events leading to construction and operation of
additional pretreatment facilities required for the user to meet the
applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing
preliminary and final plans, executing contracts, commencement of operation
and the like); provided, however, that no increment mentioned above shall
exceed three months with such progress reports to be provided no later than
14 days following each date in the schedule and the date of final compliance
and including a statement as to whether each progress increment was complied
with, the reason for delay, if any, and steps taken to return to the
established schedule.



      (9)   Within 90 days following the date for final compliance
with applicable categorical pretreatment standards or in the case of a new
source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the
POTW, any industrial user subject to such pretreatment standards or
requirements shall submit to the approving authority a report signed and
certified in accordance with the requirements of this chapter by the
authorized representative of the industrial user containing the information
required under division (E)(3) above. For industrial users subject to
equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the
procedures in 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(c), such report shall contain a reasonable
determination of the industrial user’s long-term production rate. For all
other industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards
expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production
(or other measure of operation), this report shall include the industrial
user’s actual production (or other measure of operation).



   (F)   Periodic reports required from significant industrial users
and other users:



      (1)   Any significant industrial user subject to a
pretreatment standard shall submit to the approving authority, at a frequency
determined by the approving authority, but in no case less than twice per
year, a written report, signed and certified by the authorized representative
of such user indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the
discharge that are limited by such pretreatment standards, the measured or
estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period and such
other and further information as the approving authority shall require; and



      (2)   All wastewater samples reflected in periodic reports
filed with the approving authority hereunder shall be representative of an
industrial user’s discharge. Toward this end, wastewater monitoring and
flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated and maintained in good
working order at all times. The failure of an industrial user to keep its
monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for a person
to claim that sample results are not representative of its discharge.



   (G)   If an industrial user subject to the reporting requirements in
this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the
approving authority using the approved methods described herein, the results
of this monitoring shall be included in the periodic reports to the approving
authority required hereunder.



   (H)   Any person discharging wastewater to the POTW or any portion
of the sanitary sewer is required to notify the approving authority of any
planned significant changes to its operations or wastewater treatment system
which might alter the nature, quality or volume of its wastewater at least 30
days before the change is implemented or in accordance with terms of its
wastewater discharge permit or the following standards and procedures,
whichever are more stringent.



      (1)   The approving authority may require that any person
discharging wastewater to the POTW to submit information as the approving
authority deems necessary to evaluate a changed condition in the operations
or wastewater treatment system of such person including, without limitation,
the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under this
chapter.



      (2)   Based on the change proposed, the approving authority
may issue a wastewater discharge permit or modify an existing wastewater
discharge permit under this chapter.



      (3)   No person shall implement a planned significant change
until the approving authority has responded to the industrial user’s notice
required under this section.



      (4)   For the purpose of this section, flow increases of 10%
or greater and/or the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants shall
be deemed a significant change.



   (I)   A person discharging wastewater containing prohibited waste in
violation of this chapter shall repeat such sampling and analysis and submit
the results of the repeat analysis to the approving authority within 30
calendar days after becoming aware of the violation.



   (J)   All sampling techniques and pollutant analyses used for
compilation of data required to be submitted as part of a wastewater
discharge permit application or report required under this chapter shall be
performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 C.F.R. part 136,
unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard.



   (K)   If 40 C.F.R. part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical
techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be
performed in accordance with procedures approved by the Environmental
Protection Agency. The approving authority may utilize grab sampling to
determine noncompliance with pretreatment standards.



(Prior Code, § 13.04.029)  (Ord. 01-12-15, passed 12-14-2001)  Penalty,
see § 52.99



§ 52.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   A person who continues prohibited discharges is guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction is punishable by a fine as provided in §
10.99 for each act of violation. Each day of violation shall constitute a
separate and distinct violation.



   (B)   In addition to proceeding under authority of division (A)
above, the city is entitled to pursue all other criminal and civil remedies
to which it is entitled under authority of federal and state statutes or
other ordinances against a person continuing prohibited discharges.



(Prior Code, § 13.04.023)



CHAPTER 53:  SOLID WASTE



Section



   53.01   Definitions



   53.02   Accumulation, collection generally



   53.03   Duty of owners, occupants of real property



   53.04   Containers required; specifications



   53.05   Location of containers



   53.06   Maintenance of containers



   53.07   Liquid garbage, trash to be drained



   53.08   Wrapping of certain wastes



   53.09   Disposition of material unsuitable for containers



   53.10   Disposition of heavy accumulations



   53.11   Disposition of wholesale accumulations



   53.12   Disposition of certain wastes



   53.13   Disposal in streets and the like



   53.14   Meddling, tampering with garbage



Statutory references:



   Municipal solid waste, see Tex. Health and Safety Code, Ch. 363



   Solid Waste Disposal Act, see Tex. Health and Safety Code, Ch. 361



§ 53.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GARBAGE.  All animal and vegetable matter, refuse, meat, vegetable and
fruit refuse, small dead animals and dead fowl.



   TRASH.  All tin cans, bottles, glass, scraps of iron, tin, wire or
other metals, rubbish, rags, old clothing, paper containers, pieces of wood,
boxes, barrels, crates, feathers and any other article to which the term
TRASH is usually applied.



(Prior Code, § 13.05.001)



§ 53.02  ACCUMULATION, COLLECTION GENERALLY.



   The emptying or disposing of any garbage or trash, or the accumulation
of such matter, in any place within the city is hereby prohibited. No one,
except the duly authorized agents of the city, shall collect garbage and
refuse or empty cans containing garbage or refuse substances or convey or
transport garbage or refuse substance on the streets, alleys and public
thoroughfares of the city, except as otherwise expressly provided in this
chapter.



(Prior Code, § 13.05.002)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 53.03  DUTY OF OWNERS, OCCUPANTS OF REAL PROPERTY.



   Every person owning, leasing, managing, operating, using or occupying
any building, apartment, house, structure, grounds or premises within the
city shall keep such building, apartment, house, structure, grounds or
premises clean, free and clear of all garbage or trash; manure from lots,
stables and poultry yards; all wastes, oils and greases of garages and
filling stations; and all other articles and accumulations that may cause
such premises to become insanitary or unsightly.



(Prior Code, § 13.05.003)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 53.04  CONTAINERS REQUIRED; SPECIFICATIONS.



   Containers used for garbage may be put out by the curb no earlier than
9:00 p.m. on the day before their assigned day of pickup and must be removed
by 10:00 p.m. on the day of pickup to a place behind the front of the
residence. The trash containers are not to be left in full view as to cause a
nuisance.



(Prior Code, § 13.05.004)



§ 53.05  LOCATION OF CONTAINERS.



   All garbage and trash containers shall be kept on the private premises
of the owner, lessee, tenant or occupant, and may be kept at some place in
the rear of the dwelling or back or side yard, easily accessible to the
garbage collector, but not on any sidewalk or street; provided, however, that
stores or shops in the business section of the city shall be permitted to
deposit trash in containers, cartons or boxes placed in public alleys or a
portion of the sidewalk near the place of business from which such trash
originates, but not so as to block or obstruct traffic, motor or pedestrian,
at or about the time for trash collection; provided, further, that no such
trash shall be permitted to accumulate and remain on such public property in
excess of 12 hours.



(Prior Code, § 13.05.005)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 53.06  MAINTENANCE OF CONTAINERS.



   Every garbage or trash container required by this chapter shall be
maintained in as sanitary condition as possible in view of the use to which
it is put and shall be thoroughly cleansed as needed by washing, scalding or
otherwise.



(Prior Code, § 13.05.006)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 53.07  LIQUID GARBAGE, TRASH TO BE DRAINED.



   Garbage and trash must be drained of liquid substances and sacked or
wrapped in paper before the parcel is placed in a container.



(Prior Code, § 13.05.008)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 53.08  WRAPPING OF CERTAIN WASTES.



   All animal matter that is subject to decomposition shall be well
wrapped in paper or other combustible material before being deposited in the
garbage container.



(Prior Code, § 13.05.009)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 53.09  DISPOSITION OF MATERIAL UNSUITABLE FOR CONTAINERS.



   Refuse which cannot be put in the garbage containers required by this
chapter, such as metal, wood, old furniture, scrap lumber and other debris,
shall be placed, ready for disposal, at the curbline; shall be securely
fastened; shall not be longer than three feet in length and shall not weigh
more than 35 pounds.



(Prior Code, § 13.05.010)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 53.10  DISPOSITION OF HEAVY ACCUMULATIONS.



   Heavy accumulations, such as brick, broken concrete, lumber, ashes,
dirt and plaster, sand or gravel, automobile frames and parts, dead trees,
and other bulky, heavy material shall be disposed of at the expense of owner
or person.



(Prior Code, § 13.05.011)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 53.11  DISPOSITION OF WHOLESALE ACCUMULATIONS.



   The places of wholesale accumulations, such as killing and dressing
plants for fowl, wholesale fruit and vegetable houses, where the daily
accumulation of garbage and trash is more than the ordinary quantities, shall
make special arrangements with the garbage collector for pickup of such
garbage and trash.



(Prior Code, § 13.05.012)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 53.12  DISPOSITION OF CERTAIN WASTES.



   Manure from cow lots, horse stables, poultry yards, pigeon lofts and
waste oils from garages or filling stations shall be disposed of at the
expense of the party responsible.



(Prior Code, § 13.05.013)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 53.13  DISPOSAL IN STREETS AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or dispose of any
garbage or trash in or upon any street, alley or sidewalk within the city.



   (B)   Every owner or operator of any premises shall keep the alleys,
streets and sidewalks abutting on such premises free and clear of all such
garbage and trash.



(Prior Code, § 13.05.014)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 53.14  MEDDLING, TAMPERING WITH GARBAGE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to meddle or tamper with any
garbage or trash containers, or with any garbage or trash, or to in any
manner pilfer with such containers, or with such garbage or trash, or to
scatter the contents thereof in any street, alley, sidewalk or premises in
the city.



(Prior Code, § 13.05.015)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 54:  WATER CONSERVATION AND DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLANS



Section




Water Conservation Plan




   54.01   Utility evaluation



   54.02   Water conservation plan



   54.03   Plumbing Codes



   54.04   Retrofit program



   54.05   Water rate structure



   54.06   Metering



   54.07   Water conservation landscaping



   54.08   Leak detection and repair



   54.09   Implementation and enforcement



   54.10   Recycling and reuse



   54.11   Conservation plan annual report



   54.12   Five- and ten-year targets and goals




Drought Contingency Plan




   54.25   Declaration of policy, purpose and intent



   54.26   Public involvement



   54.27   Public education



   54.28   Coordination with regional water planning groups



   54.29   Authorization



   54.30   Applicability



   54.31   Definitions



   54.32   Criteria for initiation and termination of drought response
stages



   54.33   Drought response stages



   54.34   Enforcement



   54.35   Variances



 



   54.99   Penalty



Statutory reference:



   Drought contingency plans, see Tex. Water Code, § 11.1272




WATER CONSERVATION PLAN




§ 54.01  UTILITY EVALUATION.



   (A)   The city, in an effort to conserve the treated water supply
available to the city, has initiated a plan to reduce the loss of treated
water delivered within its system, which includes meter testing and line
losses in the production and distribution system. The city’s goal is a 5%
reduction allowing for new additions and users over a period of time.



   (B)   The city serves approximately 5,099 customers (active
accounts) in the incorporated city limits. The major water users, outside of
domestic use, would be the gas and oil industries. The city’s water source
is supplied from eight wells in the Wilcox Aquifer and a 4.5 million gallons
a day surface water treatment plant.



   (C)   The city, from and after the effective date of this
subchapter, will implement the following water conservation plan:



      (1)   Population of service area: 11,273;



      (2)   Area of service area: 11 square miles;



      (3)   Number of connections in service area:



 


Commercial

 

642 meters




Industrial

 

9 meters




Residential

 

3,923 meters




 



      (4)   Water use information:



         (a)   Water production (five years):



 

Average production
 
847,193,000 gallons per year



 



         (b)   Average monthly water production (five years):



 

Gallons per month
 
70,599,000 gallons


Gallons per day
 
2,353,000 gallons



 



         (c)   Monthly production in millions of gallons (2004 to
2008):



 



January
 

55.133

 

56.402

 

71.325

 

63.537

 

61.443



February
 

54.197

 

50.390

 

61.182

 

60.616

 

62.450



March
 

59.649

 

62.090

 

67.304

 

71.841

 

63.274



April
 

60.284

 

65.702

 

73.672

 

74.631

 

33.654



May
 

70.479

 

85.683

 

79.732

 

75.285

 

52.965



June
 

64.112

 

93.047

 

91.853

 

72.366

 

55.267



July
 

87.071

 

86.151

 

103.49

 

70.701

 

73.965



August
 

78.293

 

100.50

 

109.56

 

95.342

 

74.742



September
 

73.592

 

99.782

 

86.515

 

86.192

 

53.898



October
 

60.451

 

83.558

 

75.796

 

80.097

 

75.950



November
 

57.698

 

66.144

 

64.010

 

69.561

 

60.837



December
 

58.466

 

70.390

 

64.572

 

65.106

 

34.051





 



         (d)   Largest recorded daily use (August 1, 1998):
5,610,000 gallons.



      (5)   Safe annual yield of water supply: 2,800,000,000 gallons;



      (6)   Maximum daily capacity of system: 8,700,000 gallons.
Optimum daily capacity of system: 6,600,000 gallons;



      (7)   Seven highest volume customers (2008) gallons per year:



         (a)   Bradshaw Jail (Correction Corporation of America):
56,961,600 gallons;



         (b)   Management Training Center of East Texas:
52,285,300 gallons;



         (c)   Sadler’s Bar-B-Que: 16,980,000 gallons;



         (d)   Henderson Memorial Hospital: 11,189,300 gallons;



         (e)   Clements Fluids: 14,879,400 gallons;



         (f)   Shale Tank Trucks: 11,346,400 gallons; and



         (g)   Henderson Health Rehab: 5,478,300 gallons.



      (8)   Percent of connection in system metered:



 

Residential
 

100%



Commercial
 

100%



Industrial
 

100%




 



      (9)   Revenues from water sales (five years):



 


Average revenue from sales

 
$2,457,158



 



      (10)   Applicable state, federal or other regulations:



         (a)   As a municipal subdivision of the state, the city
must abide by the rules of a public water supplier; and



         (b)   These include:



            1.   State Commission on Environmental Quality;



            2.   State Department of Health; and



            3.   Environmental Protection Agency.



(Prior Code, § 13.06.031)



§ 54.02  WATER CONSERVATION PLAN.



   (A)   (1)   The city promotes water conservation by informing the
public of ways to conserve water.



      (2)   The following methods will be used to inform water users:



         (a)   Newspaper articles, one feature article per year
minimum, in the Henderson Daily News;



         (b)   Direct mailings, in the first year of production,
there will be three direct mailings covering areas of conservation on indoor
water use, outdoor and lawn watering and plumbing retrofit information. In
each subsequent year, there will be two more direct mailings covering water
conservation or specific aspects as required; and



         (c)   Printed handouts and direct communication with
customers, new and existing, using various pamphlets and printed material of
the state water development board, American Water Works Association, Texas
Water Utilities Association and information created in-house will be given to
all new customers when they request service; and existing customers when they
visit City Hall. Distribution will also be made at city-sponsored seminars.



   (B)   Suggestions on ways to save water which may be included in
public information are listed below:



      (1)   Bathroom:



         (a)   Take a shower instead of a tub bath; showers use
less water;



         (b)   Install a low-flow shower head which restricts
water flow at 60 pounds per square inch to not more than three gallons per
minute;



         (c)   Take short showers and install a cut-off valve or
turn the water back on again to rinse;



         (d)   Do not use hot water when cold will do; water and
energy can be saved by washing hands with soap and cold water; hot water
should only be added if hands are especially dirty;



         (e)   Reduce the level of the water in the bathtub by
one or two inches if shower is not available;



         (f)   Turn off water when brushing teeth until time to
rinse;



         (g)   Do not let water run when washing hands; instead,
hand should be wet, water should be turned off while scrubbing, and water
should be on again to rinse; consider installing a cut-off valve on the
faucet;



         (h)   Shampoo hair in shower; it takes only a little
more water than is used to shampoo during a bath and much less than
shampooing and bathing separately;



         (i)   Test toilets for leaks; to test, add a few drops
of food coloring to water in the tank do not flush; if coloring appears in
the bowl within a few minutes, fixture needs adjustment or repair;



         (j)   Hold hot water in the basin when shaving instead
of letting faucet continue to run;



         (k)   Use a toilet tank displacement device to reduce
the amount of water in tank but still provide enough for flushing; a
one-gallon plastic milk bottle can be filled with stones or water, recapped
and placed in the tank (bricks are not recommended for this purpose as the
eventually crumble and could damage the working mechanism); these devices
should not be used with new low-volume toilets;



         (l)   Install faucet aerators to reduce consumption;



         (m)   Never use toilet to dispose of tissues, cigarette
butts or other trash; this is a waste of water and places unnecessary load on
treatment plants; and



         (n)   Install new low-volume flush toilet when building
a new home or remodeling a bathroom.



      (2)   Kitchen:



         (a)   Use a pan of water (or place a stopper in the
sink) for rinsing pots and pans when cooking rather than turning on the
faucet each time for rinsing items;



         (b)   Never run a dishwasher without a full load; this
saves water, expensive detergent and energy;



         (c)   Use garbage disposal sparingly; never for just a
few scraps;



         (d)   Keep a container of drinking water in the
refrigerator; running from tap until cool is a waste;



         (e)   Use a small pan of cold water to clean vegetables
rather than letting the faucet run;



         (f)   Use only a small amount of water in your pots and
use a lid for cooking most food; this method will save water and food is more
nutritious; and



         (g)   Use a pan of water for rinsing dishes when
hand-washing rather than running the faucet.



      (3)   Laundry:



         (a)   Wash only a full load in washing machine;



         (b)   Use lowest possible water level setting for light
loads; and



         (c)   Use cold water as often as possible; save hot
water for uses cold water cannot serve.



      (4)   Appliances and plumbing:



         (a)   Check water requirements of any new appliance as
models and brands may vary; some will use less water;



         (b)   Check all water line connections and faucets for
leaks; your money may be going down the drain;



         (c)   Learn to replace faucet washers to correct drips
promptly; it is easy, costs very little and saves in plumbing and utility
bills;



         (d)   Check for water leakage between water meter and
the house; if indoor and outdoor faucets are all turned off, the meter should
not run; if it does, a leak probably exists and needs to be found;



         (e)   Insulate all hot water pipes to avoid delays (and
wasted water) while waiting for water to get hot;



         (f)   Be sure hot water heater thermostat isn’t set
too high; hot settings result in waste of energy and water as it may be mixed
with cold water before use; and



         (g)   Use a moisture meter to determine when house
plants need water; more plants die from overwatering than from being on the
dry side.



      (5)   Out-of-door use:



         (a)   Water lawn early in the morning during hot summer
months to minimize evaporation;



         (b)   Use a sprinkler which produces large drops rather
than a mist to avoid evaporation;



         (c)   Turn soaker hoses so holes are on bottom to avoid
evaporation;



         (d)   Water slowly for better absorption; never in high
winds;



         (e)   Do not water streets, walks or driveways;



         (f)   Condition soil with compost before planting grass
or flower beds so water will soak in, not run off;



         (g)   Fertilize lawn at least twice a year for root
stimulation; the better the root system, the less water it will require;



         (h)   Learn to know when grass needs watering; if it has
turned a dull gray-green, or if footprints remain visible, it is time to
water;



         (i)   Do not water too frequently; too much water can
overload the soil so air cannot get to the roots and can encourage plant
diseases;



         (j)   Do not over-water; soil can absorb only so much
moisture, the rest simply runs off; one and one-half inch of water applied
once a week will keep most grasses alive;



         (k)   Operate automatic sprinkler system only when the
demand on water supply is lowest; set system to operate between 12:30 a.m.
and 4:00 a.m.;



         (l)   Do not “scalp” lawn when mowing during hot
months as taller grass holds moisture better;



         (m)   Use watering can or hand-water with hose in small
areas of lawn that need more frequent watering;



         (n)   Learn what types of grasses, shrubbery and plants
do best in the area and in which part of the lawn and plant accordingly;



         (o)   Consider decorating areas of the lawn with rocks,
gravel, wood chips or other materials that require no water at all;



         (p)   Do not “sweep” walks and driveways with a
water hose; use a broom or rake instead; and



         (q)   Use a bucket of soapy water and use the hose only
for rinsing when washing vehicles.



(Prior Code, § 13.06.032)



§ 54.03  PLUMBING CODES.



   The city has adopted the 2012 International Building Code. This Code
prescribes 1.6 gallons per flushing cycle on toilets, and insulated hot water
pipes. These Code provisions are enforced by the City Code Enforcement
Department, which is authorized to issue citations for violations. A
violation of the code carries a fine of up to $2,000 for each violation and
every day is a separate violation; provided that no penalty shall be greater
or less than the penalty provided under state law.



(Prior Code, § 13.06.033)



§ 54.04  RETROFIT PROGRAM.



   Customers in existing buildings which do not have water saving devices
will be encouraged to replace their old plumbing fixtures as the need arises.
The advertising program will help inform them of the advantages of installing
water saving devices. The current inverted rate structure should encourage
them to be conservative in their water use. This type of rate has been in
force since October 1, 1992.



(Prior Code, § 13.06.034)



§ 54.05  WATER RATE STRUCTURE.



   A water rate structure which encourages water conservation has been
implemented.



(Prior Code, § 13.06.035)



§ 54.06  METERING.



   (A)   The city currently meters 100% of the customers’ usage. The
city has a policy of rereading and then testing all meters which appear to
have abnormally high or low water usage. Incorporated in the water
conservation plan, the city will set up the following meter testing schedule:



      (1)   Well production meters: test every three years;



      (2)   Surface water treatment plant production meter: test
every year; and



      (3)   Meters six inch and smaller: test or replace when
constantly high or constantly low readings are observed.



   (B)   The city currently uses a computer system which handles all
billing requirements and generates water use reports. The computer easily
identifies dead meters, any high or low rate users and keeps track of all
water usage.



(Prior Code, § 13.06.036)



§ 54.07  WATER CONSERVATION LANDSCAPING.



   The advertising program will include suggestions on landscaping and
irrigation procedures which will save water usage and money. The current rate
structure should continue to encourage customers to save water outdoors.



(Prior Code, § 13.06.037)



§ 54.08  LEAK DETECTION AND REPAIR.



   (A)   The city currently has a leak detection program which will be
maintained.



   (B)   The program includes:



      (1)   Accounting for water by comparing water production with
water billed, allowing for internal system use such as back flushing filter,
over-flowing elevated towers and general in-flushing;



      (2)   Constant monitoring of elevated storage tanks which
identify major water main breaks;



      (3)   Visual inspection by meter readers and by city employees
who keep a constant watch out for abnormal conditions suggesting leaks;



      (4)   An adequate maintenance staff which is available to
repair any leak; and



      (5)   The city’s customer service personnel are available to
assist customers with leak detection on their premises as well as observing
all city distribution facilities.



(Prior Code, § 13.06.038)



§ 54.09  IMPLEMENTATION AND ENFORCEMENT.



   The water conservation plan will be enforced by the following methods.



   (A)   New service taps will not be given to customers who do not
meet the requirements of the water conservation plumbing fixtures codes.



   (B)   The city’s Code Enforcement Department will handle the
enforcement as described in the Plumbing Code of the water conservation plan,
to ensure new buildings are installing the plumbing fixtures that are
proposed in the service tap application, along with suggestions to citizens
and businesses to use the water conservation fixtures when replacing old
fixtures.



   (C)   The current rate structure should encourage retrofitting of
old plumbing fixtures which are using large amounts of water: people will
realize that replacing their fixtures will save them money on their bill
(both water and sewer).



(Prior Code, § 13.06.039)



§ 54.10  RECYCLING AND REUSE.



   The city has two wastewater plants. Effluent from these plants is not
currently being reused as no economically feasible application exists. The
city, however, will continue to study the possibilities of utilizing this
potential water source.



(Prior Code, § 13.06.040)



§ 54.11  CONSERVATION PLAN ANNUAL REPORT.



   (A)   The city will maintain a file which addresses the progress and
effectiveness of the water conservation plan.



   (B)   The report will include:



      (1)   Public information which has been issued;



      (2)   Public response; and



      (3)   Effectiveness of plan in reducing water use by providing
consumption data.



(Prior Code, § 13.06.041)



§ 54.12  FIVE- AND TEN-YEAR TARGETS AND GOALS.



   (A)   Five-year target and goals. The city’s current municipal
usage is 218 gallons per capita per day and water loss is 18 gallons per
capita per day. The city’s goal is to achieve a municipal usage of 210
gallons per capita per day and water loss of 15 gallons per capita per day



   (B)   Ten-year target and goals. The city’s goals are to achieve a
municipal usage of 200 gallons per capita per day and water loss of 12
gallons per capita per day.



(Prior Code, § 13.06.042)  (Ord. 10-05-08, passed 5-11-2010)




DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLAN




§ 54.25  DECLARATION OF POLICY, PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   In order to conserve the available water supply and protect
the integrity of the city water supply facilities, with particular regard for
domestic water use, sanitation and fire protection, and to protect and
preserve public health, welfare and safety and minimize the adverse impacts
of water supply shortage or other water supply emergency conditions, the city
hereby adopts the following regulations and restrictions on the delivery and
consumption of water.



   (B)   Water uses regulated or prohibited under this drought
contingency plan (the plan) are considered to be nonessential and
continuation of such uses during times of water shortage or other emergency
water supply condition are deemed to constitute a waste of water which
subjects the offender(s) to penalties as defined in § 54.34 of this plan.



(Prior Code, § 13.06.071)



§ 54.26  PUBLIC INVOLVEMENT.



   Opportunity for the public to provide input into the preparation of the
plan was provided by the city by means of a public meeting held at the City
Hall May 14, 2002, at 9:00 a.m. to accept input on the plan. Notices were
published in the local newspaper notifying the public of the meeting to
discuss the plan on Sunday, May 12, 2002.



(Prior Code, § 13.06.072)



§ 54.27  PUBLIC EDUCATION.



   The city will periodically provide the public with information about
the plan, including information about the conditions under which each stage
of the plan is to be initiated or terminated and the drought response
measures to be implemented in each stage. This information will be provided
by means of public events and newspaper.



(Prior Code, § 13.06.073)



§ 54.28  COORDINATION WITH REGIONAL WATER PLANNING GROUPS.



   The service area of the city is located within the East Texas Regional
Water Planning Area and the city has provided a copy of this plan to the East
Texas Regional Water Planning Group.



(Prior Code, § 13.06.074)



§ 54.29  AUTHORIZATION.



   The Mayor or his or her designee is hereby authorized and directed to
implement the applicable provisions of this plan upon determination that such
implementation is necessary to protect public health, safety and welfare. The
Mayor, or his or her designee, shall have the authority to initiate or
terminate drought or other water supply emergency response measures as
described in the plan.



(Prior Code, § 13.06.075)



§ 54.30  APPLICABILITY.



   The provisions of this plan shall apply to all persons, customers and
property utilizing water provided by the city. The terms PERSON and CUSTOMER
as used in the plan include individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations and all other legal entities.



(Prior Code, § 13.06.076)



§ 54.31  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AESTHETIC WATER USE.  Water use for ornamental or decorative purposes
such as fountains, reflecting pools and water gardens.



   COMMERCIAL AND INSTITUTIONAL WATER USE.  Water use which is integral
to the operation of commercial and nonprofit establishments and governmental
entities such as retail establishments, hotels and motels, restaurants and
office buildings.



   CONSERVATION.  Those practices, techniques and technologies that
reduce the consumption of water, reduce the loss or waste of water, improve
the efficiency in the use of water or increase the recycling and reuse of
water so that a supply is conserved and made available for future or
alternative uses.



   CUSTOMER.  Any person, company or organization using water supplied by
the city.



   DOMESTIC WATER USE.  Water use for personal needs or for household or
sanitary purposes such as drinking, bathing, cooking, sanitation or for
cleaning a residence, business, industry or institution.



   EVEN NUMBER ADDRESS.  Street addresses, box number or rural postal
route numbers ending in 0, 2, 4, 6 or 8 and locations without addresses.



   INDUSTRIAL WATER USE.  The use of water in processes designed to
convert materials of lower value into forms having greater usability and
value.



   LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION USE.  Water used for the irrigation and
maintenance of landscaped areas, whether publicly or privately owned,
including residential and commercial lawns, gardens, golf courses, parks and
rights-of-way and medians.



   NONESSENTIAL WATER USE.  Water uses that are not essential nor
required for the protection of public, health, safety and welfare, including:



      (1)   Irrigation of landscaped areas, including parks,
athletic fields and golf courses, except otherwise provided under this plan;



      (2)   Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat,
trailer, airplane or other vehicle;



      (3)   Use of water to wash down any sidewalks, walkways,
driveways, parking lots, tennis courts or other hard-surfaced areas;



      (4)   Use of water to wash down buildings or structures for
purposes other than immediate fire protection;



      (5)   Flushing gutters or permitting water to run or
accumulate in any gutter or street;



      (6)   Use of water to fill, refill or add to any indoor or
outdoor swimming pools or jacuzzi-type pools;



      (7)   Use of water in a fountain or pond for aesthetic or
scenic purposes except where necessary to support aquatic life;



      (8)   Failure to repair a controllable leak(s) within a
reasonable period after having been given notice directing the repair of such
leak(s); and



      (9)   Use of water from hydrants for construction purposes or
any other purposes other than fire fighting.



   ODD NUMBERED ADDRESSES.  Street addresses, box numbers or rural postal
route numbers ending in 1, 3, 5, 7 or 9.



(Prior Code, § 13.06.077)



§ 54.32  CRITERIA FOR INITIATION AND TERMINATION OF DROUGHT RESPONSE STAGES.



   The Mayor or his or her designee shall monitor water supply and/or
demand conditions on a weekly basis and shall determine when conditions
warrant initiation or termination of each stage of the plan, that is, when
the specified “triggers” are reached.



   (A)   Stage 1 triggers - mild water shortage conditions.



      (1)   Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be
requested to voluntarily conserve water and adhere to the prescribed
restrictions on certain water uses, defined in § 54.31, when the total daily
water demand equals or exceeds six million gallons or 70% of system capacity,
whichever is the lesser, for seven consecutive days.



      (2)   Requirements for termination. Stage 1 of the plan may be
rescinded when the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to
exist for a period of seven consecutive days.



   (B)   Stage 2 triggers - moderate water shortage conditions.



      (1)   Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be required
to comply with the requirements and restrictions on certain nonessential
water uses provided in § 54.33 when the total daily water demand equals or
exceeds seven million gallons, or 80% of system capacity, whichever is the
lesser, for seven consecutive days.



      (2)   Requirements for termination. Stage 2 of the plan may be
rescinded when all of the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased
to exist for a period of seven consecutive days.



   (C)   Stage 3 triggers - severe water shortage conditions.



      (1)   Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be required
to comply with the requirements and restrictions on certain nonessential
water uses for stage 3 of this plan when total daily water demand equals or
exceeds the capabilities of the daily water production (estimated at eight
million gallons per day, or 90% or greater of system capacity, whichever is
the lesser), or the imminent or actual failure of a major water system
component which could cause an immediate health or safety hazard.



      (2)   Requirements for termination. Stage 3 of the plan may be
rescinded when all of the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased
to exist for a period of four consecutive days. Upon termination of stage 3,
stage 2 becomes operative.



(Prior Code, § 13.06.078)



§ 54.33  DROUGHT RESPONSE STAGES.



   (A)   Notification procedures. The Mayor, or his or her designee,
shall monitor water supply and/or demand conditions on a daily basis and, in
accordance with the triggering criteria set forth in § 54.32, shall
determine that a mild, moderate or severe water shortage condition exists and
shall implement the following notification procedures.



      (1)   Notification of the public. The Mayor or his or her
designee shall notify the public by means of:



         (a)   Publication in the local newspaper;



         (b)   Signs posted in public places;



         (c)   Local radio stations; and



         (d)   Local televisions stations.



      (2)   Additional notification. The Mayor or his or her
designee shall notify directly, or cause to be notified directly, the
following individuals and entities:



         (a)   City Council;



         (b)   Fire Chief;



         (c)   County Judge;



         (d)   Texas Natural Resources Conservation Commission;



         (e)   Major water users; and



         (f)   Public Works Director.



   (B)   Stage 1 response - mild water shortage conditions.



      (1)   Goal: achieve a voluntary 10% reduction in daily water
demand.



      (2)   Supply management measures: reduce flushing water mains
by 20%.



      (3)   Voluntary water use restrictions.



         (a)   Water customers are requested to voluntarily limit
the irrigation of landscaped areas to Sundays and Thursdays for customers
with a street address ending in an even number, Saturdays and Wednesdays for
water customers with a street address ending in an odd number, and to
irrigate landscapes only between the hours of 12:00 midnight until 10:00 a.m.
and between 8:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight on designated watering days;
however, irrigation of landscaped areas is permitted at anytime if it is by
means of a handheld hose, and faucet filled bucket or watering can of five
gallons or less, or drip irrigation system.



         (b)   Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike,
boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle is prohibited except between the
hours of 12:00 midnight and 10:00 a.m. and between 8:00 p.m. and 12:00
midnight. Such washing, when allowed, shall be done with a handheld hose
equipped with a positive shutoff nozzle for quick rises. Vehicle washing may
be done at any time on the immediate premises of a commercial car wash or
commercial service station. Further, such washing may be exempted from these
regulations if the health, safety and welfare of the public is contingent
upon frequent vehicle cleansing, such as garbage trucks and vehicles used to
transport food and perishables.



         (c)   Use of water to fill, refill or add to any indoor
of outdoor swimming pools, wading pools or Jacuzzi-type pools is prohibited
except on designated watering days between the hours of 12:00 midnight and
10:00 a.m. and between 8:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight.



         (d)   Operation of any ornamental fountain or pond for
aesthetic or scenic purposes is prohibited except where necessary to support
aquatic life or where such fountains or ponds are equipped with a
recirculation system.



         (e)   Use of water from hydrants shall be limited to
firefighting, related activities or other activities necessary to maintain
public health, safety and welfare, except that use of water from designated
fire hydrants for construction purposes may be allowed under special permit
from the city.



         (f)   Use of water for the irrigation of golf course
greens, tees and fairways is prohibited except on designated water days
between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 10:00 a.m. and between 8:00 p.m. and
12:00 midnight; however, if the golf course utilizes a water source or other
than that provided by the city, the facility shall not be subject to these
regulations.



         (g)   All restaurants are prohibited from serving water
to patrons except upon request of the patron.



         (h)   The following uses of water are defined as
nonessential and are prohibited:



            1.   Wash down of any sidewalks, walkways,
driveways, parking lots, tennis courts or other hard-surfaced areas;



            2.   Use of water to wash down buildings or
structures for purposes other than immediate fire protection;



            3.   Use of water for dust control;



            4.   Flushing gutters or permitting water to run
or accumulate in any gutter or street; and



            5.   Failure to repair a controllable leak(s)
within a reasonable period after having been given notice directing the
repair of such leak(s).



   (C)   Stage 2 response - moderate water shortage conditions.



      (1)   Goal: achieve a 10% reduction in daily water demand.



      (2)   Supply management measures: reduce flushing water mains
by 50%.



      (3)   Water use restrictions: under threat of penalty for
violation, the following water use restrictions shall apply to all persons.



         (a)   Irrigation of landscaped areas with hose-end
sprinklers or automatic irrigation systems shall be limited to Sundays and
Thursdays for customers with a street address ending in an even number,
Saturdays and Wednesdays for water customers with a street address ending in
an odd number, and to irrigation of landscaped areas is further limited to
the hours of 12:00 midnight until 10:00 a.m. and between 8:00 p.m. and 12:00
midnight on designated watering days; however, irrigation of landscaped areas
is permitted at anytime if it is by means of a handheld hose, and faucet
filled bucket or watering can of five gallons or less, or drip irrigation
system.



         (b)   Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike,
boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle is prohibited except on designated
watering days between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 10:00 a.m. and between
8:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight. Such washing, when allowed, shall be done with
a handheld hose equipped with a positive shutoff nozzle for quick rises.
Vehicle washing may be done at any time on the immediate premises of a
commercial car wash or commercial service station. Further, such washing may
be exempted from these regulations if the health, safety and welfare of the
public is contingent upon frequent vehicle cleansing, such as garbage trucks
and vehicles used to transport food and perishables.



         (c)   Use of water to fill, refill or add to any indoor
or outdoor swimming pools, wading pools or Jacuzzi-type pools is prohibited
except on designated watering days between the hours of 12:00 midnight and
10:00 a.m. and between 8:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight.



         (d)   Operation of any ornamental fountain or pond for
aesthetic or scenic purposes is prohibited except where necessary to support
aquatic life or where such fountains or ponds are equipped with a
recirculation system.



         (e)   Use of water from hydrants shall be limited to
firefighting, related activities or other activities necessary to maintain
public health, safety and welfare, except that use of water from designated
fire hydrants for construction purposes may be allowed under special permit
from the city.



         (f)   Use of water for the irrigation of golf course
greens, tees and fairways is prohibited except on designated water days
between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 10:00 a.m. and between 8:00 p.m. and
12:00 midnight; however, if the golf course utilizes a water source or other
than that provided by the city, the facility shall not be subject to these
regulations



         (g)   All restaurants are prohibited from serving water
to patrons except upon request of the patron.



         (h)   The following uses of water are defined as
nonessential and are prohibited:



            1.   Wash down of any sidewalks, walkways,
driveways, parking lots, tennis courts or other hard-surfaced areas;



            2.   Use of water to wash down buildings or
structures for purposes other than immediate fire protection;



            3.   Use of water for dust control;



            4.   Flushing gutters or permitting water to run
or accumulate in any gutter or street; and



            5.   Failure to repair a controllable leak(s)
within a reasonable period after having been given notice directing the
repair of such leak(s).



   (D)   Stage 3 response - severe water shortage conditions.



      (1)   Goal: maintain a 10% cushion between daily water demand
and system capacity.



      (2)   Supply management measures: reduce flushing water mains
to immediate water quality measures only and reduced irrigation of public
landscaped areas. In extreme circumstances water may be trucked or bottled
water delivered to a location inside the city accessible to the public.



      (3)   Water use restrictions: all requirements of stage 2
shall remain in effect during stage 3 except:



         (a)   Irrigation of landscaped areas shall be limited to
designated watering days between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 10:00 a.m.
and 8:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight and shall be by means of handheld hoses,
handheld buckets, drip irrigation or permanently installed automatic
sprinkler system only. The use of hose-end sprinklers is prohibited at all
times;



         (b)   The watering of golf course tees is prohibited
unless the golf course utilizes a water source other than that provided by
the city; and



         (c)   The use of water for construction purposes from
designated fire hydrants under special permit is to be discontinued.



(Prior Code, § 13.06.079)



§ 54.34  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly or intentionally allow the use of
water from the city for residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural,
governmental or any other purpose in a manner contrary to any provision of
this plan.



   (B)   Any person, including a person classified as a water customer
of the city, in apparent control of the property where a violation occurs or
originates shall be presumed to be the violator, and proof that the violation
occurred on the person’s property shall constitute a rebuttable presumption
that the person in apparent control of the property committed the violation,
but any such person shall have the right to show that he or she did not
commit the violation. Parents shall be presumed to be responsible for
violations of their minor children.



   (C)   Any employee of the city, police officer, or other city
employee designated by the Mayor, may issue a citation to a person he or she
reasonably believes to be in violation of this subchapter.



      (1)   The citation shall be prepared in duplicate and shall
contain the name and address of the alleged violator, the offense charged,
and shall direct him or her to appear in the Municipal Court on the date
shown on the citation for which the date shall not be less than three days
nor more that five days from the date the citation was issued.



      (2)   If the alleged violator fails to appear in Municipal
Court, a warrant for his or her arrest may be issued.



      (3)   A summons to appear may be issued in lieu of an arrest
warrant.



(Prior Code, § 13.06.080)  Penalty, see § 54.99



§ 54.35  VARIANCES.



   (A)   The Mayor, or his or her designee, may, in writing, grant
temporary variance for existing water uses otherwise prohibited under this
plan if it is determined that failure to grant such variance would cause an
emergency condition adversely affecting the health, sanitation or fire
protection for the public or the person requesting such variance and if one
or more of the following conditions are met:



      (1)   Compliance with this plan cannot be technically
accomplished during the duration of the water supply shortage or other
condition for which the plan is in effect; and



      (2)   Alternative methods can be implemented which will
achieve the same level of reduction in water use.



   (B)   (1)   Persons requesting an exemption from the provisions
of this subchapter shall file a petition for variance with the city within
five days after the plan or a particular drought response stage has been
invoked.



      (2)   All petitions for variances shall be reviewed by the
Mayor, or his or her designee, and shall include the following:



         (a)   Name and address of the petitioner(s);



         (b)   Purpose of water use;



         (c)   Specific provision(s) of the plan from which the
petitioner is requesting relief;



         (d)   Detailed statement as to how the specific
provision of the plan adversely affects the petitioner or what damage or harm
will occur to the petitioner or others if the petitioner complies with this
subchapter;



         (e)   Description of the relief requested;



         (f)   Period of time for which the variance is sought;



         (g)   Alternative water use restrictions or other
measures the petitioner is taking or proposes to take to meet the intent of
this plan and the compliance date; and



         (h)   Other pertinent information.



   (C)   Variances granted by the city shall be subject to the
following conditions, unless waived or modified by the Mayor, or his or her
designee:



      (1)   Variances granted shall include a timetable for
compliance; and



      (2)   Variances granted shall expire when the plan is no
longer in effect, unless the petitioner has failed to meet specified
requirements.



   (D)   No variances shall be retroactive or otherwise justify any
violation of this plan occurring prior to the issuance of the variance.



(Prior Code, § 13.06.081)  (Ord. 09-02-01, passed 2-24-2009)



§ 54.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Any person who violates §§ 54.25 through 54.35 is guilty of
a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not less
that $200 for the first violation and not less than $1,000 for the second
violation. If a person is convicted of three or more distinct violations of
this plan, the Mayor, or his or her designee shall, upon due notice to the
customer, be authorized to discontinue water service to the premises where
such violations occur. Services discontinued under such circumstances shall
be restored only upon payment of all related fines and a reconnect charge,
hereby established at $45. In addition, suitable assurance must be given to
the Mayor, or his or her designee, that the same action shall not be repeated
while the plan is in effect. Compliance with this plan may also be sought
through injunctive relief in the District Court.



(Prior Code, § 13.06.080)



CHAPTER 55:  CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL



Section



   55.01   Generally



   55.02   Condensing, cooling or industrial process or other system of
nonpotable usage



   55.03   Overhead bulk water dispensing stations



   55.04   Backflow prevention assembly installation, testing and
maintenance



   55.05   Customer service inspections



   55.06   Enforcement



Statutory references:



   Backflow prevention for water closet plumbing fixtures or other
equipment, see Tex. Occupations Code, § 1301.501



   Endorsement of water supply protection specialists, see Tex.
Occupations Code, § 1301.357



   Licensing and registration of persons who perform duties relating to
public water supplies, see Tex. Health and Safety Code, § 341.034 and Tex.
Water Code, Ch. 37



§ 55.01  GENERALLY.



   (A)   No water service connection shall be made, or continued where
there is existing service, to any establishment or residence where a
potential or actual contamination hazard exists unless the city water supply
is protected from contamination in accordance with the State Commission on
Environmental Quality rules and regulations for public water systems (TCEQ
rules) and this chapter. The city shall discontinue water service if a
required backflow prevention system is not installed, maintained and tested,
where such potential or actual contamination hazard exists, in accordance
with the TCEQ rules and this chapter.



   (B)   Any residence or establishment where an actual or potential
contamination hazard exists shall be required to have additional protection
at the meter in the form of an air gap or backflow prevention assembly as
required by TCEQ rules.



   (C)   Any residence or establishment where an actual or potential
contamination hazard exists and an adequate internal cross-connection control
program is in effect is not required to have backflow protection at the water
service entrance or meter, provided that:



      (1)   Such residence or establishment has an annual inspection
and testing by a certified backflow prevention assembly tester on all
backflow prevention assemblies used for health hazard protection; and



      (2)   Copies of all such inspection and test reports are filed
with the city. It is the responsibility of the city to ensure that these
requirements are met.



(Prior Code, § 13.07.001)  (Ord. 04-04-31, passed 4-27-2004)



§ 55.02  CONDENSING, COOLING OR INDUSTRIAL PROCESS OR OTHER SYSTEM OF
NONPOTABLE USAGE.



   There shall be no water connection from the city water supply to any
condensing, cooling or industrial process or any other system of nonpotable
usage over which the city does not have sanitary control, unless the
connection is made in accordance with the requirements of § 55.01. Water
from such systems may not be returned to the potable water supply.



(Prior Code, § 13.07.002)  (Ord. 04-04-31, passed 4-27-2004)



§ 55.03  OVERHEAD BULK WATER DISPENSING STATIONS.



   Overhead bulk water dispensing stations must be provided with an air
gap between the filling outlet hose and the receiving tank.



(Prior Code, § 13.07.003)  (Ord. 04-04-31, passed 4-27-2004)



§ 55.04  BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY INSTALLATION, TESTING AND MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   All backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested upon
installation by a recognized backflow prevention assembly tester and
certified to be operating within specifications. Backflow prevention
assemblies which are installed to provide protection against health hazards
must also be tested and certified to be operating within specifications at
least annually by a recognized backflow prevention assembly tester.



   (B)   All backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed and
tested for accuracy in accordance with the manufacture’s instructions and
the American Water Works Association Recommended Practice for Backflow
Prevention and Cross-Connection Control (Manual M14) or the University of
Southern California Manual of Cross-Connection Control.



   (C)   Assemblies shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced whenever
said assemblies are found to be defective at the expense of the owner of the
residence or establishment. Original forms documenting such tests, repairs
and overhaul shall be kept and submitted to the city within five working days
of the test, repair or overhaul of each backflow prevention assembly.



   (D)   No backflow prevention assembly or device shall be removed
from use, relocated or otherwise moved from the location where it was
originally installed. If such backflow prevention assembly or device becomes
defective to the extent that it cannot be repaired, the backflow assembly or
device shall be replaced with a backflow prevention assembly or device that
complies with this section, the American Water Works Association’s
Recommended Practice for Backflow Prevention and Cross-Connection Control
(Manual M14), current edition, University of Southern California Manual of
Cross-Connection Control, current edition, or the current plumbing code of
the city, whichever is more stringent.



   (E)   Test gauges used for backflow prevention assembly testing
shall be calibrated at least annually in accordance with the American Water
Works Association’s Recommended Practice for Backflow Prevention and
Cross-Connection Control (Manual M14), current edition, or the University of
Southern California’s Manual of Cross-Connection Control, current edition.
The signed and dated original of the calibration form must be submitted to
the city within five working days of calibration.



   (F)   To be a recognized backflow prevention assembly tester a
person must hold a current certification from the state commission on
environmental quality.



(Prior Code, § 13.07.004)  (Ord. 04-04-31, passed 4-27-2004)



§ 55.05  CUSTOMER SERVICE INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   A customer service inspection shall be completed prior to
providing continuous water service to all new construction, on any existing
service when the water surveyor has reason to believe that cross-connections
or other actual or potential contaminant hazards exist, or after any material
improvement, correction or addition to any residence or establishment.



   (B)   Only individuals with the following credentials shall be
recognized as capable of conducting a customer service inspection:



      (1)   Plumbing inspectors and water supply protection
specialists that have been licensed by the State Board of Plumbing Examiners;
and



      (2)   Certified waterworks operators, and members of other
water-related professional groups who have completed a training course and
passed an examination administered by the TCEQ, or its designated agent, and
hold a current certification issued by the TCEQ.



   (C)   The customer service inspection must certify that:



      (1)   There is no direct connection between the public
drinking water supply and an actual or potential source of contamination.
Actual or potential sources of contamination are isolated from the public
water system by an air gap or an appropriate backflow prevention assembly in
accordance with the TCEQ rules and regulations;



      (2)   There is no cross-connection between the public drinking
water supply, a private water system and a private water supply, unless an
approved reduced-pressure-zone backflow prevention assembly is properly
installed and a service agreement exists for annual inspection and testing by
a certified backflow prevention assembly tester on all backflow prevention
assemblies used for health hazard protection;



      (3)   No connection exists which would allow the return of
water used for condensing, cooling or industrial processes or any other
system of nonpotable usage over which the city does not have sanitary control
back to the public water supply;



      (4)   No pipe or pipe fitting which contains more than 8% lead
exists in private water distribution facilities installed on or after July 1,
1988; and



      (5)   No solder or flux which contains more than 0.2% lead
exists in private water distribution facilities installed on or after July 1,
1988.



(Prior Code, § 13.07.004)  (Ord. 04-04-31, passed 4-27-2004)



§ 55.06  ENFORCEMENT.



   Any person who violates this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction shall be punished as provided for in § 10.99. If a person is
convicted of one or more distinct violations of this chapter, the city
designee shall, upon written notice to the customer, be authorized to
discontinue water service to the premises where such violations occur.
Services discontinued under such circumstances shall be restored only upon
payment of the current reconnection charge, and any other costs incurred by
the city in discontinuing service. Compliance with this chapter may also be
sought through injunctive relief in the District Court, as provided in §
10.99.



(Prior Code, § 13.07.005)  (Ord. 04-04-31, passed 4-27-2004)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



   Chapter



      70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      71.   TRAFFIC DIVISION



      72.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



      73.   TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES



      74.   STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING



      75.   TRUCKS, BICYCLES AND RAILROADS



      76.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   70.01   Definitions



   70.02   Purpose of title



   70.03   Authority of police officers to direct traffic



   70.04   Authority of officers of Fire Department to direct traffic



   70.05   Obedience to traffic officers



   70.06   Riding on portion of vehicle not intended for passengers



   70.07   Boarding or alighting from moving vehicles



   70.08   Use of roller skates, coasters and the like on roadway



   70.09   Payment of fine at Henderson Municipal Court



   70.10   Parades and processions



   70.11   Processions; funeral identification



   70.12   Driving through processions



   70.13   Drivers in processions



 



   70.99   Penalty



§ 70.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALLEY.  A public way in the city extending either partly through or
through any city block in the rear of city lots and in a direction generally
from avenue to avenue, not more than 20 feet in width and capable of being
traversed by a vehicle.



   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE.  Vehicles of the Fire Department (fire
patrol), police vehicles, public and private ambulances for which permits
have been issued by the State Board of Health, emergency vehicles of city
departments or public service corporations as are designated or authorized by
the City Council, and private vehicles operated by volunteer firefighters
while answering a fire alarm.



   BUS.  A commercial vehicle carrying passengers for hire and operating
over and along a fixed route.



   BUS STOP.  A section of the roadway along the edge thereof, authorized
by order of the City Council, marked by signs reading “bus stop” as a
place for the sole use and convenience of the general public to board and
depart from any bus.



   BUSINESS DISTRICT.  The territory contiguous to and including a
roadway when, within any 600 feet along such roadway, there are buildings in
use for business or industrial purposes which occupy 300 feet of frontage on
one side or 300 feet collectively on both sides of the roadway.



   CROSSWALK.  The part of a roadway at any intersection included within
the connection of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
street, whether marked or not, measured from the curbs or, in the absence of
curbs, from the edges of the traversable roadway. The word CROSSWALK also
includes any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly
indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface.



   DRIVER.  The person who drives or is in actual physical control of the
movements of a vehicle.



   DRIVEWAY, PRIVATE.  Any entrance or exit over the sidewalk or sidewalk
area of any street affording a means of ingress or egress for vehicles to or
from any private property, or the entrance or exit of any private garage into
or from any alley.



   DRIVEWAY, PUBLIC.  Any entrance or exit over the sidewalk or sidewalk
area of any street affording a means of ingress or egress for vehicles to or
from any public property.



   DIGGING OUT.  The practice of starting any motor vehicle from a
standing position by applying a sudden burst of power, recognized by spinning
the rear wheels and noise of tires on the surface of the roadway.



   INTERSECTION.  The area embraced within the prolongation or connection
of the lateral curblines, or if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the
roadways of two streets which join one another at, or approximately at, right
angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different streets
joining at any other angle may come in conflict. Where a street includes two
roadways, 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such
divided street by an intersecting street shall be regarded as a separate
INTERSECTION. In the event such intersecting street also includes two
roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of two roadways of such
streets shall be regarded as a separate INTERSECTION.



   LOADING ZONE.  The portion of any roadway set apart, marked and
numbered for the sole use of the public as a place for loading or unloading
passengers, merchandise or other cargo.



   MOTOR VEHICLE.  Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every
vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley
wires, but not operated upon rails.



   MOTORCYCLE.  Every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the
rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with
the ground, but excluding a tractor.



   NO PARKING ZONE.  A space on the roadway adjacent to the curb, whether
marked by official signs or not, in which no vehicle may be parked.



   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES. All signs, signals, markings and
devices not inconsistent with this title placed or erected by authority of a
public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating,
warning or guiding traffic.



   PARK or PARKING.  The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than a temporary stopping of such vehicle for the purpose of and
while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers, merchandise or
other cargo; except an involuntary stopping of such vehicle by reason of
mechanical failure or direction of a police officer.



   PARKING STALL or PARKING SPACE.  The portion or section of a roadway
adjacent to the curbing or edge, set apart, marked and bounded by lines
painted or marked upon the surface of the roadway and extending into the
roadway for the use of parking vehicles; or that portion of any alley marked
by official signs showing such space to be a parking zone.



   PEDESTRIAN.  Any person afoot.



   POLICE OFFICER.  Any member of the Police Department of the city
authorized by law to make arrests in traffic offenses.



   RESIDENCE DISTRICT.  The territory contiguous to and including a
street not comprising a business district, when the property on such street
for a distance of 300 feet or more is, in the main, improved with residences
or residences and buildings in use for business.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY.  The privilege of immediate use of the roadway.



   ROADWAY.  The portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel. In the event a street includes two or more
separate roadways, the term ROADWAY shall refer to any such roadway
separately but not to all such roadways collectively.



   SAFETY ZONE.  The area or space officially set apart within a roadway
for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked
or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while
set apart as a safety zone.



   SIDEWALK.  The portion of a street between the curblines, or the
lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the
use of pedestrians.



   STOP.  When required, complete cessation of movement.



   STOP, STOPPING or STANDING.  When prohibited, any stopping or standing
of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police
officer or traffic-control sign or signal.



   STREET or HIGHWAY.  The entire width between the boundary lines of
every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel.



   TRAFFIC.  Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other
conveyances, either singly or together, while using any street for purposes
of travel.



   TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL.  Any device, whether manually, electrically or
mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and
to proceed.



   TRUCK.  A motor vehicle designed primarily for the transportation of
cargo.



   U-TURN.  The turning or causing the turning of a vehicle, so that when
such turn is completed such vehicle will be headed in the opposite direction
from that in which it was headed before such turning was begun, whether or
not such vehicle is pulled into a driveway or any space beyond the curbline
of the street.



   VEHICLE.  Any device in, upon or by which any person or property may
be or is transported upon any street within the corporate limits of the city,
except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails
or tracks.



(Prior Code, § 12.01.001)



§ 70.02  PURPOSE OF TITLE.



   The purpose of the regulations prescribed by this title is to ensure to
the people the maximum use and benefit of the public streets of the city, and
yet retain the maximum degree of safety to prevent injury to person and
property.



(Prior Code, § 12.01.002)



§ 70.03  AUTHORITY OF POLICE OFFICERS TO DIRECT TRAFFIC.



   Officers of the Police Department or such officers as are assigned by
the Chief of Police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice,
hand or signal in conformance with this title and other traffic laws. In the
event of fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard
pedestrians, officers of the Police Department may direct traffic as
conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of this title and other
traffic laws.



(Prior Code, § 12.01.003)



§ 70.04  AUTHORITY OF OFFICERS OF FIRE DEPARTMENT TO DIRECT TRAFFIC.



   Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire, may
direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate
vicinity.



(Prior Code, § 12.01.004)



§ 70.05  OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC OFFICERS.



   No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order
or direction of a police officer or Fire Department official given to direct
or control traffic as authorized in this title.



(Prior Code, § 12.01.005)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.06  RIDING ON PORTION OF VEHICLE NOT INTENDED FOR PASSENGERS.



   No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not
designated or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not
apply to any employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to
persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise.



(Prior Code, § 12.01.006)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Persons under 18 riding in open bed of truck or trailer, see Tex.
Transportation Code, § 545.414



§ 70.07  BOARDING OR ALIGHTING FROM MOVING VEHICLES.



   No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is
in motion.



(Prior Code, § 12.01.007)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.08  USE OF ROLLER SKATES, COASTERS AND THE LIKE ON ROADWAY.



   No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster,
skateboard, toy vehicle or similar device shall go upon any roadway, except
while crossing a street on a crosswalk, and when so crossing such person
shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties
applicable to pedestrians.



(Prior Code, § 12.01.008)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.09  PAYMENT OF FINE AT HENDERSON MUNICIPAL COURT.



   Any person who has received any notice to appear in answer to a traffic
charge under this title may, within the time specified in the notice, appear
at the traffic violations bureau and answer the charge set forth in such
notice by paying a prescribed fine, and, in writing, pleading guilty to the
charge, waiving a hearing in court and giving power of attorney to the person
in charge of the Bureau to make such a plea and pay such fine in court.



(Prior Code, § 12.01.009)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.10  PARADES AND PROCESSIONS.



   No parade or procession, excepting the forces of the United States
army, navy, air force or marines, the military forces of the state, and
forces of the Police and Fire Departments, shall occupy, march or proceed
along any street, sidewalk or any other public place or way in the city,
except in accordance with a permit therefor issued by the Chief of Police and
such other regulations as are set forth herein which may apply.



(Prior Code, § 12.01.010)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.11  PROCESSIONS; FUNERAL IDENTIFICATION.



   A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as
such by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant or other
identifying insignia or by such other method as may be determined and
designated by the Traffic Division.



(Prior Code, § 12.01.011)



§ 70.12  DRIVING THROUGH PROCESSIONS.



   No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a
funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such
vehicles are conspicuously designated as such. This provision shall not apply
at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals or
police officers.



(Prior Code, § 12.01.012)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.13  DRIVERS IN PROCESSIONS.



   Each driver in a funeral or other authorized procession shall drive as
near to the right-hand side of the roadway as practical and shall follow the
vehicle ahead as close as is practical and safe.



(Prior Code, § 12.01.013)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whenever in this title an act is prohibited or is made or
declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or wherever in this
title the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is
declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is otherwise provided in
this code of ordinances, the violation shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding $500; provided, however, that no penalty shall be greater or less
than the penalty provided for the same or a similar offense of the laws of
the state.



   (B)   Each day a violation of this code or of any ordinance
continues shall constitute a separate offense.



CHAPTER 71:  TRAFFIC DIVISION



Section



   71.01   Established



   71.02   Duties



   71.03   Record of traffic violations



   71.04   Drivers’ files to be maintained



   71.05   Administration, management of title



   71.06   Emergency, other regulations



§ 71.01  ESTABLISHED.



   There is hereby established in the Police Department of this city a
traffic division, to be under the control of an officer of police appointed
by and directly responsible to the Chief of Police.



(Prior Code, § 12.02.001)



§ 71.02  DUTIES.



   It shall be the duty of the Traffic Division, with such aid as may be
rendered by other members of the Police Department, to enforce all applicable
provisions of this code, state law and city ordinances, rules and
regulations, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate accidents
and to perform all duties incident thereto, to cooperate with the City
Traffic Engineer and other officers of the city in the administration of the
traffic laws in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and
to carry out those duties specially imposed upon such Division by this
chapter.



(Prior Code, § 12.02.002)



§ 71.03  RECORD OF TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   The Police Department or the Records Division thereof shall
keep a record of all alleged violations of the traffic ordinances of this
city or of the state vehicle laws of which any person has been charged,
together with a record of the final disposition of all such alleged offenses.
Such record shall be so maintained as to show all types of violations and the
total of each. Such record shall accumulate during at least a five-year
period and from that time on the record shall be maintained complete for at
least the most recent five-year period.



   (B)   All forms of records of violations and notices of violations
shall be serially numbered. For each month and year, a written record shall
be kept available to the public showing the disposal of all such forms, and
all such records shall be public records.



(Prior Code, § 12.02.003)



§ 71.04  DRIVERS’ FILES TO BE MAINTAINED.



   (A)   The Police Department or the Records Division thereof shall
maintain a suitable record of all traffic accidents, warnings, arrests,
convictions and complaints reported for each driver, which shall be filed
alphabetically under the name of the driver concerned.



   (B)   Such Division shall study the cases of all the drivers charged
with frequent or serious violations of the traffic laws or involved in
frequent traffic accidents or any serious accident, and shall attempt to
discover the reasons therefor, and shall take whatever steps are lawful and
reasonable to prevent the same or to have the licenses of such persons
suspended or revoked.



   (C)   Such records shall accumulate during at least a five-year
period and from that time on such records shall be maintained complete for at
least the most recent five-year period.



(Prior Code, § 12.02.004)



§ 71.05  ADMINISTRATION, MANAGEMENT OF TITLE.



   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to determine the location
and proper timing and maintenance of traffic-control devices, to conduct
traffic studies and to devise remedial measures, to conduct investigation of
traffic conditions and to cooperate with other city officials in the
development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out
the additional powers and duties imposed by this chapter and other ordinances
of the city.



(Prior Code, § 12.02.005)



§ 71.06  EMERGENCY, OTHER REGULATIONS.



   The Chief of Police, with the approval of the City Council, is hereby
authorized to make and enforce regulations necessary to make effective the
provisions of this chapter and to make and enforce temporary regulations to
cover emergency or special conditions.



(Prior Code, § 12.02.006)



CHAPTER 72:  TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



Section




Operation of Vehicles




   72.01   Operation of vehicles in parks and the like



   72.02   Digging out prohibited




Speed Regulations




   72.15   Maximum limits on specific streets



   72.16   School zones



   72.17   Exemptions from subchapter




OPERATION OF VEHICLES




§ 72.01  OPERATION OF VEHICLES IN PARKS AND THE LIKE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any vehicle
whatsoever through or upon or to park such vehicle upon any park, hospital
grounds or other public property within the city, except upon official,
designated roadways or parking lots.



(Prior Code, § 12.03.001)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.02  DIGGING OUT PROHIBITED.



   Any driver of any motor vehicle who shall wilfully cause such vehicle
to dig out or shall cause any such vehicle to make unnecessary noise by
reason of operating such vehicle in such manner as to cause the wheels
thereof to spin or slide on the roadway of any street when starting such
vehicle or while making any turning movement shall be deemed guilty of a
violation of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 12.03.002)



Statutory reference:



   Operation and movement of vehicles, see Tex. Transportation Code, Ch.
546




SPEED REGULATIONS




§ 72.15  MAXIMUM LIMITS ON SPECIFIC STREETS.



   The City Council may alter the maximum speed limit established by §
72.15, on any street or portion thereof within the city in accord with the
provisions of Tex. Transportation Code, § 545.356. Whenever signs are posted
giving notice of the maximum legal speed limit so established for a
particular street or portion thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to
drive or operate any vehicle at a rate of speed in excess of such limit.



(Prior Code, § 12.05.002)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.16  SCHOOL ZONES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive any vehicle at
a speed greater than 20 mph through or to overtake or pass any other vehicle
in any school zone as may be marked or designated within the city during the
hours indicated upon signs erected in such zones or whenever children are
present in such zones.



(Prior Code, § 12.05.003)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.17  EXEMPTIONS FROM SUBCHAPTER.



   The provisions of this subchapter and other ordinances of the city
regulating the speed of vehicles shall not apply to vehicles of the Fire
Department when responding to a call, nor to police patrols, nor to
physicians or ambulances when actually engaged in responding to emergency
calls.



(Prior Code, § 12.05.004)



Statutory reference:



   Authority of municipality to alter speed limits, see Tex.
Transportation Code, § 545.356



   Authority to establish or alter prima facie speed limits, see Tex.
Transportation Code, § 542.202(12)



   Municipal regulation of speed limits for emergency vehicles, see Tex.
Transportation Code, § 545.365



   Speed restrictions, see Tex. Transportation Code, §§ 545.351 et seq.



CHAPTER 73:  TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES



Section



   73.01   Conformity with manual and specifications of state;
uniformity



   73.02   General powers and duties relative to devices



   73.03   Necessity of signs



   73.04   Ratification of existing devices



   73.05   Installation of traffic lights



   73.06   Stop intersections



   73.07   Yield right-of-way signs



   73.08   Designation of crosswalks, zones and marking traffic lanes



   73.09   One-way streets and alleys



   73.10   Prohibited turns at intersections



   73.11   Turning markers



   73.12   No passing zone



§ 73.01  CONFORMITY WITH MANUAL AND SPECIFICATIONS OF STATE; UNIFORMITY.



   All traffic-control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the
manual and specifications approved by the State Transportation Commission.
All signs and signals required under this chapter for a particular purpose
shall, so far as practicable, be uniform as to type and location throughout
the city. All traffic-control devices so erected and not inconsistent with
the provisions of state law or this chapter shall be official traffic-control
devices.



(Prior Code, § 12.04.001)



Statutory reference:



   Adoption of sign manual and specifications, see Tex. Transportation
Code, § 544.001



§ 73.02  GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES RELATIVE TO DEVICES.



   The city designee shall place and maintain traffic-control signs,
signals and devices when and as required under this chapter to make effective
the provisions of this chapter, and may place and maintain such additional
traffic-control devices as he or she may deem necessary to regulate traffic
under this chapter or under state law, or to guide or warn traffic. It shall
be the duty of the city designee to supervise the installation and proper
timing and maintenance of traffic-control devices.



(Prior Code, § 12.04.002)



§ 73.03  NECESSITY OF SIGNS.



   No provision of this chapter for which signs are required shall be
enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged
violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently
legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular
section does not state that signs are required, such section shall be
effective even though no signs are erected or in place.



(Prior Code, § 12.04.003)



Statutory reference:



   No enforcement against alleged violator if traffic-control device not
in proper position or sufficiently legible, see Tex. Transportation Code, §
544.004(b)



§ 73.04  RATIFICATION OF EXISTING DEVICES.



   All traffic-control signs, signals, devices and markings placed or
erected prior to the adoption of this code and in use for the purpose of
regulating, warning or guiding traffic are hereby affirmed, ratified and
declared to be official traffic-control devices, provided such
traffic-control devices are not inconsistent with the provisions of this
chapter or state law.



(Prior Code, § 12.04.004)



Statutory references:



   Authority to place and maintain traffic-control devices, see Tex.
Transportation Code, § 542.202(a)(1)



   Traffic signs, signals and markings, see Tex. Transportation Code, Ch.
544



§ 73.05  INSTALLATION OF TRAFFIC LIGHTS.



   The city designee, as authorized by the City Council from time to time,
shall designate intersections at which traffic shall be controlled by
electric traffic-control signals or lights and shall cause such signals or
lights to be installed and maintained at such intersections.



(Prior Code, § 12.04.005)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to place and maintain traffic-control devices, see Tex.
Transportation Code, § 542.202(a)(1)



§ 73.06  STOP INTERSECTIONS.



   The city designee, with the approval of the City Council, may designate
any street intersection as a stop intersection and designate the streets upon
which vehicles shall stop before entering such intersection. Whenever any
intersection has been so designated, the city designee shall cause the same
to be identified by the erection of stop signs indicating which vehicles
approaching the intersection shall stop.



(Prior Code, § 12.04.006)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to designate through highways and stop and yield
intersections, see Tex. Transportation Code, §§ 542.202, 544.003



§ 73.07  YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY SIGNS.



   The city designee, as authorized from time to time by the City Council,
may install and maintain yield right-of-way signs at intersections where a
special hazard may exist and anywhere vehicles shall be required to yield the
right-of-way.



(Prior Code, § 12.04.007)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to designate through highways and stop and yield
intersections, see Tex. Transportation Code, §§ 542.202, 544.003



§ 73.08  DESIGNATION OF CROSSWALKS, ZONES AND MARKING TRAFFIC LANES.



   The city designee, with the approval of the City Council, is hereby
authorized to:



   (A)   Designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines
upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at any intersection where, in his
or her opinion, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the
roadway, and at such other places as he or she may deem necessary;



   (B)   Establish safety, quiet, play and other zones of such kind and
character and at such places as he or she may deem necessary for the
protection of the public; and



   (C)   Mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as
he or she may deem advisable, consistent with this chapter and other traffic
ordinances of this city.



(Prior Code, § 12.04.008)



§ 73.09  ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.



   (A)   Whenever any ordinance of the City Council designates any
one-way street or alley, the city designee shall place and maintain signs
giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless such
signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement
shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the
opposite direction is prohibited.



   (B)   Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys
which are designated as one-way streets or alleys, vehicular traffic shall
move only in the indicated direction where signs indicating the direction of
traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in
the opposite direction is prohibited.



(Prior Code, § 12.04.009)



Statutory reference:



   One-way roadways, see Tex. Transportation Code, § 545.059



§ 73.10  PROHIBITED TURNS AT INTERSECTIONS.



   (A)   The city designee is hereby authorized, subject to approval by
the City Council, to determine those intersections at which drivers of
vehicles shall not make a right turn, left turn and/or U-turn, and shall
place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be
prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in
which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be
removed when such turns are permitted. Whenever authorized signs are erected
indicating that no right turn, left turn or U-turn is permitted, no driver of
a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such signs.



   (B)   No driver of any vehicle shall make a U-turn at any
intersection within the city where there is suspended and operating a
traffic-control signal light.



(Prior Code, § 12.04.010)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 73.11  TURNING MARKERS.



   (A)   The City Council is authorized to place markers, buttons or
signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be
traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and such course to be
traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by any
provision of this code, state law or city ordinance, rule or regulation.



   (B)   When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are
placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by
vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions
of such indications.



(Prior Code, § 12.04.011)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 73.12  NO PASSING ZONE.



   The City Council is hereby authorized to determine by resolution those
portions of any highway the city where overtaking and passing or driving on
the left side of the roadway would be especially hazardous and may, by
appropriate signs or markings on the roadway, indicate the beginning and end
of such zones, and when such signs or markings are in place and clearly
visible to any ordinarily observant person, every driver of a vehicle shall
obey the directions thereof.



(Prior Code, § 12.04.012)



CHAPTER 74:  STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING



Section



   74.01   Presumption that owner of vehicle illegally parked same



   74.02   Impoundment of standing or parked vehicles; generally



   74.03   Impoundment; liability of city



   74.04   Fees for impoundment



   74.05   Ten feet of roadway to be left available for traffic



   74.06   Parallel and angle parking



   74.07   Parking prohibited for certain purposes



   74.08   Designation and marking of parking stalls and areas where
parking is prohibited or limited



   74.09   Parking in prohibited areas; overtime parking



   74.10   Loading, unloading zones; designation



   74.11   Use of passenger zones



   74.12   Use of freight zones



   74.13   Vehicles exceeding 25 feet



   74.14   Parking or standing in alleys



   74.15   Residential parking



   74.16   Boats, recreational vehicles and trailers



   74.17   Parking in the front yard of a residence



   74.18   Continuous parking



Statutory references:



   Authority to regulate parking generally, see Tex. Transportation Code,
§ 542.202(a)(2)



   Stopping, standing and parking, see Tex. Transportation Code, §
545.301 et seq.



§ 74.01  PRESUMPTION THAT OWNER OF VEHICLE ILLEGALLY PARKED SAME.



   In any prosecution charging a violation of any ordinance or regulation
governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular
vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such
ordinance or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the
complaint was, at the time of such parking, the registered owner of such
vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the
registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such
vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation
occurred.



(Prior Code, § 12.06.001)



Statutory references:



   Presumption that owner of vehicle is responsible for offense, see Tex.
Transportation Code, § 545.308



§ 74.02  IMPOUNDMENT OF STANDING OR PARKED VEHICLES; GENERALLY.



   (A)   Any vehicle which shall be or remain standing or parked upon
any public street, avenue, way, alley or other public place, or upon any
private property, may be removed by or upon order of the Chief of Police, and
placed in storage in a privately operated garage or other place designated by
or maintained by the city, under the following circumstances:



      (1)   When any vehicle is left standing or parked unattended
for more than 48 hours in violation of any applicable provision of this code,
state law or city ordinances, rules and regulations; provided, however, that
in the event such vehicle is parked or standing immediately in front of or
immediately adjacent to property owned by the owner of such vehicle, or
property rented by such owner, before such vehicle shall be removed, the
owner thereof shall be given written notice after the expiration of 48 hours
and shall be given an additional 24 hours to remove or cause to be removed
such vehicle. Such written notice may be given depositing the same in the
United States mail, addressed to the owner at the address given on the
registration receipt of the vehicle, or his or her last known address; or



      (2)   When any motor vehicle, motorcycle or other vehicle,
trailer or mobile home is parked, stopped or standing on private property
without the consent of the owner of such private property.



   (B)   In order to obtain possession of a vehicle stored under the
provisions of this section, the claimant must produce satisfactory evidence
of ownership or right to possession within 30 days from the date of such
storage and, in addition thereto, must pay all charges for storage and
removal of such vehicle, in addition to any fine.



   (C)   If a vehicle removed under this section is not claimed within
30 days from the date of storage, the same may be sold by the city or the
garage where the same is stored, for storage charges, as provided by law.



(Prior Code, § 12.06.002)



Statutory references:



   Removal of unlawfully stopped vehicle, see Tex. Transportation Code, §
545.305



   Unattended vehicle, see Tex. Transportation Code, § 545.404



§ 74.03  IMPOUNDMENT; LIABILITY OF CITY.



   The provisions of § 74.02 shall not be construed to relieve from or
lessen the responsibility of any person who shall leave his or her vehicle
parked on the streets of the city in such a manner that the same may be
impounded, nor shall the city be held as assuming any such liability by
reason of impounding or causing to be impounded such vehicle.



(Prior Code, § 12.06.003)



§ 74.04  FEES FOR IMPOUNDMENT.



   An impounding fee, plus the actual towing charges incurred, and a
storage fee is hereby assessed against, and shall be collected from the owner
or driver of any vehicle impounded by virtue of § 74.02 before the release
of any such vehicle. Such fees shall be as on file in the City Secretary’s
office. The payment of this impounding fee shall not excuse such owner or
driver from the charge of violating any applicable provision of this code,
state law or city ordinance, rule or regulation.



(Prior Code, § 12.06.004)



§ 74.05  TEN FEET OF ROADWAY TO BE LEFT AVAILABLE FOR TRAFFIC.



   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street in such a
manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of
the width of either lane of a roadway for free movement of the vehicular
traffic, except that a driver may stop temporarily during the actual loading
or unloading of passengers or when necessary in obedience to traffic
regulations or traffic signs or signals of a police officer.



(Prior Code, § 12.06.005)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.06  PARALLEL AND ANGLE PARKING.



   (A)   No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other
than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful
traffic movement and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within 18
inches of the curb or edge of the roadway, except as otherwise provided in
this section. On one-way streets, vehicles may be parked on the left side of
the street, with the left-hand wheels within 18 inches of the curb or edge of
the roadway, unless signs prohibit parking.



   (B)   The city designee, with the approval of the City Council,
shall determine upon which streets angle parking shall be permitted and shall
mark or sign such streets, but such angle parking shall not be indicated upon
any federal aid or state highway within this city, unless the State
Transportation Commission has determined by resolution or order entered in
its minutes that the roadway is of sufficient width to permit angle parking
without interfering with the free movement of traffic. Angle parking shall
not be indicated or permitted at any place where passing traffic would
thereby be caused or required to drive upon the left side of the street or
upon any railway tracks.



   (C)   Upon those streets which have been signed or marked for angle
parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to,
and with the hood or front end of such vehicle next to, the curb or edge of
the roadway indicated by such signs or markings.



   (D)   Whenever parking spaces are marked by lines on the pavement,
whether for parallel or angle parking, a vehicle must be parked entirely
within the lines of the parking space.



(Prior Code, § 12.06.006)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Additional parking regulations, see Tex. Transportation Code, § 545.303



§ 74.07  PARKING PROHIBITED FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES.



   No person shall park a vehicle upon any street in the city for the
principal purpose of:



   (A)   Displaying such vehicle for sale;



   (B)   Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs
necessitated by an emergency; or



   (C)   Advertising, except by permit issued by the Chief of Police
and under the conditions stipulated therein.



(Prior Code, § 12.06.007)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.08  DESIGNATION AND MARKING OF PARKING STALLS AND AREAS WHERE PARKING
IS PROHIBITED OR LIMITED.



   (A)   The city designee shall cause parking stalls to be maintained
and marked off in and on such streets and parts thereof as may be designated
by the City Council from time to time, and he or she shall cause spaces in
which parking is prohibited to be maintained and marked off in and on such
streets and parts thereof as may be designated by the City Council from time
to time.



      (1)   The city designee shall also cause time limit parking
areas to be maintained and marked off in and on such part or parts of streets
as may be designated by the City Council from time to time.



      (2)   All such spaces or areas shall be clearly indicated by
appropriate signs or by markings on the pavement or curb.



   (B)   In areas designated as time limit parking areas, parking may
be limited to any period prescribed by the Council, the same to be designated
with clearly distinguished markings or signs at both ends of the time limit
area and at reasonable intervals between the beginning and ending of such
time limit area, indicating the time allowed for parking in such area.



   (C)   Any prohibition of or time limit on parking established under
this section shall apply on such days and between such hours as prescribed by
the Council.



(Prior Code, § 12.06.008)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory references:



   Authority to regulate parking generally, see Tex. Transportation Code,
§ 542.202(a)(2)



   Stopping, standing and parking, see Tex. Transportation Code, §§
545.301 et seq.



§ 74.09  PARKING IN PROHIBITED AREAS; OVERTIME PARKING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer
any vehicle registered in his or her name or owned or operated by him or her
or in his or her possession or under his or her control to be or remain in
any space or area in which parking is prohibited as provided in § 74.08, or
in a time limit parking area for a longer period of time than that designated
by the markings on the street or by signs clearly visible.



(Prior Code, § 12.06.009)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.10  LOADING, UNLOADING ZONES; DESIGNATION.



   The city designee is hereby authorized to determine and designate the
location of passenger and freight curb loading zones, and shall place and
maintain appropriate signs indicating the same and stating the hours during
which the provisions therefor are applicable.



(Prior Code, § 12.06.010)



§ 74.11  USE OF PASSENGER ZONES.



   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period
of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in
any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the
regulations applicable to such curb loading zones are effective, and then
only for a period of time not to exceed three minutes, except when such
spaces are adjacent to and serving a hotel or bus station, when such period
of time may not exceed 15 minutes.



(Prior Code, § 12.06.011)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.12  USE OF FREIGHT ZONES.



   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any length
of time in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone during the hours
so set aside, except that commercial vehicles may so stop, stand or park for
the expeditious unloading and delivery or loading and pickup of material. In
no case shall the stop for unloading, loading, pickup or delivery of material
exceed 30 minutes.



   (B)   The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily at a
place marked as a freight curb loading zone for the purpose of and while
actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does
not interfere with any motor vehicle used for the transportation of materials
which is waiting to enter or about to enter such zone.



(Prior Code, § 12.06.012)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.13  VEHICLES EXCEEDING 25 FEET.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle, trailer or
combination thereof on the streets, alleys or other public ways, except in
official loading or unloading zones, of the city which shall exceed 25 feet
in length.



(Prior Code, § 12.06.013)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.14  PARKING OR STANDING IN ALLEYS.



   (A)   No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a
manner or under such conditions as to block the free passage of other
vehicles in such alley.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A) above, it shall
be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in any alley within the fire
limits of the city, except when such vehicle is actually being used for the
purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.



(Prior Code, § 12.06.014)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.15  RESIDENTIAL PARKING.



   (A)   The following vehicles are not allowed to be parked within a
residential district:



      (1)   Vehicle of three axles or more;



      (2)   Bus;



      (3)   Truck tractor;



      (4)   Commercial vehicle of rated capacity in excess of one
and one-half tons;



      (5)   Cargo van, bobtail or flatbed trucks more than 20 feet
in overall length, more than eight feet in width, and more than ten feet in
height measured from the surface under the vehicle to the highest part of the
vehicle excluding antennae; and



      (6)   Motor vehicles weighing in excess of 17,000 pounds.



   (B)   The following vehicles of the type enumerated in division (A)
above are excepted from such no-parking provisions:



      (1)   City work vehicles;



      (2)   School buses owned and operated by accredited schools;



      (3)   Delivery vehicles making deliveries;



      (4)   Moving vans while being unloaded (a van or truck-tractor
semitrailer used for moving home or office furniture);



      (5)   Vehicles while being used to haul material for
construction;



      (6)   Vehicles engaged in work for a public utility company,
such as electric, gas, telephone, cable or some such similar public utility;



      (7)   Recreational vehicles; and



      (8)   Wreckers governed by the provisions of Chapter 119.



(Prior Code, § 12.06.015)  (Ord. 07-12-22, passed 12-19-2007)  Penalty,
see § 70.99



§ 74.16  BOATS, RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND TRAILERS.



   Boats, RVs and trailers are prohibited from parking on public streets,
rights-of-way or alleys in excess of 24 hours without being moved or
obtaining a permit under special conditions from the city official designated
by the City Manager.



(Prior Code, § 12.06.016)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.17  PARKING IN THE FRONT YARD OF A RESIDENCE.



   No more than 30% of the front yard of any one-family residence (whether
one or more families live in such residence) or duplex may be paved. All
vehicles parked in the front yard of such residence or duplex must be parked
on such paved area, that is, no vehicles may be parked on the front yard
lawn. Such paved area must be paved with concrete, asphalt, rock, gravel,
brick or a similar substance approved by the City Building Inspector. Prior
to paving any of the front lawn for parking, a detailed plan must be
submitted to the City Building Inspector, showing the exact location of such
proposed paved area on the subject property, the paving material to be used,
and the grade at which it will be constructed. The City Building Official
must approve such plan and issue a permit before construction begins.



(Prior Code, § 12.06.017)  (Ord. 07-12-22, passed 12-19-2007)  Penalty,
see § 70.99



§ 74.18  CONTINUOUS PARKING.



   (A)   Prohibited conduct. It shall be unlawful to encroach upon the
right-of-way of any state highway located in the city, by continuously
parking any vehicle, as defined in the Texas Transportation Code, upon said
right-of-way, or putting any other personal property upon said right-of-way
continuously, for the purpose of profit or gain.



   (B)   Defense. It shall be a defense to said prohibited conduct that
a written agreement has been entered into with the state or the city
permitting such vehicles or other property to be placed upon said
right-of-way.



   (C)   Misdemeanor. Violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor
and punishable as provided elsewhere in this code.



(Prior Code, § 12.06.018)  (Ord. 11-01-01, passed 1-25-2011)  Penalty, see
§ 70.99



CHAPTER 75:  TRUCKS, BICYCLES AND RAILROADS



Section




Truck Regulations Generally




   75.01   Use of motor brakes by truck-tractors




Truck Routes




   75.15   Definition



   75.16   Scope



   75.17   Designated



   75.18   Exemptions



   75.19   Installation of signs




Bicycles




   75.30   Application of subchapter provisions to rental agencies



   75.31   Age of riders



   75.32   Parking



   75.33   Riding on sidewalks




Railroads




   75.45   Construction of crossings



   75.46   Maintenance of crossings



   75.47   Warning devices at crossings; required



   75.48   Expense of construction, maintenance of devices



   75.49   Flying switch prohibited



   75.50   Obstruction of city drainage



   75.51   Headlight, signal bells



   75.52   Unnecessary whistle blowing prohibited



   75.53   Board, alighting from moving cars




TRUCK REGULATIONS GENERALLY




§ 75.01  USE OF MOTOR BRAKES BY TRUCK-TRACTORS.



   The use of motor brakes by truck-tractors within the city is prohibited.



(Prior Code, § 12.07.001)  (Ord. 04-08-24, passed 8-24-2004)  Penalty, see
§ 70.99




TRUCK ROUTES




§ 75.15  DEFINITION.



   For purposes of this subchapter, the word TRUCK shall have the meaning
as defined by Tex. Transportation Code, § 541.201(21), and shall include
TRUCK TRACTORS, as defined by Tex. Transportation Code, § 541.201(22), but
shall not include vehicles defined as LIGHT TRUCKS by Tex. Transportation
Code, § 541.201(7).



(Prior Code, § 12.07.031)  (Ord. 98-1-1, passed 1-27-1998)



§ 75.16  SCOPE.



   All city streets within the city shall be and hereby are declared to be
closed to through truck traffic, except for streets designated as truck
routes.



(Prior Code, § 12.07.032)  (Ord 98-1-1, passed 1-27-1998)  Penalty, see §
70.99



§ 75.17  DESIGNATED.



   All of portions of certain city streets shall be designated as truck
routes, and it shall be lawful for trucks to use such designated portions of
such streets for through traffic purposes. Such designated truck routes are
on file in the office of the City Secretary.



(Prior Code, § 12.07.033)  (Ord. 98-1-1, passed 1-27-1998)



§ 75.18  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Trucks making deliveries to a residence or business accessible
only from a city street not designated as a truck route herein shall be
exempt from the restrictions contained in this subchapter as reasonably
necessary to complete such deliveries.



   (B)   Public utility trucks being used on or adjacent to a city
street not designated as a truck route herein shall be exempt from the
restrictions contained in this subchapter as reasonably necessary to install,
repair or replace such public utilities.



   (C)   Trucks used to pick up and haul trash by the hauling carrier
designated by the city are exempt from the restrictions contained in this
subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 12.07.034)  (Ord. 98-1-1, passed 1-27-1998)



§ 75.19  INSTALLATION OF SIGNS.



   In conformity with state law, the City Manager is hereby authorized to
have installed all necessary signs giving notice and warning of the
prohibitions contained in this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 12.07.035)




BICYCLES




§ 75.30  APPLICATION OF SUBCHAPTER PROVISIONS TO RENTAL AGENCIES.



   A rental agency shall not rent or offer any bicycle for rent unless the
bicycle is equipped with the lamps and other equipment required in this
subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 12.08.001)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 75.31  AGE OF RIDERS.



   No child under the age of six years shall ride a bicycle in any public
street in the city.



(Prior Code, § 12.08.002)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 75.32  PARKING.



   No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the
roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the
bicycles or against a building or at the curb, in such a manner as to afford
the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic.



(Prior Code, § 12.08.003)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 75.33  RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within the
business district of the city.



   (B)   No person 15 or more years of age shall ride a bicycle on any
sidewalk in any district of the city.



   (C)   Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such
person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible
signals before overtaking and passing such pedestrian.



(Prior Code, § 12.08.004)  Penalty, see § 70.99




RAILROADS




§ 75.45  CONSTRUCTION OF CROSSINGS.



   It shall be the duty of all railroad companies and managers thereof
owning or controlling railroads within the city and operating trains therein
to provide crossings easy of access and suitable for the use of street
traffic; such crossings shall be constructed of vitrified brick or other
permanent paving material satisfactory to the city, and must be so
constructed as to be easy of access and reasonably smooth.



(Prior Code, § 12.09.001)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 75.46  MAINTENANCE OF CROSSINGS.



   It shall be the duty of each railroad company whose lines of tracks are
constructed within the corporate limits of the city to put in good repair and
maintain in good condition all streets or parts of streets through or over
which its line of tracks may run, and to keep the same free from obstructions
of every kind, which such repair shall be made and constructed under the
direction and supervision of the city.



(Prior Code, § 12.09.002)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 75.47  WARNING DEVICES AT CROSSINGS; REQUIRED.



   (A)   Every railroad company which has railroad tracks which run
through the city or any portion thereof shall be required to erect, place or
construct such barricades or other warning devices as shall be required by
the City Council at all crossings of such tracks with the streets, alleys or
other public ways within the city.



   (B)   Upon notice by registered mail, return receipt requested, from
the city to any such railroad company directing such railroad company to so
erect, place or construct such warning device, it shall be unlawful for such
railroad company to fail to do so within 60 days after receipt of such notice.



(Prior Code, § 12.09.003)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 75.48  EXPENSE OF CONSTRUCTION, MAINTENANCE OF DEVICES.



   Every gate, guard or other warning device erected at railroad crossings
and the approaches thereto shall be erected and constructed at the sole cost
and expense of the railroad company under the supervision of the city, and
the same shall thereafter be kept and maintained by the railroad company in
proper repair and condition at its own cost and expense and without cost or
expense to the city and under the supervision of the city.



(Prior Code, § 12.09.004)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 75.49  FLYING SWITCH PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any railroad company or person to switch a
railroad car in the manner commonly known as a “flying”, “running” or
“kicking” switch at any crossing within the city.



(Prior Code, § 12.09.005)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 75.50  OBSTRUCTION OF CITY DRAINAGE.



   It shall be unlawful for any railroad company to obstruct the drainage
of the city in any way or by any means whatsoever.



(Prior Code, § 12.09.006)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 75.51  HEADLIGHT, SIGNAL BELLS.



   No railroad engine, train or similar railroad equipment shall be run or
moved in the nighttime without a headlight, or shall be run at any time
without the usual signal bells or devices.



(Prior Code, § 12.09.007)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 75.52  UNNECESSARY WHISTLE BLOWING PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any railroad company, or its employees,
operating or running trains through the city to blow or have blown the
whistles of the engine of such train, except for the purpose of blowing for
the board or semaphore as required by the rules of such railroad or in case
of emergency as additional warning of any impending danger to life or
property.



(Prior Code, § 12.09.008)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 75.53  BOARD, ALIGHTING FROM MOVING CARS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person not an employee of the railroad
company to get on or off of a railroad passenger coach, freight car or engine
while such equipment is in motion.



(Prior Code, § 12.09.009)  Penalty, see § 70.99



CHAPTER 76:  TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



Schedule



      I.   Stop intersections



SCHEDULE I: STOP INTERSECTIONS.



   As authorized by the City Council, the City Secretary shall maintain on
file a Master List of all such stop intersections.



(Ord. 16-01-01, passed 2-9-2016; Ord. 16-02-02, passed 3-8-2016)



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      90.   ANIMAL CONTROL



      91.   CEMETERIES



      92.   FIRE PREVENTION



      93.   HEALTH AND SANITATION



      94.   PARKS AND RECREATION



      95.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



      96.   PUBLIC TREE CARE



CHAPTER 90:  ANIMAL CONTROL



Section




General Provisions




   90.001   Keeping of swine



   90.002   Livestock running at large



   90.003   Fowl running at large



   90.004   Disposal of dead animals



   90.005   Sanitation



   90.006   Pet care



   90.007   Nuisances




Dogs and Cats




   90.020   Definitions



   90.021   Enforcement



   90.022   Running at large



   90.023   Limitation on number



   90.024   Dangerous dogs; state law adopted




Rabies Control




   90.035   Vaccination of dogs and cats



   90.036   Report of rabid animals



   90.037   Quarantine




Impoundment




   90.050   Authorized



   90.051   Notice to owner



   90.052   Redemption generally



   90.053   Redemption after quarantine



   90.054   Pound



   90.055   Retention period



   90.056   Disposal



   90.057   Immediate euthanization authorized



   90.058   Fees




Adoption from Animal Shelter




   90.070   Definitions



   90.071   Requirements for adoption



   90.072   Denial of adoption



   90.073   Sterilization



   90.074   Reclamation



   90.075   Exceptions




Vicious Animals




   90.090   Dogs at large



   90.091   Animals at large



   90.092   Impoundment



   90.093   Tranquilization, destruction



   90.094   Redemption restricted




Keeping of Livestock




   90.105   Definitions



   90.106   Keeping of livestock, fowl, hogs and swine prohibited



   90.107   Prohibitions and restrictions



   90.108   Annexation



   90.109   Animal parades, herding prohibited; defenses



Statutory references:



   Animals running at large on highways, see Tex. Agriculture Code, §§
143.101 et seq.



   Authority of municipalities to establish rabies control programs, see
Tex. Health and Safety Code, § 826.015



   Cruelty to animals, see Tex. Penal Code, §§ 42.09 through 42.092



   Health and safety of animals, see Tex. Health and Safety Code, Ch. 821
et seq.



   Impoundment of strays, see Tex. Agriculture Code, § 142.009



   Restraint, impoundment and disposition of dogs and cats, see Tex.
Health and Safety Code, § 826.033



   Strays, see Tex. Agriculture Code, Ch. 142




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 90.001  KEEPING OF SWINE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain swine
in any place or property within the city at a distance of less than 300 feet
from any residence, dwelling, place of business, public sidewalk or public
street of the city; provided, however, that this section shall not be
construed to apply to nor to prohibit the public exhibition or keeping of
swine, in a sanitary and clean enclosure, and in such manner as not to be or
constitute a nuisance to the immediate neighborhood of such enclosure, for
experimental or educational purposes.



   (B)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, it shall not
be unlawful to keep a small exotic breed of pig (for example, a Vietnamese
potbellied pig) as a household pet; however, no household shall have more
than three pigs at one time. The owner of each such pig shall have a
veterinarian’s certificate of vaccination for erysipelas for each pig by
the age of three months.



(Prior Code, § 2.01.001)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.002  LIVESTOCK RUNNING AT LARGE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow and permit any cows,
horses, mules, jacks, jennets, goats, sheep, swine or any other livestock of
any character to run at large within the city.



(Prior Code, § 2.01.002)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.003  FOWL RUNNING AT LARGE.



   It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any geese, ducks,
turkeys, chickens or other domestic fowl to allow or permit the same to run
at large in the city.



(Prior Code, § 2.01.003)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.004  DISPOSAL OF DEAD ANIMALS.



   The carcass of any animal dead of disease or other cause not
slaughtered for food shall be removed and/or disposed of by the owner if
known and, if not known, the owner of the premises where such animal is
found, at his or her own expense within 24 hours after such death, according
to such method as may be approved by the animal control officer or designee.



(Prior Code, § 2.01.004)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.005  SANITATION.



   The owner or person in possession of animals shall keep yards, pens and
enclosures in which such animals, including livestock and fowl, are confined
in such a manner so as not to give off odors offensive to persons of ordinary
sensibilities residing in the vicinity, or to breed or attract flies,
mosquitoes or other noxious insects, or in any manner to endanger the public
health or safety, or create a public nuisance.



(Prior Code, § 2.01.005)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.006  PET CARE.



   It is hereby prohibited and shall be unlawful for any person to
willfully abandon any animal, to withhold food or water from any animal such
that its health is endangered, fail to provide shelter in accordance with
current conditions, or to treat the animal in such a way that it suffers
unduly.



(Prior Code, § 2.01.006)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.007  NUISANCES.



   The following shall be considered a public nuisance and shall be
unlawful:



   (A)   The keeping of any dog, cat, livestock or fowl, which by
causing frequent or long-continued barking or noise, shall disturb any person
of ordinary sensibilities in the vicinity;



   (B)   The keeping of any dog, cat, livestock or fowl in such a
manner as to endanger the public health; to annoy neighbors by the
accumulation of dog, cat, livestock or fowl wastes which cause foul and
offensive odors, or are considered to be a hazard to any other animal or
human being; or by continued presence on the premises of another; and



   (C)   All animal pens, stables or enclosures in which any animal may
be kept or confined which, from use have become offensive to a person of
ordinary sensibilities.



(Prior Code, § 2.01.007)  Penalty, see § 10.99




DOGS AND CATS




§ 90.020  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER OR DESIGNEE.  Any person designated by the City
Manager to enforce the provisions of this subchapter.



   CAT.  Any member of the Felis catus species, either male or female.



   DOG.  Any member of the canine species of animals, either male or
female.



   OWNER.  Any person having title to any animal; or a person who has,
harbors or keeps, or who causes or permits to be harbored or kept, an animal
in his or her care, or who permits an animal to remain on or about his or her
premises.



   RUNNING AT LARGE.  Not completely confined by a building, wall or
fence of sufficient strength or construction to restrain the animal, except
when such animal is either on a leash or held in the hands of the owner or
keeper, or under the direct supervision of the owner within the limits of the
owner’s private property. Leaving an unattended dog fastened to a leash,
chain or trolley shall not be deemed to comply with the requirements of this
subchapter.



   VICIOUS DOG.  Any dog that has made an unprovoked attack on any person
causing physical injury to that person, or that has caused physical injury to
at least two or more persons whether the attacks were provoked or not.



(Prior Code, § 2.02.001)



§ 90.021  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Enforcement of this subchapter shall be the responsibility of
the animal control officer or designee.



   (B)   The animal control officer or designee shall have the
authority to issue citations for any violations of this subchapter. If the
person cited is not present, the animal control officer or designee may send
the citation to the alleged defendant by registered or certified mail.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with any
animal control officer or designee in the performance of his or her duties.



(Prior Code, § 2.02.002)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.022  RUNNING AT LARGE.



   It shall be unlawful for any dog possessed, kept or harbored to run at
large anywhere in the city. This regulation shall apply to all public places
and to all private property. Leaving an unattended dog fastened to a leash,
chain or trolley shall not be deemed to comply with the requirements of this
section. The animal control officer or designee is authorized to impound any
dog found to be running at large.



(Prior Code, § 2.02.003)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.023  LIMITATION ON NUMBER.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any household to own or keep more than four
dogs or four cats or a combination of four dogs and cats upon any private
premises within the city limits subject to the following exceptions: a
veterinary clinic, an animal hospital or similar facility; an animal shelter;
a kennel; a pet shop; a research institution; a qualified researcher; a
performing animal exhibition; or a litter up to 12 weeks old.



   (B)   It is an exception to this provision if the dogs are housed at
all times within a dwelling or on a premises which is a minimum of one acre
in size and the dwelling or premises is maintained in a sanitary manner that
is not a public health nuisance, no noise nuisance, or a danger to the
animals or the public.



   (C)   Provisions of divisions (A) and (B) above shall not become
effective until one year after the adoption of this code.



   (D)   Every yard, shed, pen or other structure used for the storage
or shelter of animals shall be cleaned and maintained so as to maintain safe
and healthy conditions for the animals, to prevent the escape of any noxious
odors or substances to adjacent properties, or to create any health hazard or
nuisance to adjacent property owners. Allowing or permitting of such
violation is hereby declared a public nuisance. Provisions of this division
(D) shall become effective immediately upon adoption of this code.



(Prior Code, § 2.02.004)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.024  DANGEROUS DOGS; STATE LAW ADOPTED.



   Dangerous dogs, as defined in Tex. Health and Safety Code, § 822.041,
shall be regulated in accordance with the provisions of Tex. Health and
Safety Code, Ch. 822, subchapter D, §§ 822.041 et seq.



(Prior Code, § 2.02.031)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority of city to regulate the keeping of dangerous dogs, see Tex.
Health and Safety Code, § 822.041 et seq.




RABIES CONTROL




§ 90.035  VACCINATION OF DOGS AND CATS.



   Every owner of a dog or cat four months of age or older shall have such
animal vaccinated against rabies, and such dog or cat shall receive a booster
rabies vaccination within the 12-month interval following the initial
vaccination. Every domestic dog or cat must be re-vaccinated against rabies
at a minimum of at least once every three years with a rabies vaccine
licensed by the United States Department of Agriculture. Any person moving
into the city from a location outside of the city shall comply with this
section within ten days after having moved into the city.



(Prior Code, § 2.03.001)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Rabies vaccinations, see Tex. Health and Safety Code, §§ 826.021 et
seq.



§ 90.036  REPORT OF RABID ANIMALS.



   It shall be the duty of the owner or harborer of any animal, and all
practicing veterinarians, to report to the animal control officer or designee
all cases of rabies with which he or she comes in contact or to which his or
her attention has been directed. This report shall be made immediately upon
diagnosis or suspicion of such cases of rabies.



(Prior Code, § 2.03.002)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Reports of rabies, see Tex. Health and Safety Code, § 826.041



§ 90.037  QUARANTINE.



   (A)   The animal control officer or designee shall have the
authority to order the quarantine of animals responsible for bite incidents,
or suspected of having any disease considered to be a hazard to the human
population or other animals.



   (B)   Every animal that bites a human, or attacks another animal in
an unnatural manner, or has rabies or any other disease, or is under
suspicion of having rabies or any other disease, shall be immediately
confined by the owner, who shall promptly notify the animal control officer
or designee of the place where such animal is confined and the reason
therefor. The owner shall not permit such animal to come in contact with any
other person or animal. The owner shall surrender possession of such animal
to the animal control officer or designee on demand for supervised
quarantine. Supervised quarantine shall be at the city pound or veterinary
hospital, or by any other method of adequate confinement approved by the
animal control officer or designee. The quarantine shall be for not less than
ten days. A release from quarantine may be issued if no signs of rabies or
other diseases have been observed during the quarantine period of ten days.



      (1)   Any animal quarantined other than at the city pound
shall be observed by the same veterinarian throughout the entire required
quarantine period, and the owner shall immediately notify the animal control
officer or designee as to the veterinarian supervising the quarantine.



      (2)   If the animal control officer or designee orders
quarantine, it shall be in the city pound or a veterinary hospital.



   (C)   All animal bites reported shall be investigated by the animal
control officer or designee. Without permission of the animal control officer
or designee, it shall be unlawful for any person to kill or remove from the
city limits any animal that has bitten a person or other animal, or that has
been placed under quarantine except when it is necessary to kill such to
protect the life of any person or animal.



   (D)   The animal control officer or designee shall direct the
disposition of an animal suspected of being rabid or having any other disease
considered to be a hazard to any animal or human being.



   (E)   The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies, or suspected
of having been rabid, shall, upon demand, be surrendered to the animal
control officer or designee.



   (F)   Every animal that has been bitten by another animal shall be
immediately confined by the owner, who shall promptly notify the animal
control officer or designee of the place where such animal is confined and
the reason therefor. The owner shall not permit such animal to come in
contact with any person or animal.



   (G)   Any animal known exposed to rabies shall be handled in one of
the following manners:



      (1)   Humane destruction with notification to, or under the
supervision of, the animal control officer or designee; or



      (2)   Quarantine in a veterinary hospital for at least six
months immediately following the date of the exposure.



   (H)   No person shall fail to surrender an animal for supervised
quarantine or humane destruction, as required herein, for rabies control when
demand therefor is made by the animal control officer or designee.



(Prior Code, § 2.03.003)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory references:



   Quarantine and impoundment facilities generally, see Tex. Health and
Safety Code, §§ 826.051 et seq.



   Quarantine of animals, see Tex. Health and Safety Code, § 826.042




IMPOUNDMENT




§ 90.050  AUTHORIZED.



   The following dogs or cats may be impounded:



   (A)   Dogs or cats not exhibiting evidence of being vaccinated as
described in § 90.035;



   (B)   Any dog or cat infected or kept under conditions which could
endanger the public or animal health;



   (C)   Any dog or cat that creates a nuisance, as defined in §
90.007;



   (D)   Any dog running at large, as stipulated in § 90.022;



   (E)   Any dog or cat treated in a manner determined by the animal
control officer or designee to be cruel or inhumane;



   (F)   Any dog or cat that has bitten a human being or needs to be
placed under observation for rabies determination as determined by an animal
control officer or designee; and



   (G)   Any dog or cat violating any provision of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 2.04.001)



§ 90.051  NOTICE TO OWNER.



   Reasonable effort should be made by the animal control officer or
designee to contact the owner of any dog or cat impounded; however, final
responsibility for the location of the dog or cat is that of the owner.



(Prior Code, § 2.04.002)



§ 90.052  REDEMPTION GENERALLY.



   The owner may resume possession of any impounded animal, to include
livestock and fowl, upon payment of impoundment fees, handling fees and any
veterinarian bills which may be incurred by the animal control officer or
designee for the welfare of the animal, to include livestock and fowl, and
upon compliance with the vaccination provisions of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 2.04.003)



§ 90.053  REDEMPTION AFTER QUARANTINE.



   If any dog or cat is held under quarantine or observation for rabies,
the owner shall not be entitled to possession until it has been released from
quarantine by the animal control officer or designee, and all quarantine fees
are paid. Additionally, handling fees will attach to quarantine fees for
animals not reclaimed after the quarantine period expires. If the fees were
not paid and the dog or cat reclaimed within ten days at the end of the
quarantine period, the dog or cat shall be considered relinquished to the
shelter for disposition.



(Prior Code, § 2.04.004)



§ 90.054  POUND.



   The City Manager shall select and establish a place for impounding all
animals, to include livestock and fowl, impounded under any provision of this
subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 2.04.005)



§ 90.055  RETENTION PERIOD.



   Any impounded animal, to include livestock and fowl, not under
quarantine, will be considered relinquished to the shelter.



(Prior Code, § 2.04.006)



§ 90.056  DISPOSAL.



   (A)   Any animal, including livestock and fowl, not reclaimed by the
owner may be humanely euthanized after being impounded 72 hours.



   (B)   Any nursing animal, including livestock and fowl, impounded
without the mother, or where the mother cannot or refuses to provide a
nutritious milk, may be immediately euthanized to prevent further suffering.



   (C)   Any impounded animal, including livestock and fowl, that
appears to be suffering from extreme injury or illness may be euthanized or
given to a nonprofit humane organization without regard to the 72-hour period
for the purpose of veterinary medical care, as determined by the animal
control officer or designee.



(Prior Code, § 2.04.007)



§ 90.057  IMMEDIATE EUTHANIZATION AUTHORIZED.



   An owner who no longer wishes responsibility for his or her animal,
including livestock and fowl, or believes the animal, including livestock and
fowl, to be in ill or injured condition, may sign a written waiver supplied
by the animal control officer or designee allowing the animal to be
immediately euthanized in a humane manner, provided that no dog or cat that
has bitten a human being shall be euthanized before the expiration of the
ten-day quarantine period.



(Prior Code, § 2.04.008)  (Ord. 94-8-9, passed 8-16-1994)



§ 90.058  FEES.



   (A)   Impoundment fees for animals, including livestock and fowl,
shall be on file in the City Secretary’s office.



   (B)   A daily handling fee shall be charged for every day, or
fraction thereof, that an animal, including livestock and fowl, is at the
pound. Such fee shall be on file in the City Secretary’s office. This fee
shall be paid in addition the impoundment fees.



   (C)   The owner of any dog, cat or dangerous or vicious dog held in
quarantine for observation purposes shall be charged an additional fee, which
is on file in the City Secretary’s office for every day or fraction of a
day a dog or cat is at the pound. This is in addition to the impoundment and
handling fees.



   (D)   If a licensed veterinarian is called to the animal pound to
examine or inspect the dog or cat, this fee shall be charged to the owner.
This fee is in addition to any other fees in this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 2.04.009)




ADOPTION FROM ANIMAL SHELTER




§ 90.070  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANIMAL SHELTER.  The animal shelter operated by the city.



   NEW OWNER.  A person who is legally competent to enter into a binding
contract and who is adopting an animal, including livestock and fowl, from
the city animal shelter.



   STERILIZATION.  The surgical removal of the reproductive organs of a
dog or cat to render the animal unable to reproduce.



   VETERINARIAN.  A person licensed to practice veterinary medicine by
the State Board of Veterinary Medical Examiners.



(Prior Code, § 2.05.001)



§ 90.071  REQUIREMENTS FOR ADOPTION.



   (A)   An individual may adopt an animal, including livestock and
fowl, from the city animal shelter if:



      (1)   The individual complies with the requirements of this
code;



      (2)   The animal, including livestock and fowl, has been
classified as adoptable by the animal shelter;



      (3)   The prospective adopter demonstrates that they have
proper facilities to care for the animal;



      (4)   The prospective adopter obtains all necessary
registration and vaccinations for the animal; and



      (5)   The prospective adopter pays the fee set by the City
Council for adoption of an animal, including livestock and fowl. A schedule
of adoption fees shall be kept on file by the city animal control officer or
designee.



   (B)   Except as provided by § 90.075, the city animal shelter may
not release a dog or cat for adoption unless the animal has been sterilized
or the release is made to a new owner who signs an agreement to have the
animal sterilized.



(Prior Code, § 2.05.002)



Statutory reference:



   Sterilization of dog or cat released for adoption, see Tex. Health and
Safety Code, Ch. 828



§ 90.072  DENIAL OF ADOPTION.



   (A)   The city animal control officer or designee may refuse to
allow a person to adopt an animal, including livestock and fowl, if he or she
has reason to believe:



      (1)   Such person would not, in the opinion of the animal
control officer or designee, have the proper facilities to contain or care
for the animal, including livestock and fowl, as required by this code;



      (2)   Such person wants the animal, including livestock and
fowl, for the purpose of resale or for purposes other than for pet ownership;



      (3)   The animal, including livestock and fowl, would be a
hazard or threat to humans or other animals;



      (4)   If, during the course of the interaction/observation
period between the animal and the prospective owner, the animal control
officer or designee observes behavior on the part of the person or animal
that indicates a potential hazard to either;



      (5)   The person refuses to agree to spay or neuter the animal
as required by this subchapter; or



      (6)   The person refuses or fails to pay the adoption fee
required by this chapter.



   (B)   The city animal control officer or designee may refuse to
allow a person to adopt an animal, including livestock and fowl, if the
prospective adopter has, in the past, adopted an animal, including livestock
and fowl, and has failed to have the adopted animal sterilized.



(Prior Code, § 2.05.003)



§ 90.073  STERILIZATION.



   (A)   Agreement. The sterilization agreement used by the animal
shelter must contain:



      (1)   The date of the agreement;



      (2)   The name(s), address(es) and signature(s) of the new
owner or new owners;



      (3)   A description of the animal to be adopted;



      (4)   The sterilization completion date;



      (5)   A description of the letters required if the dog or cat
is not spayed or neutered; and



      (6)   A statement that the sterilization must be done by a
veterinarian licensed by the state.



   (B)   Deadline.



      (1)   Except as provided by this section, a new owner who
signs an agreement under division (A) above shall have the adopted animal
sterilized on or before the sterilization completion date stated in the
agreement.



      (2)   The sterilization completion date contained in the
sterilization agreement must be:



         (a)   The thirtieth day after the date of adoption in
the case of an adult animal; or



         (b)   The thirtieth day after a specified date estimated
to be the date an adopted infant female animal becomes six months old or an
adopted infant male animal becomes eight months old.



      (3)   If the sterilization completion date falls on a
Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the deadline is extended to the first day
that is not a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday.



      (4)   The animal shelter may extend the deadline for 30 days
on presentation of a written report from a veterinarian licensed by the state
stating that the life or health of the adopted animal may be jeopardized by
surgery.



   (C)   Confirmation of sterilization.



      (1)   Except as provided by division (D) below, each new owner
who signs a sterilization agreement under division (A) above shall deliver to
the animal shelter from which the animal was adopted a letter signed by the
veterinarian who performed the surgery.



      (2)   The letter must be delivered in person or by mail not
later than the seventh day after the date on which the animal was sterilized.



      (3)   The letter must state that the animal has been
sterilized, briefly describe the animal and provide the date of sterilization.



   (D)   Letter concerning animal’s death or loss.



      (1)   If an adopted animal dies or is lost or stolen on or
before the sterilization completion date agreed to under division (A) above,
the new owner shall deliver to the animal shelter a signed letter stating
that the animal is dead, lost or was stolen.



      (2)   The letter must be delivered not later than the seventh
day after the date of the animal’s death, theft or loss, and must describe
the cause of death, if known, and provide the date of death, loss or theft.



      (3)   The letter required by this subsection is in lieu of the
letter required by division (C) above.



   (E)   Notice of failure to receive letter. A releasing agency that
does not receive a letter required under divisions (C) or (D) above before
the expiration of the seventh day after the sterilization completion date
agreed to under this section shall cause a complaint to be filed against the
new owner. It is a presumption under this subchapter that the failure of the
new owner to deliver to the animal shelter a signed letter, as required under
divisions (C) or (D) above, is the result of the new owner’s refusal to
have the adopted animal sterilized. The new owner may rebut this presumption
at the time of the hearing with the proof required under the above-mentioned
divisions.



(Prior Code, § 2.05.004)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.074  RECLAMATION.



   (A)   If the animal control officer or designee does not receive a
letter under § 90.073(C) or (D) after the expiration of the seventh day
after the sterilization completion date agreed to under § 90.073, the animal
control officer or designee may promptly reclaim the animal from the new
owner.



   (B)   A person may not give false information to the animal control
officer or designee regarding an adopted animal, or prevent, obstruct or
interfere with a reclamation under this section.



   (C)   A person who violates division (B) above shall be adjudged
guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and punished as authorized under § 10.99.



(Prior Code, § 2.05.005)



§ 90.075  EXCEPTIONS.



   Nothing herein shall prohibit the sale of unwanted animals to a medical
school or a medical or veterinary facility for medical research or for the
treatment of other animals.



(Prior Code, § 2.05.006)




VICIOUS ANIMALS




§ 90.090  DOGS AT LARGE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor, raise or allow to
run at large any vicious dog within the city.



(Prior Code, § 2.06.001)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.091  ANIMALS AT LARGE.



   It shall be unlawful to allow to run at large any wild or vicious
animal within the city. As used in this section, a WILD ANIMAL shall mean any
animal that is not ordinarily domesticated. A VICIOUS ANIMAL shall mean any
animal, other than a dog, that by its nature or physical makeup is capable of
causing serious physical injury or death to human beings.



(Prior Code, § 2.06.002)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.092  IMPOUNDMENT.



   (A)   The animal control officer or designee shall cause to be
seized and impounded any vicious dog found to be running at large or that is
found to be kept or living within the city.



   (B)   The animal control officer or designee shall cause to be
seized and impounded any wild or vicious animal found to be running at large
within the city.



(Prior Code, § 2.06.003)



§ 90.093  TRANQUILIZATION, DESTRUCTION.



   If, during the course of seizing and impounding any animal under this
subchapter, including, but not limited to vicious dogs, the animal poses a
risk of serious physical harm or death to any person, such person authorized
by the animal control officer or designee may render such animal immobile, by
means of tranquilizers or other safe drugs or if that is not safely possible
then such animal may be killed.



(Prior Code, § 2.06.004)



§ 90.094  REDEMPTION RESTRICTED.



   (A)   Any vicious dog or wild or vicious animal shall not be
released from impoundment, unless and until the animal control officer or
designee is satisfied that the owner of such vicious dog or wild or vicious
animal has made arrangements to keep the same outside of the city, and that
the vicious dog or wild or vicious animal will be immediately and permanently
removed from the city and the impoundment and any other applicable fees which
are on file in the City Secretary’s office are paid.



   (B)   No vicious dog or wild or vicious animal may be adopted out of
the city pound; however, the owner of any impounded vicious dog or wild or
vicious animal may resume possession of the same if such owner makes
arrangements for keeping the same outside the city within 72 hours of
impoundment. The animal control officer or designee shall euthanize any such
vicious dog or wild or vicious animal not redeemed by its owner after the
expiration of 72 hours of impoundment.



(Prior Code, § 2.06.005)  Penalty, see § 10.99




KEEPING OF LIVESTOCK




§ 90.105  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   FOWL.  Any heavy bodied, terrestrial bird of the order Galliformes,
including but not limited to chickens, ducks, geese, pheasants, turkey,
grouse, guineas or other common domestic fowl, but not including caged pet
birds kept inside a building and otherwise not a bird defined as fowl.



   LIVESTOCK.  Any horse, swine, cattle, sheep, goat, mule, jack, jenny,
emu, ostrich or rhea.



(Prior Code, § 2.07.001)



§ 90.106  KEEPING OF LIVESTOCK, FOWL, HOGS AND SWINE PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Livestock. It shall be unlawful to own, keep or harbor, any
livestock within the city limits, except as follows.



      (1)   Numerical limitation. In areas zoned RE (Residential
Estates District) and FP (Floodplain District), no more than one livestock
animal per fenced in acre may be kept. In all other zoning districts, no more
than three livestock animals per fenced in acre may be kept.



      (2)   Restraint. The acreage on which such livestock are
maintained must be enclosed by a fence of sufficient height, strength and
construction to keep such livestock from escaping from the premises.



      (3)   Pens and structures. All livestock kept under this
section shall be provided a stable, shed, pen or other structure of adequate
size for the storage, shelter and safekeeping of such animals.



      (4)   Location of pens and structures. Every such stable,
shed, pen or other structure for the storage, shelter and safekeeping of
livestock shall be at least 25 feet from the property of any other property
owner at the nearest point.



   (B)   Fowl. It shall be unlawful to own, keep or harbor any fowl
within the city limits, except as follows.



      (1)   Numerical limitation. In areas zoned RE (Residential
Estates District) and FP (Floodplain District), no more than six fowl may be
kept per acre. In all other zoning districts, no more than six fowl may be
kept per household regardless of lot size.



      (2)   Restraint. All fowl kept under this section shall be
confined in a pen, coop or other structure sufficient to prevent their escape.



      (3)   Location of pens and structures. Every such pen, coop or
other structure required for the confinement of fowl under this section shall
be located at least 50 feet distant from the property of any other property
owner at the nearest point.



   (C)   Hogs and swine. It shall be unlawful to own, keep or harbor
any hogs or swine within the city limits, except as follows.



      (1)   This section shall not be construed to apply to nor to
prohibit the public exhibition or keeping of swine, in a sanitary and clean
enclosure, and in such manner as not to be or constitute a nuisance to the
immediate neighborhood of such enclosure, for experimental or educational
purposes.



      (2)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, it
shall not be unlawful to keep a small exotic breed of pig (for example, a
Vietnamese potbellied pig) as a household pet; however, no household shall
have more than three pigs at one time. The owner of each pig shall have a
veterinarian’s certificate of vaccination for erysipelas for each pig by
the age of three months.



      (3)   All provisions of § 90.001 inconsistent with this
division (B) are herewith expressly repealed.



(Prior Code, § 2.07.002)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.107  PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS.



   Prohibitions and restrictions set out in this subchapter shall not
apply to:



   (A)   A zoo, zoological park or animal park;



   (B)   An accredited research institution;



   (C)   A qualified researcher utilizing such livestock or fowl in
connection with defined research objectives;



   (D)   An animal exhibition operating under contract, lease or
special event permit, or otherwise duly approved by the city;



   (E)   Someone lawfully engaged in the transport of livestock or fowl
in an enclosed vehicle in accordance with state law unless such livestock,
fowl, hogs or swine create a nuisance, as defined by § 90.007;



   (F)   Someone engaged in the transport or receipt of livestock or
fowl for processing in connection with the operation of a cattle auction,
slaughterhouse or like facility;



   (G)   A commercial farm and ranch feed and supply business or pet
store;



   (H)   An animal shelter, veterinary clinic or similar facility for
the treatment and temporary shelter of animals in connection therewith; or



   (I)   Livestock, fowl, hogs or swine kept by a student in a primary
or secondary school on a temporary basis as part of a learning project though
his or her school, unless such livestock, fowl, hogs or swine create a
nuisance as defined by § 90.007.



(Prior Code, § 2.07.003)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.108  ANNEXATION.



   Areas on which agricultural operations are conducted or livestock are
kept that are annexed into the city after the adoption of this subchapter may
retain such uses as legal uses pursuant to state law. Such agricultural or
livestock operations in such newly-annexed areas can only be altered by the
City Council, by resolution, making findings that such regulations are
necessary to protect the public health.



(Prior Code, § 2.07.004)



§ 90.109  ANIMAL PARADES, HERDING PROHIBITED; DEFENSES.



   It is unlawful to herd, parade or otherwise move livestock from one
location to another along a public street or highway in the city unless the
person is:



   (A)   Doing so pursuant to the conditions of a parade permit duly
issued under this code; or



   (B)   An officer or employee of the federal, state or local
government engaged in the performance of official duties.



(Prior Code, § 2.07.005)  (Ord. 09-07-09, passed 7-28-2009)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



CHAPTER 91:  CEMETERIES



Section




General Provisions




   91.001   Definitions




Cemetery Board




   91.015   Created



   91.016   Composition; appointment of members



   91.017   Members’ qualifications and oath



   91.018   Terms of members



   91.019   Secretary



   91.020   General powers and duties




Permits




   91.035   Order and permit for work on lots



   91.036   Permit for workers



   91.037   Exclusion of persons from grounds; refusal of permits




Regulations




   91.050   Authority to lay out and alter walks and avenues and make
rules and regulations



   91.051   Suspension of work when chapter violated



   91.052   Price of lots



   91.053   General restrictions on use



   91.054   Opening hours



   91.055   Vehicles and animals



   91.056   Sitting, standing and the like on lots, graves and the like



   91.057   Grave-digging



   91.058   Changing lot grades



   91.059   Signs and advertising



   91.060   Enclosures, curbing, ornaments, walks and the like



   91.061   Boundary markers



   91.062   Marker plans



   91.063   Mausoleums, vaults



   91.064   Loud conversation prohibited; workers to cease operations
during interment



   91.065   Articles placed on lots or graves



   91.066   Right to remove and plant trees and shrubs and mow grass



   91.067   Removal of funeral designs and floral pieces



   91.068   Right to fill and level graves, plant grass thereon



   91.069   Use of city’s tools, lumber and the like



   91.070   Restrictions on bringing marker work, granite and the like
into grounds



   91.071   Bringing heavy loads into grounds



   91.072   Guy ropes fastened to trees or shrubs



   91.073   Material to be moved on paths or planks



   91.074   Right to prohibit erection of markers and monuments



   91.075   Removal of offensive monuments, vaults and the like



   91.076   Responsibility of funeral directors for conduct of employees



   91.077   Destruction, removal of cemetery property



Statutory references:



   Cemeteries, see Tex. Health and Safety Code, §§ 711.001 et seq. and
§§ 714.001 et seq.



   Municipal regulation of cemeteries, see Tex. Health and Safety Code,
§§ 713.001 et seq.




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 91.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CARETAKER.  The person designated to supervise and manage the
operation of the cemetery.



   CEMETERY.  Any cemetery owned and/or operated by the city.



(Prior Code, § 1.07.001)




CEMETERY BOARD




§ 91.015  CREATED.



   A Cemetery Board is hereby created in and for the city.



(Prior Code, § 1.07.031)



§ 91.016  COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS.



   The Cemetery Board shall consist of seven members, who shall be
appointed by the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 1.07.032)



§ 91.017  MEMBERS’ QUALIFICATIONS AND OATH.



   Members of the Cemetery Board shall be qualified voters residing in the
city and, after their appointment, they shall subscribe to the oath of office.



(Prior Code, § 1.07.033)



§ 91.018  TERMS OF MEMBERS.



   The members of the Cemetery Board shall be appointed for a term of two
years from such appointment and until a successor is appointed and qualified.



(Prior Code, § 1.07.034)



§ 91.019  SECRETARY.



   There is hereby created the office of Secretary to the Cemetery Board,
which shall be filled by a person qualified to keep the records of the Board
and to account for the receipt and expenditure of all funds arising from the
operation of the cemeteries.



(Prior Code, § 1.07.035)



§ 91.020  GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Cemetery Board shall act in an advisory capacity to the City
Council relative to the management and operation of the cemeteries. The Board
shall see that the operation of such cemeteries is in conformity with the
laws of the state and the Charter of the city.



(Prior Code, § 1.07.036)




PERMITS




§ 91.035  ORDER AND PERMIT FOR WORK ON LOTS.



   (A)   The city will not allow work of any description to be placed
upon any cemetery lot, unless a written order from the lot holder or his or
her representative is presented and a permit is obtained from the cemetery
caretaker.



   (B)   This section applies to the cutting of inscriptions, setting
of markers and the like, and also to the removal of anything from the lot.



(Prior Code, § 1.07.061)



§ 91.036  PERMIT FOR WORKERS.



   No workers, except those employed in the erection of stone work under a
regular permit, will be allowed to work in the grounds of the cemetery,
except by permission of the caretaker.



(Prior Code, § 1.07.062)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.037  EXCLUSION OF PERSONS FROM GROUNDS; REFUSAL OF PERMITS.



   The city shall have the right to exclude from the grounds of the
cemetery any person who disobeys any provision of this chapter. The city
shall also have the right to refuse permission to persons whose work is not
satisfactory, or whose employees disobey the rules of the cemetery.



(Prior Code, § 1.07.063)




REGULATIONS




§ 91.050  AUTHORITY TO LAY OUT AND ALTER WALKS AND AVENUES AND MAKE RULES
AND REGULATIONS.



   The City Council may, from time to time, lay out and alter avenues or
walks and make such rules and regulations for the government of the grounds
and care and control of lots in the cemetery as it may deem requisite and
proper to secure and promote the general objects of the cemetery.



(Prior Code, § 1.07.091)



§ 91.051  SUSPENSION OF WORK WHEN CHAPTER VIOLATED.



   The city shall have the power to suspend work in the cemetery
immediately whenever there is a failure to conform to the rules and
regulations prescribed in this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 1.07.092)



§ 91.052  PRICE OF LOTS.



   All lots sold in the cemetery shall be of such size and for such price
as may be fixed and determined by the City Council and on file in the City
Secretary’s office.



(Prior Code, § 1.07.093)



§ 91.053  GENERAL RESTRICTIONS ON USE.



   The cemetery shall be used for cemetery purposes only.



(Prior Code, § 1.07.094)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.054  OPENING HOURS.



   The cemetery will be open from 6:00 a.m. to sunset to all lot owners
and visitors, or at such other times as the City Council may designate.



(Prior Code, § 1.07.095)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.055  VEHICLES AND ANIMALS.



   The driving or riding of vehicles or animals will not be allowed on
lots or upon the lawns or walks of the cemetery.



(Prior Code, § 1.07.096)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.056  SITTING, STANDING AND THE LIKE ON LOTS, GRAVES AND THE LIKE.



   Sitting, lounging or lying at full length on lots, mounds or ornamental
grounds at the cemetery and sitting or standing on graves therein is strictly
prohibited.



(Prior Code, § 1.07.097)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.057  GRAVE-DIGGING.



   The digging of a grave for an interment in the cemetery will only be
permitted by authorized persons, under the direction of the cemetery
caretaker. A notice of not less than five working hours must be given to
ensure proper preparation of the grave.



(Prior Code, § 1.07.098)



§ 91.058  CHANGING LOT GRADES.



   The grades of cemetery lots once established cannot be changed without
the consent of the City Council or appointed authority.



(Prior Code, § 1.07.099)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.059  SIGNS AND ADVERTISING.



   No signs indicating that a lot or vault is for sale and no sign, card
or advertisement of any stonecutter, undertaker or other person shall be
permitted in the cemetery.



(Prior Code, § 1.07.100)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.060  ENCLOSURES, CURBING, ORNAMENTS, WALKS AND THE LIKE.



   Enclosures of any kind, curbing or coping around a lot, ornaments,
chairs, settees, vases, glass jars, pitchers, artificial flowers, flowers,
toys, watering cans or other articles that may be considered inappropriate
are prohibited in the cemetery, and the right to remove the same without
notice to lot owners is reserved. Objects of wood of any kind will not be
permitted in the cemetery, and no gravel, brick, stone, cement or other kind
of artificial walk will be allowed on any lot, except by permission of the
cemetery caretaker.



(Prior Code, § 1.07.101)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.061  BOUNDARY MARKERS.



   All boundary markers set up in the cemetery by the city must remain
undisturbed.



(Prior Code, § 1.07.102)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.062  MARKER PLANS.



   Plans for markers must be submitted to the city to secure permission
for erection in the cemetery.



(Prior Code, § 1.07.103)



§ 91.063  MAUSOLEUMS, VAULTS.



   No mausoleums, vaults or tombs above ground shall be allowed within the
cemeteries, except in accordance with the rules and regulations adopted by
the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 1.07.104)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.064  LOUD CONVERSATION PROHIBITED; WORKERS TO CEASE OPERATIONS DURING
INTERMENT.



   Loud conversation in the cemetery shall not be permitted, and all
workers must cease operations while in the immediate vicinity of an interment.



(Prior Code, § 1.07.105)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.065  ARTICLES PLACED ON LOTS OR GRAVES.



   The city shall not be responsible for any funeral design, floral piece
or other article or thing placed on any lot or grave in the cemetery.



(Prior Code, § 1.07.106)



§ 91.066  RIGHT TO REMOVE AND PLANT TREES AND SHRUBS AND MOW GRASS.



   If any trees or shrubs situated on any cemetery lot shall, by means of
their roots or branches, become detrimental to the adjacent lots or avenues,
or become unsightly or inconvenient for visitors, it shall be the duty of the
cemetery caretaker, and he or she shall have the right to enter the lot for
such purpose, to remove the trees or shrubbery or such part thereof as he or
she shall determine to be detrimental, unsightly or inconvenient. The
cemetery caretaker shall have the right to remove any trees or shrubs that
may be infected by scales or other diseases and to plant and mow the grass on
all lots and graves.



(Prior Code, § 1.07.107)



§ 91.067  REMOVAL OF FUNERAL DESIGNS AND FLORAL PIECES.



   Funeral designs and floral pieces will be removed from the graves when
they become wilted or unsightly. Persons desiring to retain any such design
or piece must remove the same within 48 hours after the interment. In no case
will employees attempt to locate designs or floral pieces after their removal
from the lots.



(Prior Code, § 1.07.108)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.068  RIGHT TO FILL AND LEVEL GRAVES, PLANT GRASS THEREON.



   The cemetery caretaker shall have full right to fill and level graves
and plant grass thereon, when desired.



(Prior Code, § 1.07.109)



§ 91.069  USE OF CITY’S TOOLS, LUMBER AND THE LIKE.



   The use of cemetery tools, lumber or other material belonging to the
city by any person not an employee of the city shall not be allowed.



(Prior Code, § 1.07.110)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.070  RESTRICTIONS ON BRINGING MARKER WORK, GRANITE AND THE LIKE INTO
GROUNDS.



   (A)   Marker work or any other material shall not be brought into
the cemetery when the ground is not in a suitable condition, or when the
proper foundation has not been prepared.



   (B)   Masons and stonecutters will not be permitted to bring into
the grounds of the cemetery material in large quantities in advance of its
immediate use, nor in any unprepared condition. Blocks of granite or marble
must be dressed to the design and dimensions ready for setting and lime must
be slacked and mortar prepared and brought to the grounds in moderate supply,
and all chips, pruning and rubbish must be gathered up and carried to places
of deposit as required by the cemetery caretaker.



(Prior Code, § 1.07.111)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.071  BRINGING HEAVY LOADS INTO GROUNDS.



   The cemetery caretaker must in all cases be consulted before any heavy
load shall enter the cemetery grounds.



(Prior Code, § 1.07.112)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.072  GUY ROPES FASTENED TO TREES OR SHRUBS.



   Guy ropes must not be fastened to any trees or shrubs in the cemetery.



(Prior Code, § 1.07.113)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.073  MATERIAL TO BE MOVED ON PATHS OR PLANKS.



   All materials must be moved on the paths of the cemetery and over
planks laid for the purpose, and not over adjoining lots.



(Prior Code, § 1.07.114)



§ 91.074  RIGHT TO PROHIBIT ERECTION OF MARKERS AND MONUMENTS.



   The City Council reserves the right to prohibit the erection in the
cemetery of any marker or other monumental work that may be considered by the
members of the Council to be inappropriate, whether in material, design,
workmanship or location, or which might interfere with the general effect or
obstruct any principal view.



(Prior Code, § 1.07.115)



§ 91.075  REMOVAL OF OFFENSIVE MONUMENTS, VAULTS AND THE LIKE.



   If any monument, vault, effigy or any structure whatever is placed in
or upon any cemetery lot which is determined by the cemetery caretaker to be
offensive, improper or injurious to the appearance of the surrounding lots or
grounds, he or she shall have the right, and it shall be his or her duty, to
enter upon such lot and remove the offensive or improper object and he or she
may do so without notice to the owner.



(Prior Code, § 1.07.116)



§ 91.076  RESPONSIBILITY OF FUNERAL DIRECTORS FOR CONDUCT OF EMPLOYEES.



   Funeral directors shall be held responsible for the actions of all
vehicle drivers or others employed by them while within the grounds of the
cemetery.



(Prior Code, § 1.07.117)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.077  DESTRUCTION, REMOVAL OF CEMETERY PROPERTY.



   Any person who shall wrongfully destroy, mutilate, deface, injure or
remove any tomb, monument, gravestone or other structure in any cemetery or
other place of burial, or any fence, railing or curb for the protection of
such structure, or any enclosure for any such place of burial, or wrongfully
injure, cut, remove or destroy any tree, shrub or plant growing within any
such enclosure, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 1.07.118)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 92:  FIRE PREVENTION



Section




Fire Marshal




   92.01   Office created, independent of other departments



   92.02   Appointment, qualifications, removal and compensation



   92.03   Duty to investigate fires



   92.04   Taking of testimony generally



   92.05   Authority to summon witnesses, require production of
evidence and administer oaths



   92.06   Investigations may be private; separation of witnesses



   92.07   Duty when evidence indicates crime in connection with fire



   92.08   Misconduct of witnesses summoned by Fire Marshal



   92.09   Right of entry



   92.10   Inspection of premises; ordering removal or repair of
dangerous conditions



   92.11   Record of fires to be kept



   92.12   Monthly report




Fire Prevention Code




   92.25   Adoption



   92.26   Amendments



   92.27   Geographic limits



   92.28   Responsible official



   92.29   Conflicts



   92.30   Definitions



   92.31   Enforcement of code



   92.32   Modifications



   92.33   Appeals




Outdoor Burning




   92.45   Restricted




Fire Prevention Inspection; Historic District




   92.60   Requirement of Fire Marshal inspection



   92.61   Definitions



   92.62   Owner’s presence required



   92.63   Fees



Statutory references:



   Authority of municipality for abatement of nuisances and to control and
abate air pollution, see Tex. Health and Safety Code, § 382.113



   Regulation of outdoor burning by state, see Tex. Health and Safety
Code, § 382.018



   Texas Clean Air Act, see Tex. Health and Safety Code, Ch. 382




FIRE MARSHAL




§ 92.01  OFFICE CREATED, INDEPENDENT OF OTHER DEPARTMENTS.



   The Office of Fire Marshal is hereby created, and such office shall be
independent of other city departments, the Fire Marshal reporting directly to
the City Manager.



(Prior Code, § 5.02.001)



§ 92.02  APPOINTMENT, QUALIFICATIONS, REMOVAL AND COMPENSATION.



   The Fire Marshal shall be appointed by the City Manager. The Fire
Marshal shall be properly qualified for the duties of his or her office, and
shall be subject to removal at all times and for any reason. He or she shall
receive such compensation as provided for by the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 5.02.002)



§ 92.03  DUTY TO INVESTIGATE FIRES.



   The Fire Marshal shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances
of every fire occurring within this city by which property has been destroyed
or damaged, and shall especially make investigation as to whether such fire
was the result of carelessness or design. Such investigation shall be
commenced within 24 hours, not including Sunday, of the occurrence of such
fire.



(Prior Code, § 5.02.003)



§ 92.04  TAKING OF TESTIMONY GENERALLY.



   The Fire Marshal, when in his or her opinion further investigation is
necessary, shall make or cause to be taken the testimony, on oath, of all
persons supposed to be cognizant of any facts or to have means of knowledge
in relation to the matter under investigation, and shall cause the same to be
reduced to writing.



(Prior Code, § 5.02.004)



§ 92.05  AUTHORITY TO SUMMON WITNESSES, REQUIRE PRODUCTION OF EVIDENCE AND
ADMINISTER OATHS.



   The Fire Marshal shall have the power to summon witnesses before him or
her to testify in relation to any matter which is, by the provisions of this
subchapter, a subject of inquiry and investigation, and may require the
production of any book, paper or document deemed pertinent thereto. The Fire
Marshal is hereby authorized and empowered to administer oaths and
affirmations to any persons appearing before him or her as witnesses.



(Prior Code, § 5.02.005)



§ 92.06  INVESTIGATIONS MAY BE PRIVATE; SEPARATION OF WITNESSES.



   All investigations held by or under the direction of the Fire Marshal
may, in his or her discretion, be private, and persons other than those
required to be present may be excluded from the place where such
investigation is held, and witnesses may be kept separate and apart from each
other and not allowed to communicate with each other until they have been
examined.



(Prior Code, § 5.02.006)



§ 92.07  DUTY WHEN EVIDENCE INDICATES CRIME IN CONNECTION WITH FIRE.



   If the Fire Marshal shall be of the opinion that there is evidence
sufficient to charge any person with the crime of arson, or with the attempt
to commit the crime of arson, or of conspiracy to defraud or criminal conduct
in connection with any fire, he or she shall cause such person to be lawfully
arrested and charged with such offense or either of them, and shall furnish
to the proper prosecuting attorney all such evidence, together with the names
of witnesses and all the information obtained by him or her, including a copy
of all pertinent and material testimony taken in the case.



(Prior Code, § 5.02.007)



§ 92.08  MISCONDUCT OF WITNESSES SUMMONED BY FIRE MARSHAL.



   Any witness who refuses to be sworn, or who refuses to appear or
testify, or who disobeys any lawful order of the Fire Marshal or who fails or
refuses to produce any book, paper or document touching any matter under
examination, or who is guilty of any contemptuous conduct during any of the
proceedings of the Fire Marshal in the matter of such investigation or
inquiry, after being summoned to give testimony in relation to any matter
under investigation, shall be deemed guilty of a violation, and it shall be
the duty of the Fire Marshal to cause all such offenders to be prosecuted.



(Prior Code, § 5.02.008)



§ 92.09  RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   The Fire Marshal shall have the authority, at all times of the day or
night, when necessary in the performance of the duties imposed upon him or
her by the provisions of this subchapter, to enter upon and examine any
building or premises where any fire has occurred, and other buildings and
premises adjoining or near the same, which authority shall be exercised only
with reason and good discretion.



(Prior Code, § 5.02.009)



§ 92.10  INSPECTION OF PREMISES; ORDERING REMOVAL OR REPAIR OF DANGEROUS
CONDITIONS.



   (A)   The Fire Marshal, upon the complaint of any person having an
interest in any building or property adjacent thereto, or without any
complaint, shall have the right at all reasonable hours, for the purpose of
examination, to enter into and upon all buildings and premises within the
city, and it shall be his or her duty to enter upon and make or cause to be
entered upon and made a thorough examination of all mercantile, manufacturing
and public buildings together with the premises belonging thereto.



   (B)   Whenever he or she shall find any building or other structure
which is especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger
other buildings or property, or so occupied that the fire would endanger
persons or property therein, and whenever he or she shall find an improper or
dangerous arrangement of stoves, ranges, furnaces or other heating appliances
of any kind whatsoever, including chimneys, flues and pipes with which the
same may be connected, or a dangerous arrangement of lighting devices or
electrical wiring or a dangerous or unlawful storage of explosives,
compounds, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, dangerous chemicals, vegetable
products, ashes, combustible, inflammable refuse materials, wastepaper, rags
or other conditions which may be dangerous in character or liable to cause or
promote fire or create conditions dangerous to firefighters combating a fire
or to occupants, he or she shall order the same to be removed or remedied,
and such order shall be forthwith complied with by the owner or occupant of
the building or premises.



   (C)   If the owner or occupant deems himself or herself aggrieved by
such order, he or she may, within 15 days, appeal such order to the City
Council, which shall investigate the cause of the complaint and, unless such
order is revoked by the City Council, such order shall remain in force and be
forthwith complied with by such owner or occupant. Except in case of
emergency, any owner or occupant who fails to comply with such order within a
ten-day period from the date of such notice shall be deemed guilty of a
violation of this code.



(Prior Code, § 5.02.010)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.11  RECORD OF FIRES TO BE KEPT.



   The Fire Marshal shall keep in his or her office a record of all fires,
together with all facts, statistics and circumstances, including the origin
of the fires and the amounts of the loss, which may be determined by the
investigation required by this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 5.02.011)



§ 92.12  MONTHLY REPORT.



   At the end of each month, the Fire Marshal shall report to the State
Fire Marshal all existing hazardous conditions, together with a separate
report on each fire in the city during the month.



(Prior Code, § 5.02.012)




FIRE PREVENTION CODE




§ 92.25  ADOPTION.



   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of
the City Secretary, being marked and designated as the International Fire
Code, 2012 edition, including Appendix B, C, D, E, F, G and H, as published
by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Fire Code
of the city, for regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and
property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling
and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions
hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises as
herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said Fire Code on file in the office of the city are
hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in
this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in § 92.26.



(Prior Code, § 5.03.001)  (Ord. 06-02-14, passed 2-14-2006; Ord. 13-12-01,
passed 12-10-2013)



§ 92.26  AMENDMENTS.



   The following sections of the International Fire Code are hereby
revised:



   (A)   Section 101.1. Insert: City of Henderson;



   (B)   Section 109.3. Insert: Class C misdemeanor, $2,000; and



   (C)   Section 111.4. Insert: $100 and $2,000.



(Prior Code, § 5.03.002)  (Ord. 06-02-14, passed 2-14-2006)



§ 92.27  GEOGRAPHIC LIMITS.



   The geographic limits referred to in certain sections of the 2012
International Fire Code are hereby established as follows.



   (A)   Section 5504.3-1.1.3: Storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in
stationary containers is prohibited in the City of Henderson, Texas, except
in Zoning Districts I-1 and I-2.



   (B)   Section 5704.2.9.6.1: Storage of Class I and II liquids in
above-ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited in the City of
Henderson, Texas, except in Zoning Districts I-1, I-2, C-3 and RE.



   (C)   Section 6104.2: Storage of liquefied petroleum gas is
prohibited in the City of Henderson, Texas, except in Zoning Districts I-1
and I-2.



(Prior Code, § 5.03.003)  (Ord. 06-02-14, passed 2-14-2006; Ord. 13-12-01,
passed 12-10-2013)



§ 92.28  RESPONSIBLE OFFICIAL.



   Within such code, when reference is made to the duties of certain
officials named therein, the designated official of the city who has duties
corresponding to those of the named officials in such code shall be deemed to
be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of such code
is concerned.



(Prior Code, § 5.03.004)



§ 92.29  CONFLICTS.



   In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the code adopted
by this subchapter and the provisions of this code of ordinances, state law
or city ordinances, rules or regulations, the provisions of this code of
ordinances, state law or city ordinances, rules or regulations shall prevail
and be controlling.



(Prior Code, § 5.03.005)



§ 92.30  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   (A)   Wherever the word “municipality” is used in the Fire
Prevention Code, it shall be held to mean the City of Henderson.



   (B)   Wherever the term “corporation counsel” is used in the
Fire Prevention Code, it shall be held to mean the City Attorney.



   (C)   Wherever the words “Chief of the Bureau of Fire
Prevention” are used in the Fire Prevention Code, they shall be held to
mean the Fire Marshal.



(Prior Code, § 5.03.006)



§ 92.31  ENFORCEMENT OF CODE.



   (A)   The Fire Prevention Code shall be enforced by the Fire Marshal.



   (B)   The Fire Marshal may appoint such inspectors as shall from
time to time be necessary to enforce the provisions of such code and the
provisions of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 5.03.007)



§ 92.32  MODIFICATIONS.



   (A)   The Fire Marshal shall have power to modify any of the
provisions of the Fire Prevention Code upon application in writing by the
owner or lessee, or his or her duly authorized agent, when there are
practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the
code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety
secured and substantial justice done.



   (B)   The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed
and the decision of the Fire Marshal thereon shall be entered upon the
records of the Department, and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant.



(Prior Code, § 5.03.008)



§ 92.33  APPEALS.



   Whenever the Fire Marshal shall disapprove an application or refuse to
grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the
code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been
misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the
decision of the Fire Marshal to the City Council within 15 days from the date
of the decision appealed.



(Prior Code, § 5.03.009)




OUTDOOR BURNING




§ 92.45  RESTRICTED.



   No person, corporation or other entity may cause or permit any outdoor
burning within the city limits unless such outdoor burning is carried out in
accordance with the regulations of the State Commission on Environmental
Quality.



(Prior Code, § 5.04.001)  Penalty, see § 10.99




FIRE PREVENTION INSPECTION; HISTORIC DISTRICT




§ 92.60  REQUIREMENT OF FIRE MARSHAL INSPECTION.



   Any building located in the historic district of the city that remains
vacant for at least three consecutive months shall be inspected by the Fire
Marshal, or his or her designee, of the city, during the subsequent (or
fourth) month of such vacancy to determine if there are any conditions which
need to be abated to reduce the risk of fire beginning or spreading. Such
inspections shall continue on a regular basis every three months thereafter
until such building is no longer vacant.



(Prior Code, § 5.05.031)



§ 92.61  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUILDING.  Any structure or portion of a structure used or intended
for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy, and includes an enclosed
building, open building and partially open building.



   OWNER.  The owner(s) of record in the county where the real property
is situated, or his or her heirs or his or her devisees or an executor(s), an
administrator(s), a trustee(s) or other person(s) with ownership rights. Any
person who is included in the definition as an OWNER has joint and several
obligations for compliance with the provisions of this subchapter.



   VACANT BUILDING.  A building which is not used as a business (or
residence) where the owner or his or her lessee conducts legitimate business
with the public at least four days a week, maintains offices which are used
at least four days a week, or maintains said building as the primary
residence of the occupant thereof (where permitted by ordinance), and in
which electric and/or gas utilities and water and sewer utilities are not
maintained without interruption of five consecutive days. In other words, it
is not sufficient to keep a building from being labeled as a VACANT BUILDING
by using it three days or less each week as specified above or using it
solely for storage.



(Prior Code, § 5.05.032)



§ 92.62  OWNER’S PRESENCE REQUIRED.



   An owner of any such vacant building or his or her designee is required
to be present with the Fire Marshal, or his or her designee, for such
inspection. If the owner’s or his or her designee’s presence cannot be
obtained for such inspection, after notice by certified mail, return receipt
requested, by the Fire Marshal, the Fire Marshal may then get an order from
the Municipal Court for forced entry into the building upon a showing to the
court the efforts he or she has made to contact the owner(s).



(Prior Code, § 5.05.033)



§ 92.63  FEES.



   (A)   The owner(s) of any such vacant building shall pay a fee as
provided in § 35.40 to the city for each such inspection.



   (B)   This fee is a joint and several liability of each owner of the
building, but shall not exceed $100 per building.



   (C)   Failure to pay such fees can result in a lien being attached
to the subject building by the municipal court.



(Prior Code, § 5.05.034)  (Ord. 08-09-05, passed 9-9-2008)



CHAPTER 93:  HEALTH AND SANITATION



Section




Food and Food Establishments, Generally




   93.001   Sanitary maintenance of premises wherein food is sold




Restaurants and Food Service Establishments




   93.015   Definitions



   93.016   Certified food manager



   93.017   License



   93.018   Health regulations



   93.019   Food service sanitation




Unsanitary, Unsightly Conditions on Private Premises




   93.030   Stagnant water



   93.031   Accumulation of carrion, filth and the like



   93.032   Growth or accumulation of weeds, rubbish and the like



   93.033   Notice to owner to remedy or remove condition, generally



   93.034   Notice; failure to remove or remedy conditions



   93.035   Correction or removal of conditions by city, generally



   93.036   Filing of statement of expenses incurred



   93.037   Lien for and collection of expenses



   93.038   Additional authority to abate dangerous weeds




Smoking




   93.050   Definitions



   93.051   Prohibited in public places



   93.052   Prohibited in place of employment



   93.053   Prohibition of smoking in seating area at an outdoor event



   93.054   Reasonable distance; exceptions



   93.055   Exceptions



   93.056   Declaration of establishment as nonsmoking



   93.057   Posting of signs



   93.058   Enforcement



   93.059   Retaliation prohibited




Mosquito Control




   93.065   Definition



   93.066   Treatment required



   93.067   Methods of treatment



   93.068   Presence of larvae



   93.069   Failure to abate



   93.070   Right of entry




Rodent Control




   93.085   Definitions



   93.086   Rat-proofing business buildings and residences; required



   93.087   Notice to, compliance by owner



   93.088   Notice to, compliance by occupant



   93.089   Maintenance



   93.090   Closure of occupied buildings and residences



   93.091   Condemnation of unoccupied buildings or residences



   93.092   Where foodstuffs stored, kept and the like



   93.093   Storage of food, feed



   93.094   Inspections



   93.095   Restoration of rat-proofing following repair,
reconstruction and the like



   93.096   Storage of lumber, boxes and the like




Illegal Smoking Products




   93.110   Definitions



   93.111   Sale, offer, gift, display or possession



   93.112   Use or possession



   93.113   Affirmative defense to prosecution



 



   93.999   Penalty



Statutory references:



   Authority to enforce laws to protect public health, see Tex. Health and
Safety Code, § 121.003



   Local regulation of sanitation, see Tex. Health and Safety Code, Ch. 342



   Minimum standards of sanitation and health protection, see Tex. Health
and Safety Code, Ch. 341



   Mosquito breeding places declared public nuisance, see Tex. Health and
Safety Code, § 341.011(7)



   Power of home-rule municipality to adopt rules to protect health of
persons and provide for establishment of quarantine stations, emergency
hospitals and other hospitals, see Tex. Health and Safety Code, § 122.006



   Protection of impounded water from disease-bearing mosquitoes, see Tex.
Health and Safety Code, § 341.038



   Regulation of food products, generally, see Tex. Health and Safety
Code, Ch. 433 through 438



   Regulation of food service establishments, retail food stores, mobile
food units and roadside food vendors, see Tex. Health and Safety Code, §§
437.001 et seq.




FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS, GENERALLY




§ 93.001  SANITARY MAINTENANCE OF PREMISES WHEREIN FOOD IS SOLD.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or carry on any business
for the sale of food or food products in any manner, wherein the premises for
the operation of such business are not at all times kept in a clean and
sanitary condition.



(Prior Code, § 6.02.001)  Penalty, see § 93.999




RESTAURANTS AND FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS




§ 93.015  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPROVED.  Complying with all applicable state laws and city
ordinances.



   CATERER.  A business delivering food ready to eat away from the
premises of the business.



   FAST-FOOD ESTABLISHMENT.  A business preparing food for consumption on
or off the premises, featuring fast or convenient service.



   FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT.  Any business involved in the preparation,
distribution or sale of food for human consumption, including, but not
limited to, grocery stores, bars, soft drink stands, drugstores, soda
fountains or meat markets.



   RESTAURANT. Any place where food or drink, other than alcoholic
beverages, is served to the public for consumption on the premises, and any
caterer, fast-food establishment or cafeteria.



(Prior Code, § 6.02.031)



§ 93.016  CERTIFIED FOOD MANAGER.



   (A)   During operating hours, each restaurant, food service
establishment, fast-food establishment and caterer is required to have at
least one person present who is in charge and who has satisfactorily
completed and passed the state-approved certified food management course
pursuant to the requirements of the Department of State Health Services,
Retail Foods Division.



   (B)   The certificate issued by the Department of State Health
Services, showing successful completion of such course must be displayed in
such establishment in a place to which all customers of such establishment
have access.



   (C)   All such establishments must be in compliance with this
section on or before January 1, 2009.



(Prior Code, § 6.02.033)  (Ord. 07-12-23, passed 12-19-2007)



§ 93.017  LICENSE.



   (A)   Required. It shall be unlawful to operate any restaurant,
fast-food establishment, catering service or other food service business
engaged in the preparation, distribution or sale of food for human
consumption in the city without complying with the terms of this subchapter
and obtaining a license therefor.



(Prior Code, § 6.02.061)



   (B)   Exemptions. Specifically exempted from the requirements of
this section are charitable organizations or groups that do not prepare,
distribute or sell food for human consumption on a regular basis.



(Prior Code, § 6.02.062)



   (C)   Religious, nonprofit, charitable organizations. Public
schools, churches and other religious organizations and other nonprofit and
charitable organizations are required to comply with each provision contained
in this subchapter, except that no fee shall be charged or collected from
such organizations for the license required by this section.



(Prior Code, § 6.02.063)



   (D)   Application generally. Application for licenses required by
this section shall be made to the City Health Inspector on a form to be
furnished by the Inspector, and the applicant shall comply with all
applicable provisions of law on licenses.



(Prior Code, § 6.02.064)



   (E)   Fee. The annual fee for licenses required by this section
shall be determined by the City Manager, which fee, or fee schedule, as the
case might be, shall be on file in the offices of the City Secretary and the
City Health Inspector.



(Prior Code, § 6.02.065)



   (F)   Investigation of premises. All applications for a license to
conduct a restaurant or food service establishment shall be referred to the
Health Inspector, who shall make or cause to be made an investigation of the
premises to be used, and report his or her finding thereon, recommending or
advising against the issuance of the license.



(Prior Code, § 6.02.066)



   (G)   Duration. Licenses issued under the authority of this section
shall remain effective for a period of one year from the date of issuance,
unless revoked by the Health Inspector for violation of any provision of this
subchapter prior to the normal expiration date.



(Prior Code, § 6.02.067)



   (H)   Revocation; grounds. Any license issued under this section may
be revoked by the City Health Inspector for repeated violation of the
provisions herein, or for any violation of any other ordinance provision
relating to the conduct of the business, the condition of the premises, the
articles sold or to the license required.



(Prior Code, § 6.02.068)



   (I)   Appeal; public hearing; notice.



      (1)   The owner or operator of any restaurant or food service
establishment from which the required license has been revoked shall have the
right to a public hearing before the City Judge upon written notice to the
City Health Inspector within seven days of the revocation.



      (2)   Both the city and any aggrieved owner or operator shall
have the right to appeal the decision of the City Judge directly to the
District Court of the county.



(Prior Code, § 6.02.069)



(Ord. 12-04-04, passed 4-17-2012)  Penalty, see § 93.999



§ 93.018  HEALTH REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Wholesomeness of food and drink.



      (1)   Generally. All food and drink shall be clean, wholesome,
free from spoilage, and so prepared as to be safe for human consumption. All
milk, fluid milk products, ice cream and other frozen desserts served shall
be from approved sources. Milk and fluid milk products shall be served in the
individual containers in which they were received from the distributor or
from a bulk container equipped with an approved dispensing device; provided,
that this requirement shall not apply to cream, which may be served from the
original bottle or from a dispenser approved for such service. All oysters,
clams and mussels shall be from approved sources, and if shucked, shall be
kept until used in the containers in which they were placed at the shucking
plant.



      (2)   Unwholesome food. No person shall offer for sale, or
keep for the purpose of selling or offering for sale, any food of any kind
intended for human consumption which is spoiled or tainted or is unwholesome
and unfit for human consumption for any reason.



      (3)   Examination and condemnation of unwholesome or
adulterated food or drink. Samples of food, drink and other substances may be
taken and examined by the Health Inspector as often as necessary for the
detection of unwholesomeness or adulteration. The Health Inspector may
condemn and forbid the sale of, or cause to be removed or destroyed, any food
or drink which is unwholesome or adulterated.



(Prior Code, § 6.02.101)



   (B)   Storage, display and serving of food and drink.



      (1)   Generally. All food and drink shall be so stored,
displayed and served as to be protected from dust, flies, vermin, depredation
and pollution by rodents, unnecessary handling, droplet infection, overhead
leakage and other contamination. No animals or fowl shall be kept or allowed
in any room in which food or drink is prepared or stored. All means necessary
for the elimination of flies, roaches and rodents shall be used.



      (2)   Refrigeration. All readily perishable food and drink
shall be kept at or below 50°F, except when being prepared or served.
Wastewater from refrigeration equipment shall be properly disposed of.



(Prior Code, § 6.02.102)



   (C)   Employees.



      (1)   Cleanliness. All persons engaged in handling or coming
in contact with food intended for sale for human consumption shall keep
themselves clean, both as to person and clothing. It shall be unlawful for
any restaurant or food service establishment to permit any person who is not
clean to be employed in or about any premises where food is stored, prepared
or sold, or to deliver such food.



      (2)   Infectious diseases. It shall be unlawful for any person
who is afflicted with or is a carrier of any infectious disease to handle or
be engaged in the care or preparation of any such food, and it shall be
unlawful to permit any such person to be employed in or about any premises
where food is stored, prepared or sold, or to deliver such food.



(Prior Code, § 6.02.103)



   (D)   Inspections.



      (1)   Generally.



         (a)   At least every six months, the Health Inspector
shall inspect every food service establishment and restaurant located within
the city.



         (b)   In case the Health Inspector discovers the
violation of any item of sanitation, he or she shall make a second inspection
after the lapse of such time as he or she deems necessary for the defect to
be remedied, and the second inspection shall be used in determining
compliance with the requirements of this subchapter.



      (2)   Copies of inspection report. One copy of the inspection
report shall be given to the manager of the restaurant or food service
establishment on duty at the time of the inspection. Another copy of the
inspection report shall be filed with the records of the Health Inspector.



      (3)   Access to establishment and records. The person
operating any food service establishment or restaurant shall, upon request of
the Health Inspector, permit access to all parts of the establishment and
shall permit copying of any and all records of food purchased.



(Prior Code, § 6.02.104)



   (E)   Utensils and equipment.



      (1)   Construction. All multi-use utensils and all show and
display cases or windows, counters, shelves, tables, refrigerating equipment,
sinks and other equipment or utensils used in connection with the operation
of a restaurant shall be constructed as to be easily cleaned and shall be
kept in good repair. Utensils containing or plated with cadmium or lead shall
not be used, provided that solder containing lead may be used for jointing.



      (2)   Cleaning and bactericidal treatment.



         (a)   All equipment, including display cases or windows,
counters, shelves, tables, refrigerators, stoves, hoods and sinks, shall be
kept clean and free from dust, dirt, insects and other contaminating
material. All cloths used by waiters, chefs and other employees shall be
clean. Single-service containers shall be used only once.



         (b)   All multi-use eating and drinking utensils shall
be thoroughly cleaned and effectively subjected to an approved bactericidal
process after each usage. All multi-use utensils used in the preparation or
serving of food and drink shall be thoroughly cleaned and effectively
subjected to an approved process immediately following the day’s operation.
Drying cloths, if used, shall be kept clean and shall be used for no other
purpose.



         (c)   No article, polish or other substance containing
any cyanide preparation or other poisonous material shall be used for the
cleaning or polishing of utensils.



      (3)   Storage and handling. After bactericidal treatment,
utensils shall be stored in a clean, dry place protected from flies, dust and
other contamination, and shall be handled in such a manner as to prevent
contamination as far as practicable. Single-service utensils shall be
purchased only in containers; shall be stored therein in a clean, dry place
until used; and shall be handled in a sanitary manner.



(Prior Code, § 6.02.105)



   (F)   Toilet and lavatory facilities.



      (1)   Every restaurant and food service establishment shall be
provided with adequate and conveniently located toilet facilities for its
employees, conforming with the ordinances of the city. In restaurants
constructed, toilet rooms shall not be open directly into any room in which
food, drink or utensils are handled or stored. The doors of all toilet rooms
shall be self-closing. Toilet rooms shall be kept in a clean condition, in
good repair, and well lighted and ventilated. Handwashing signs shall be
posted in each toilet room used by employees.



      (2)   Adequate and convenient handwashing facilities shall be
provided, including hot and cold running water, soap and approved sanitary
towels. The use of a common towel is prohibited. No employee shall resume
work after using the toilet room without first washing his or her hands.



(Prior Code, § 6.02.106)



   (G)   Water supply. Running water under pressure shall be easily
accessible to all rooms in which food is prepared or utensils are washed, and
the water supply shall be adequate, and of a safe, sanitary quality.



(Prior Code, § 6.02.107)



   (H)   Disposal of wastes. All wastes shall be properly disposed of,
and all garbage and trash shall be kept in suitable receptacles, in such
manner as not to become a nuisance.



(Prior Code, § 6.02.108)



   (I)   Handwashing; gloves.



      (1)   No person working in a restaurant, a food service
establishment, a fast-food establishment or as a caterer shall touch uncooked
or ready-to-eat foods with their bare hands, but must use a clean utensil
such as a tong or deli tissue or single-use disposable gloves when touching
such uncooked or ready-to-eat foods.



      (2)   Handwashing, as provided for elsewhere in this section,
is required even though disposable gloves are worn.



(Prior Code, § 6.02.110)



(Ord. 07-12-23, passed 12-19-2007)  Penalty, see § 93.999



§ 93.019  FOOD SERVICE SANITATION.



   (A)   The Texas Food Establishment Rules of the Department of State
Health Services, as amended from time to time, are hereby adopted in their
entirety for purposes of regulation of food service and food service
establishments located within the city. The City Secretary shall maintain a
current version of the state rules on file in the offices of the City
Secretary.



   (B)   All food service and food service establishments located
within the city shall comply with the requirements of the state rules, as
amended from time to time.



   (C)   The City Building Official and the City Health Officer shall
enforce the state rules adopted herein.



   (D)   All persons, firms and corporations found to be in violation
of any provision of the state rules adopted hereby shall be punished as
described in § 10.99.



(Prior Code, § 6.02.141)  (Ord. 99-3-5, passed 4-13-1999)




UNSANITARY, UNSIGHTLY CONDITIONS ON PRIVATE PREMISES




§ 93.030  STAGNANT WATER.



   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any lot or other premises in the
city to allow or permit holes or places where water may accumulate and become
stagnant to be or remain on such lot or premises or to allow or permit the
accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or to permit the same to remain
thereon.



(Prior Code, § 6.03.001)  Penalty, see § 93.999



Statutory reference:



   Municipal power concerning stagnant water and other unsanitary
conditions, see Tex. Health and Safety Code, §§ 342.001, 342.005 et seq.



§ 93.031  ACCUMULATION OF CARRION, FILTH AND THE LIKE.



   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any lot, building, house,
establishment or premises in the city to allow or permit any carrion, filth
or any other impure or unwholesome matter of any kind to accumulate or remain
thereon.



(Prior Code, § 6.03.002)  Penalty, see § 93.999



Statutory reference:



   Municipal power concerning filth, carrion and other unwholesome matter,
see Tex. Health and Safety Code, §§ 342.003, 342.005 et seq.



§ 93.032  GROWTH OR ACCUMULATION OF WEEDS, RUBBISH AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person owning, leasing, claiming,
occupying or having supervision and control of any real property within the
limits of the city, to allow:



      (1)   On developed property (including, but not limited to,
any right-of-way, easement or drainage ditch), any weeds, grass or brush in
excess of 12 inches in height to grow uncultivated;



      (2)   On undeveloped property (including, but not limited to,
any right-of-way, easement or drainage ditch), any weeds, grass or brush in
excess of 12 inches in height to grow uncultivated within ten feet of the
edge of any improved roadway or public street within the limits of the city;
or



      (3)   On any lot or tract of land within the city, regardless
of the size of said lot or tract of land (whether developed or undeveloped,
commercial or residential, occupied or unoccupied), to accumulate or remain
any refuse, rubbish, junk, litter, trash, debris (including, but not limited
to, vegetative and building debris), garbage, discarded items, carrion,
filth, animal or human feces, or any other objectionable, unsightly or
unsanitary matter of whatever nature.



   (B)   (1)   For purposes of this section, the term DEVELOPED
PROPERTY shall mean any lot or tract of land which meets any of the following
criteria:



         (a)   Any structure or paving currently exists or has
previously existed on the lot or tract of land; or



         (b)   Any grading, mining, drilling, dredging, filling
or excavation has taken place on the lot or tract of land.



      (2)   Clearing of trees or vegetation from a lot or tract of
land shall not, by itself, be construed to render the affected lot or tract
of land DEVELOPED PROPERTY within the meaning of this section.



   (C)   For the purposes of this section, the term UNDEVELOPED
PROPERTY shall mean any lot or tract of land which is not developed property
as defined in division (B) above.



   (D)   For purposes of this section, the term OBJECTIONABLE,
UNSIGHTLY OR UNSANITARY MATTER shall mean any matter, condition or object
which is or should be objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary to a person of
ordinary sensitivities.



(Prior Code, § 6.03.003)  (Ord. 01-10-23, passed 10-23-2001)  Penalty, see
§ 93.999



Statutory reference:



   Authority of municipality to regulate weeds, grass and the like, see
Tex. Health and Safety Code, §§ 342.004 et seq.



   Local regulation of sanitation, see Tex. Health and Safety Code, Ch. 342



§ 93.033  NOTICE TO OWNER TO REMEDY OR REMOVE CONDITION, GENERALLY.



   Whenever any condition described in this subchapter is found to exist
on any premises within the city, the owner of such premises shall be notified
by the city, in writing, to correct, remedy or remove the condition within
seven days after such notice. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to
comply with such notice.



(Prior Code, § 6.03.004)  Penalty, see § 93.999



§ 93.034  NOTICE; FAILURE TO REMOVE OR REMEDY CONDITIONS.



   (A)   (1)   If any person owning, claiming, occupying or having
supervision or control of any real property, occupied or unoccupied, within
the corporate limits of the city fails to comply with the provisions of this
subchapter, it shall be the duty of the person designated by the City Manager
to give seven days’ notice in writing personally to the owner of the
property by letter addressed to the owner at the owner’s address as
recorded in the appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which
the property is located.



      (2)   If personal service cannot be obtained, it shall be the
duty of the person designated by the City Manager to give notice as follows:



         (a)   By publication at least once;



         (b)   By posting the notice on or near the front door of
each building on the property to which the violation relates; or



         (c)   By posting the notice on a placard attached to a
stake driven into the ground on the property to which the violation relates.



   (B)   In the notice herein provided for, the city shall have the
right to inform the owner by regular mail and a posting on the property that
if the owner commits another violation of the same kind or nature that poses
a danger to the public health and safety on or before the first anniversary
of the date of the notice, the city without further notice may correct the
violation at the owner’s expense and assess the expense against the
property.



(Prior Code, § 6.03.005)



§ 93.035  CORRECTION OR REMOVAL OF CONDITIONS BY CITY, GENERALLY.



   In the event the owner of any lot or premises upon which a condition
described in this subchapter exists fails to correct, remedy or remove such
condition after notice to do so is given in accord with this subchapter, the
city may do such work or make such improvements as are necessary to correct,
remedy or remove such condition, or cause the same to be done, and pay
therefor and charge the expenses incurred thereby to the owner of such lot.
Such expenses shall be assessed against the lot or real estate upon which the
work was done or the improvements made. The doing of such work by the city
shall not relieve such person from prosecution for failure to comply with
such notice in violation of § 93.033.



(Prior Code, § 6.03.006)



§ 93.036  FILING OF STATEMENT OF EXPENSES INCURRED.



   Whenever any work is done or improvements are made by the city under
the provisions of § 93.035, the Mayor or Health Officer, or other city
official designated by the Mayor on behalf of the city, shall file a
statement of the expenses incurred thereby with the County Clerk. Such
statement shall give the amount of such expenses and the date or dates on
which the work was done or the improvements were made.



(Prior Code, § 6.03.007)



§ 93.037  LIEN FOR AND COLLECTION OF EXPENSES.



   (A)   After the statement provided for in § 93.036 is filed, the
city shall have a privileged lien on the lot or real estate upon which the
work was done or improvement made, to secure the expenses thereof. Such lien
shall be second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements, and the
amount thereof shall bear interest at the rate of 10% per annum from the date
the statement was filed.



   (B)   For any such expenditures and interest, suit may be instituted
and recovery and foreclosure of the lien may be had in the name of the city
and the statement of expenses made in accord with § 93.036, or a certified
copy thereof, shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended for such work
or improvements.



(Prior Code, § 6.03.008)



§ 93.038  ADDITIONAL AUTHORITY TO ABATE DANGEROUS WEEDS.



   (A)   The city may abate, without notice, weeds that:



      (1)   Have grown higher than 48 inches; and



      (2)   Are an immediate danger to the health, life or safety of
any person.



   (B)   Not later than the tenth day after the date the city abates
weeds under this section, the city shall give notice to the property owner in
the manner required by Tex. Health and Safety Code, § 342.006.



   (C)   The notice shall contain:



      (1)   An identification, which is not required to be a legal
description, of the property;



      (2)   A description of the violations of the ordinance that
occurred on the property;



      (3)   A statement that the city abated the weeds; and



      (4)   An explanation of the property owner’s right to
request an administrative hearing about the city’s abatement of the weeds.



   (D)   The city shall conduct an administrative hearing on the
abatement of weeds under this section if, not later than the thirtieth day
after the date of the abatement of the weeds, the property owner files with
the city a written request for a hearing.



   (E)   An administrative hearing conducted under this section shall
be conducted not later than the twentieth day after the date a request for a
hearing is filed. The owner may testify or present any witnesses or written
information relating to the city’s abatement of the weeds.



   (F)   The city may assess expenses and create liens under this
section as it assesses expenses and creates liens under Tex. Health and
Safety Code, § 342.007. A lien created under this section is subject to the
same conditions as a lien created under Tex. Health and Safety Code, §
342.007.



   (G)   The authority granted the city by this section is in addition
to the authority granted by Tex. Health and Safety Code, § 342.006.



(Prior Code, § 6.03.009)



Statutory reference:



   Additional authority to abate dangerous weeds without notice, see Tex.
Health and Safety Code, § 342.008




SMOKING




§ 93.050  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BAR. An enclosed indoor establishment that is open to the public and is
devoted primarily to the sale and service of alcoholic beverages for
on-premises consumption.



   BUSINESS.



      (1)   A sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture,
corporation, or other business entity, either for-profit or not-for-profit,
including a retail establishment, where goods or services are sold;



      (2)   A professional corporation or other entity where legal,
medical, dental, engineering, architectural, or other professional services
are delivered; or



      (3)   A private club.



   EMPLOYEE. An individual who:



      (1)   Is employed by an employer for direct or indirect
monetary wages or profit; or



      (2)   Volunteers the individual's services for an employer.



   EMPLOYER. A person who employs one or more individuals or uses the
volunteer services of one or more individuals. The term includes:



      (1)   A nonprofit entity, and



      (2)   Any political subdivision of this state.



   ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE. Any product containing or delivering
nicotine or any other substance intended for human consumption that can be
used by a person to simulate smoking through inhalation of vapor or aerosol
from the product. The term includes any such device, whether manufactured,
distributed, marketed, or sold as an e-cigarette, e-cigar, e-pipe, e-hookah,
or vape pen, or under any other product name or descriptor.



   ENCLOSED AREA. All space between a floor and ceiling that is bounded on
at least two sides by walls, doorways or windows, whether open or closed. A
wall includes any retractable divider, garage door, or other physical
barrier, whether temporary or permanent, and whether or not containing
openings of any kind.



   HEALTH CARE FACILITY. An office or institution in which care or
treatment is provided for physical, mental, or emotional diseases or other
medical, physiological, or psychological conditions.



   PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT. An area under the control of an employer that is
used by employees of the employer but is not generally open to the public.



   PRIVATE CLUB. An organization that:



      (1)   Owns, leases, or occupies a building used exclusively
for club purposes at all times;



      (2)   Is operated solely for a recreational, fraternal,
social, patriotic, political, benevolent, or athletic purpose, but not for
pecuniary gain;



      (3)   Sells alcoholic beverages only incidentally to its
operation;



      (4)   Is managed by a board of directors or similar body
chosen by the members at an annual meeting;



      (5)   Has established bylaws or a constitution to govern the
club's activities; and



      (6)   Is exempt from federal income taxation under § 501(a),
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as a club described by § 501(c)(7) of that
code.



   PUBLIC PLACE.



      (1)   An enclosed indoor area the public is invited or
permitted to enter, including all or part of the following:



         (a)   A restaurant;



         (b)   A bar;



         (c)   A retail or service establishment;



         (d)   A facility of a business or nonprofit entity;



         (e)   A shopping mall;



         (f)   A convention facility;



         (g)   A theater or other facility primarily used for
exhibiting a performance;



         (h)   A sports arena;



         (i)   A health care facility;



         (j)   A licensed child-care or adult day-care facility;



         (k)   A room in which a public meeting under the control
of this state, an agency or branch of government of this state, or a
political subdivision of this state is in progress;



         (l)   A common area in a multiple-unit residential
facility;



         (m)   A public transportation facility, including a bus
or taxicab, and a ticket, boarding, or waiting area of a public
transportation depot;



         (n)   A waiting room, hallway, room, or ward in a health
care facility; or



         (o)   A restroom, lobby, reception area, service line,
hallway, elevator, or other common-use area the public is invited or
permitted to enter.



      (2)   A facility of the state or of a local government,
including a building or vehicle owned, leased, or operated by the state or
local government, regardless of whether the public is invited or permitted to
enter.



   RESTAURANT. An enclosed indoor establishment that is open to the public
and is devoted primarily to the sale and service of food for immediate
consumption. The term includes a bar located at the establishment.



   RETAIL or SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT. An establishment that sells goods or
services to the public.



   SERVICE LINE. An indoor line in which one or more persons wait for or
receive service, whether or not the service involves the exchange of money.



   SHOPPING MALL. An enclosed public walkway or hall area that connects
retail, service, or professional establishments.



   SMOKING. To inhale, exhale, burn, or carry a lighted cigar, cigarette,
pipe, tobacco product, electronic cigarette or e-cigarette or liquid nicotine
of any kind, which is burning or emitting a vapor or the exhalation of any
smoke or vapor produced from any cigar, cigarette, pipe, tobacco product,
electronic cigarette or e-cigarette, cigarette, pipe, or other smoking
equipment in any manner.



   SPORTS ARENA. A place in which a person engages in physical exercise,
participates in athletic competition, or witnesses sports or other events.



(Prior Code, § 6.04.001) (Ord. 16-11-14, passed 12-13-2016)



Statutory reference:



   Smoking tobacco in certain public places or conveyances, see Tex. Penal
Code, § 48.01



§ 93.051  PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC PLACES.



   Smoking shall be prohibited in all public places within the city,
including, but not limited to, the following places:



   (A)   Elevators;



   (B)   Restrooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways and any other
common-use areas;



   (C)   Buses, bus terminals, taxicabs, and other facilities and means
of public transit under the authority of the city, as well as ticket,
boarding, and waiting areas of public transit depots;



   (D)   Service lines;



   (E)   Retail stores;



   (F)   Food establishments, nightclubs and bars;



   (G)   Galleries, libraries, and museums;



   (H)   Any facility which is primarily used for exhibiting any motion
picture, stage, drama, lecture, musical recital or other similar performance,
except that performers may smoke when the smoking is part of a stage
production;



   (I)   Sports arenas and convention halls, including bowling
facilities;



   (J)   Every room, chamber, place of meeting or public assembly,
including school buildings under the control of any board, council,
commission, committee, including joint committees, or agencies of the city or
any political subdivision of the state during such time as a public meeting
is in progress, to the extent such place is subject to the jurisdiction of
the city;



   (K)   Waiting rooms, hallways, wards and semi-private rooms of
health facilities, including, but not limited to, hospitals, clinics,
physical therapy facilities, doctors' offices, and dentists' offices;



   (L)   Lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in apartment
buildings, condominiums, trailer parks, retirement facilities, nursing homes,
and other multiple-unit residential facilities; and



   (M)   Polling places.



(Prior Code, § 6.04.002) (Ord. 16-11-14, passed 12-13-2016) Penalty, see §
93.999



§ 93.052  PROHIBITED IN PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT.



   (A)   A person may not smoke in a place of employment.



   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of employers to provide a
smoke-free workplace for all employees.



(Ord. 16-11-14, passed 12-13-2016)



§ 93.053  PROHIBITION OF SMOKING IN SEATING AREA AT AN OUTDOOR EVENT.



   A person may not smoke in:



   (A)   The seating area of an outdoor arena, stadium, or
amphitheater; or



   (B)   Bleachers or grandstands for use by spectators at a sporting
or other public event.



(Ord. 16-11-14, passed 12-13-2016)



§ 93.054  REASONABLE DISTANCE; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   A person may not smoke within a distance of 30 feet from a
primary public pedestrian entrance to or an operate window of an enclosed
area in which smoking is prohibited.



   (B)   Exceptions. A person may smoke within 30 feet of an entrance
of an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited if the entrance is not a
primary public pedestrian entrance to the premises.



(Ord. 16-11-14, passed 12-13-2016)



§ 93.055  EXCEPTIONS.



   This subchapter does not apply to:



   (A)   A private residence, except if used as a child-care, adult
day-care or health care facility;



   (B)   A hotel or motel room rented to a guest and designated as a
smoking room, if:



      (1)   Not more than 20% of rooms rented to guests in a hotel
or motel are designated as smoking rooms;



      (2)   All smoking rooms in the hotel or motel on the same
floor are contiguous; and



      (3)   Smoke from smoking rooms does not enter an area in which
smoking is prohibited;



   (C)   A private or semi-private room in a nursing home or long-term
care facility occupied by one or more persons, all of whom are smokers and
have requested in writing to be placed in a room where smoking is permitted,
provided that smoke from the room does not enter an area where smoking is
prohibited;



   (D)   Any and all correctional facilities located within the city
limits of the city, including the Rusk County Jail; or



   (E)   Outdoor places of employment except those covered by §§
93.053 and 93.054.



(Ord. 16-11-14, passed 12-13-2016)



§ 93.056  DECLARATION OF ESTABLISHMENT AS NONSMOKING.



   (A)   An owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of an
establishment, facility, or outdoor area may declare that entire
establishment, facility, or outdoor area as a nonsmoking place.



   (B)   A person may not smoke in a place in which a sign conforming
to the requirements of § 93.057 is posted.



(Ord. 16-11-14, passed 12-13-2016)



§ 93.057  POSTING OF SIGNS.



   (A)   The owner, manager or other person having control of such
building or other area where smoking is prohibited by this subchapter shall
have a conspicuously posted sign clearly stating that smoking is prohibited
at each entrance and within the building or other areas where smoking is
prohibited.



   (B)   Such “No Smoking" signs shall have bold lettering of not
less than 1-inch in height. The international "No Smoking" symbol may also be
used (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette
enclosed in a red circle with red bar across it).



   (C)   All ashtrays and other smoking paraphernalia shall be limited
in facilities to that required for the enforcement of extinguishing of
smoking materials in public places.



(Ord. 16-11-14, passed 12-13-2016)



§ 93.058  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Enforcement of this subchapter shall be implemented by the
planning and community development department, fire and law enforcement
agencies.



   (B)   Any owner, manager, operator or employee of any establishment
regulated by this chapter shall be responsible for enforcement.



(Ord. 16-11-14, passed 12-13-2016)



§ 93.059  RETALIATION PROHIBITED.



   No person or employee shall discharge, refuse to hire or in any manner
retaliate against any employee, applicant for employment or customer because
such employee, applicant or customer exercises any right to a smoke free
environment afforded by this subchapter.



(Ord. 16-11-14, passed 12-13-2016)




MOSQUITO CONTROL




§ 93.065  DEFINITION.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, COLLECTIONS OF WATER shall be
defined and held to be those contained in ditches, pools, ponds, excavations,
holes, depressions, open cesspools, privy vaults, fountains, cisterns, tanks,
shallow wells, barrels, troughs (except horse troughs in frequent use), urns,
cans, boxes, bottles, tubs, buckets, defective house roof gutters, tanks or
flush closets or other similar water containers.



(Prior Code, § 6.05.001)



§ 93.066  TREATMENT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful to have, keep, maintain, cause or permit within
the city any collection of standing or flowing water in which mosquitoes
breed or are likely to breed, unless such collection of water is treated so
as effectually to prevent such breeding.



(Prior Code, § 6.05.002)  Penalty, see § 93.999



§ 93.067  METHODS OF TREATMENT.



   The method of treatment of any collections of water directed toward the
prevention of breeding of mosquitoes shall be approved by the accredited
Health Officer, and may be any one or more of the following:



   (A)   Screening with wire netting of at least 16 meshes to the inch
each way or with any other material which will effectually prevent the
ingress or egress of mosquitoes;



   (B)   Complete emptying every seven days of unscreened containers,
together with their thorough drying or cleaning;



   (C)   Using a larvicide approved and applied under the direction of
the Health Officer;



   (D)   Cleaning and keeping sufficiently free of vegetable growth and
other obstructions, and stocking with mosquito-destroying fish;



   (E)   Filling or draining to the satisfaction of the Health Officer;
and/or



   (F)   Proper disposal, by removal or destruction, of tin cans, tin
boxes, broken or empty bottles and similar articles likely to hold water.



(Prior Code, § 6.05.003)



§ 93.068  PRESENCE OF LARVAE.



   The natural presence of mosquito larvae in standing or running water
shall be evidence that mosquitoes are breeding therein, and failure to
prevent such breeding within three days after notice by the Health Officer
shall be deemed a violation of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 6.05.004)



§ 93.069  FAILURE TO ABATE.



   Should the person responsible for conditions giving rise to the
breeding of mosquitoes fail or refuse to take necessary measures to prevent
the same within three days after due notice has been given to him or her, the
Health Officer is hereby authorized to do so, and all necessary cost incurred
by him or her for this purpose shall be a charge against the property owner
or other person offending, as the case may be.



(Prior Code, § 6.05.005)



§ 93.070  RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this subchapter, the
Health Officer, or his or her duly accredited agent, acting under his or her
authority, may at all reasonable times enter in and upon any premises within
his or her jurisdiction. Any person or persons charged with any of the duties
imposed by this subchapter failing within the time designated by this
subchapter, or within the time stated in the notice of the Health Officer, as
the case may be, to perform such duties, or to carry out the necessary
measures to the satisfaction of the Health Officer, shall be deemed guilty of
a separate violation of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 6.05.006)  Penalty, see § 93.999




RODENT CONTROL




§ 93.085  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUSINESS BUILDING.  Any structure, whether public or private, that is
adopted for occupancy, for transaction or business, for rendering of
professional service, for amusement, for the display, sale or storage of
goods, wares, or merchandise, or for the performance of work or labor,
including hotels, apartment buildings, tenement houses, roominghouses, office
buildings, public buildings, stores, theaters, markets, restaurants, grain
elevators, abattoirs, warehouses, workshops, factories and all outhouses,
sheds, barns and other structures on premises used for business purposes.



   HEALTH OFFICER.  The Superintendent, Commissioner or Director of
Health or his or her duly authorized representative.



   OCCUPANT.  The individual, partnership or corporation that uses or
occupies any business building or part or fraction thereof, whether the
actual owner or tenant. In the case of vacant business buildings or vacant
portions thereof, the owner, agent or custodian shall have the responsibility
as OCCUPANT.



   OWNER.  The actual owner, agent or custodian of the business building,
whether individual, partnership or corporation. The lessee shall be construed
as the OWNER for the purpose of this subchapter when business building
agreements hold the lessee responsible for maintenance and repairs.



   RAT ERADICATION. The elimination or extermination of rats within
buildings or residences by any or all of the accepted measures, such as
poisoning, fumigation, trapping, clubbing and the like.



   RAT HARBORAGE.  Any condition which provides shelter or protection for
rats, thus favoring their multiplication and continued existence in, under or
outside of any structure.



   RAT-PROOFING.  A form of construction to prevent the ingress of rats
into business buildings or residences from the exterior or from one business
building, residence or other establishment to another. It consists
essentially of treatment with material, impervious to rat gnawing, all actual
or potential openings in exterior walls, ground or first floors, basements,
roof and foundations that may be reached by rats from the ground by climbing
or burrowing.



   RESIDENCE.  Any structure used by a person or persons for a dwelling
or used for storage or any other use incident to a dwelling, including all
portable and permanent structures and all single- and multiple-family
structures.



(Prior Code, § 6.06.001)



§ 93.086  RAT-PROOFING BUSINESS BUILDINGS AND RESIDENCES; REQUIRED.



   All business buildings and residences in the city shall be rat-proofed,
freed of rats and maintained in a rat-proof and rat-free condition to the
satisfaction of the Health Officer.



(Prior Code, § 6.06.002)



§ 93.087  NOTICE TO, COMPLIANCE BY OWNER.



   Upon receipt of written notice and/or order from the Health Officer,
the owner of any business building or residence specified herein shall take
immediate measures for rat-proofing the building, and unless such work and
improvements have been completed by the owner in the time specified in the
written notice, in no event to be less than 15 days, or within the time to
which a written extension may have been granted by the Health Officer, then
the owner shall be deemed guilty of an offense under the provisions of this
subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 6.06.003)



§ 93.088  NOTICE TO, COMPLIANCE BY OCCUPANT.



   Whenever the Health Officer notifies the occupant of a business
building or residence in writing that there is evidence of rat infestation of
the building, the occupant shall immediately institute rat eradication
measures and shall continuously maintain such measures in a satisfactory
manner until the premises is declared by the Health Officer to be free of rat
infestation. Unless such measures are undertaken within five days after
receipt of notice, it shall be construed as a violation of the provisions of
this subchapter and occupant shall be held responsible therefor.



(Prior Code, § 6.06.004)



§ 93.089  MAINTENANCE.



   The owners of all rat-proofed business buildings and residences shall
maintain the premises in a rat- proofed condition and repair all breaks or
leaks that may occur in the rat-proofing without a specific order of the
Health Officer.



(Prior Code, § 6.06.005)



§ 93.090  CLOSURE OF OCCUPIED BUILDINGS AND RESIDENCES.



   Whenever conditions inside or under any occupied business buildings or
residences within the city provide extensive harborage for rats in the
opinion of the Health Officer, the Health Officer is empowered, after due
notification in accordance with § 93.088, to close such business buildings
until such time as the conditions are abated by rat-proofing and harborage
removal including, if necessary, the installation of suitable concrete floors
in basements or replacement of wooden first or ground floors with concrete or
other major repairs necessary to facilitate rat eradication.



(Prior Code, § 6.06.006)



§ 93.091  CONDEMNATION OF UNOCCUPIED BUILDINGS OR RESIDENCES.



   Whenever conditions inside or under any unoccupied business buildings
or residences provide extensive harborage for rats in the opinion of the
Health Officer, the Health Officer is empowered to require compliance with
the provisions of § 93.089 and, if such conditions are not corrected in a
period of 60 days, or within the time to which a written extension may have
been granted by the Health Officer, the Health Officer is empowered to
institute condemnation and destruction proceedings.



(Prior Code, § 6.06.007)



§ 93.092  WHERE FOODSTUFFS STORED, KEPT AND THE LIKE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy any new or existing
business buildings wherein foodstuffs are to be stored, kept, handled, sold,
held or offered for sale without complying with the provisions of this
subchapter; unless the provisions of this section are complied with, no city
license or permit to conduct or carry on any business mentioned above will be
issued.



(Prior Code, § 6.06.008)  Penalty, see § 93.999



§ 93.093  STORAGE OF FOOD, FEED.



   All food and feed within the city for feeding chickens, cows, pigs,
horses and other animals shall be stored in rat-free and rat-proof
containers, compartments or rooms, unless stored in a rat-proof building.



(Prior Code, § 6.06.009)



§ 93.094  INSPECTIONS.



   The Health Officer is empowered to make unannounced inspections of the
interior and exterior of business buildings to determine full compliance with
this subchapter, and the Health Officer shall make periodic inspections at
intervals of not more than 45 days of all rat-proofed buildings to determine
evidence of rat infestation and the existence of new breaks or leaks in the
rat-proofing. The Health Officer may also make inspections of a residence to
determine the need for rat-proofing upon receipt of a written complaint from
any citizen. When any evidence of it is found indicating the presence of rats
or openings through which rats may again enter business buildings or
residences, the Health Officer shall serve the owners or occupants with
notice and/or orders to abate the conditions found.



(Prior Code, § 6.06.010)



§ 93.095  RESTORATION OF RAT-PROOFING FOLLOWING REPAIR, RECONSTRUCTION AND
THE LIKE.



   It shall be unlawful under the provisions of this subchapter for the
occupant, owner, contractor, public utility company, plumber or any other
person to remove and fail to restore in condition the rat- proofing from any
business building or residence for any purpose. It shall be unlawful any
person or agent to make any new openings that are not closed or sealed
against entrance of rats.



(Prior Code, § 6.06.011)  Penalty, see § 93.999



§ 93.096  STORAGE OF LUMBER, BOXES AND THE LIKE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit to accumulate on any
premises, improved or vacant, or on any open lot or alley in the city, any
lumber, boxes, barrels, bottles, cans, containers or similar materials that
may be permitted to remain thereon unless same shall placed on open racks
that are elevated not less than 18 inches above the ground, and evenly piled
or stacked.



(Prior Code, § 6.06.012)  (Ord. 99-8-18, passed 8-24-1999)  Penalty, see
§ 93.999




ILLEGAL SMOKING PRODUCTS




§ 93.110  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ILLEGAL SMOKING PRODUCT.



      (1)   Any substance, whether described as tobacco, herbs,
incense, spice or any blend thereof, regardless of whether the substance is
marketed for the purpose of being smoked, which includes any one or more of
the following chemicals:



         (a)   Salvia divinorum salvinorin A; all parts of the
plant presently classified botanically as salvia divinorum, whether growing
or not, the seeds thereof, any extract from any part of such plant, and every
compound, manufacture, salts derivative, mixture or preparation of such
plant, its seeds or extracts;



         (b)   2-(lR,
3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl)-5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl) phenol (also known as CP47,
497) and homologues;



         (c)   (6aS, 10aS)-9-(hydroxmethyl)-6,
6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-l-yl)-6a, 7, 10, 10a-tetrahyrobenzo [c]
chomien-l-ol) (also known as HU-211 or Dexanabino);



         (d)   l-pentyl-2-(l-naphthoyl) indole (also known as
JWH-018);



         (e)   l-butyl-3-(l-naphthoyl) indole (also known as
JWH-030); or



         (f)   l-pentyl-3-(4-methoxynaphthoyl) indole (also known
as JWH-081).



      (2)   Products containing some or all of the above substances
are currently being marketed under the following commercial names: Spice,
Spice Gold, Spice Diamond, Yucatan Fire, Solar Flare, Pep Spice, Fire N Ice,
K-2 Summit, K-2 Sex and KO Knock-Out 2.



      (3)   Any ILLEGAL SMOKING PRODUCT containing any of the
chemical compounds set forth above shall be subject to the provisions of this
subchapter, regardless of whether they are marketed under alternative names.



   PERSON.  An individual, group of individuals, proprietorship,
corporation, partnership, wholesaler, retailer or any licensed or unlicensed
business.



(Prior Code, § 6.07.001)



§ 93.111  SALE, OFFER, GIFT, DISPLAY OR POSSESSION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer to sell, deliver to
or to give any illegal smoking product to any person.



(Prior Code, § 6.07.002)  Penalty, see § 93.999



§ 93.112  USE OR POSSESSION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession or
to use illegal smoking products.



(Prior Code, § 6.07.003)  Penalty, see § 93.999



§ 93.113  AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE TO PROSECUTION.



   (A)   It shall be a defense to prosecution for a violation of this
subchapter if the possession or use of the illegal smoking product is at the
direction of or under a prescription issued by a licensed physician or
dentist authorized to prescribe controlled substances within the state.



   (B)   It shall be a defense to prosecution for a violation of this
subchapter if the sale, use or possession of the illegal smoking product was
in conjunction with ornamental landscaping and used solely for that purpose.



   (C)   It shall be a defense to prosecution for a violation of this
subchapter if any individual charged with a violation can provide proper and
complete historic documentation that the possession or use of such illegal
smoking product is a portion of a religious undertaking or activity of a
religious denomination which has long standing historic membership supported
by documentation from clergy or a spiritual leader recognized by the state.



(Prior Code, § 6.07.004)



§ 93.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Any person violating any provision of §§ 93.015 through
93.018 shall, upon conviction, be punished pursuant to § 10.99.



(Prior Code, § 6.02.032)



   (C)   (1)   Any person who violates any provision of §§ 93.050
through 93.059 shall be guilty of a class "C" misdemeanor and shall be
punished by a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $200. If a defendant
has previously been convicted under §§ 93.050 through 93.059, the defendant
shall be fined an amount of not less than  $50 nor more than $500 for a
second conviction hereunder, and shall be fined an amount of not less than 
$100 nor more than $1,000 for a third conviction hereunder and for each
conviction thereafter.



      (2)   Each day an offense occurs is a separate violation



(Prior Code, § 6.04.004)



   (D)   Violations of §§ 93.110 through 93.113 shall be a
misdemeanor, and subject to a penalty as provided for in this code.



(Prior Code, § 6.07.005)  (Ord. 10-11-22, passed 11-23-2010)



CHAPTER 94:  PARKS AND RECREATION



Section



   94.01   Definitions



   94.02   Enforcement



   94.03   Hours when parks are open to the public; unlawful entry



   94.04   Conduct of persons



   94.05   Littering and dumping prohibited



   94.06   Smoking prohibited



   94.07   Traffic regulations



   94.08   Behavior



   94.09   Glass containers



   94.10   Recreation activities



   94.11   Dogs; owner’s responsibility



   94.12   Livestock and fowl



   94.13   Policy regarding advertising inside city parks



   94.14   Vendors



Charter reference:



   Parks, see Art. II, § 17



§ 94.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.  The same as defined in the Tex. Alcoholic
Beverage Code, § 1.04.



   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE.  Any substance defined as a controlled substance
by the Texas Controlled Substances Act (Tex. Health and Safety Code, Ch. 481).



   DANGEROUS DRUG.  Any substance defined as a dangerous drug by Tex.
Health and Safety Code, §§ 483.001 et seq.



   PARK.  A park, reservation, playground, recreation center or any other
area in the city owned, used or designated by the city and devoted to active
or passive recreation.



   SUPERINTENDENT.  The Public Services Director and Parks Superintendent
of the city.



(Prior Code, § 1.08.001)



§ 94.02  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Officials. The Superintendent, code enforcement officers of
the Community Development Department, or the Chief of Police, or his or her
designee, shall, in connection with their duty imposed by law, diligently
enforce the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   Ejectment. The Superintendent, code enforcement officers or
the Chief of Police, or his or her designee, shall have the authority to
eject from any park any person acting in violation of this chapter or in
violation of any rules and regulations promulgated by the Council and to
determine the length of time during which such person shall be excluded from
such park. No person shall come in or upon any park from which he or she has
been excluded in accordance with the provisions of this section.



   (C)   Appeal of ejectment. Any person aggrieved by the enforcement
of division (B) above may appeal such action within ten days from the date
thereof by filing written notice of appeal with the City Secretary. Within
ten days of the receipt of the notice of appeal, the City Manager shall set a
time and place for a hearing on the appeal which shall be held no later than
40 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal.



   (D)   Notice. Notice of the time and place of the appeal hearing
shall be delivered to the person in person, by mail, or by publication at
least once in the official newspaper of the city if service in person or by
mail are unsuccessful in notifying the aggrieved person of the hearing.



   (E)   Decision final. The decision of the City Manager on the appeal
is final. No other administrative procedure shall be provided by the city.



   (F)   Appeal. A person aggrieved by the City Manager’s decision
may appeal the decision to the county court at law no later than ten days
after receipt by certified mail of the City Manager’s decision and not
thereafter for a trial de novo.



(Prior Code, § 1.08.002)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.03  HOURS WHEN PARKS ARE OPEN TO THE PUBLIC; UNLAWFUL ENTRY.



   (A)   Park hours. Except for events sponsored by the city or
unforeseen emergencies, parks shall be only open to the public every day of
the year during the hours of 5:00 a.m. until 11:00 p.m. unless different
opening and closing hours for each individual park shall be posted therein.



   (B)   Unlawful entry. It shall be unlawful for any person, other
than an employee of the city in the course of his or her employment, or
except while anyone is traveling on an established roadway through a park, to
be or remain in any park during any time it is not open.



   (C)   Unlawful use. It shall be unlawful to use any park at any time
for any unlawful meetings or purposes.



   (D)   Closed areas. Any section or part of any park may be declared
closed to the public by the Superintendent at any time for any interval of
time, either temporarily or at regular and stated intervals.



   (E)   Entrance to parks or recreation areas restricted. No person
shall enter a park or recreational area by climbing over, under or through
any fence surrounding the same; or entering the same through or by way of the
water on the lake side or from the dam site; or by any other manner except
through the designated gates or parking facilities.



(Prior Code, § 1.08.003)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.04  CONDUCT OF PERSONS.



   No person in a park shall:



   (A)   Willfully or intentionally mark, deface, disfigure, injure,
tamper with or displace or remove any building, bridge, table, bench,
fireplace, railing or paving material, water line or other public utilities
or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards, whether
temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts or other boundary markers,
or other structures or equipment, facilities or park property or
appurtenances, either real or personal;



   (B)   Fail to cooperate in maintaining restrooms and washrooms in a
neat and sanitary condition;



   (C)   Dig or remove any soil, rock, stones, trees, shrubs or plants
or other wood or materials, or make any excavation by tool, equipment,
blasting or other means or agency;



   (D)   Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant or
injure the bark or pick the flowers or seeds of any tree or plant;



   (E)   Dig in or otherwise disturb grass areas, or in any other way
injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of the area; or



   (F)   Willfully interfere with, disrupt or prevent the orderly
conduct of any supervised play or amusement program being conducted by the
city.



(Prior Code, § 1.08.004)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.05  LITTERING AND DUMPING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to throw, discard, dump, deposit
or leave in and upon the grounds or waters of a public park or recreation
area any litter, garbage, trash or debris except in receptacles provided for
this purpose. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter,
garbage, refuse and the like shall be picked up, carried away from the park
grounds, and otherwise disposed of in accordance with this code.



   (B)   Persons placing litter in public receptacles shall prevent the
litter from being carried or deposited by the elements upon the park grounds
or other public places.



   (C)   It is unlawful for any person, while a driver or passenger in
or upon a motor vehicle, to throw or deposit litter, garbage or refuse onto
the grounds of a city park.



   (D)   All trash receptacles located within parks shall be used for
the disposal of waste generated from within the parks and not for disposal of
waste generated elsewhere.



(Prior Code, § 1.08.005)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.06  SMOKING PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke within a park as defined
in § 93.050.



(Prior Code, § 1.08.006)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.07  TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.



   No person in a park shall:



   (A)   Fail to comply with all applicable provisions of the state
motor vehicle traffic laws in regard to the equipment and operation of
vehicles, together with such regulations as are contained in this chapter and
other ordinances;



   (B)   Fail to obey all traffic officers and park employees, such
persons being hereby authorized and instructed to direct traffic whenever
needed in the parks and on the highways, streets or roads immediately
adjacent thereto;



   (C)   Fail to observe carefully all traffic signs indicating speed,
direction, caution, stopping or parking and all others posted for proper
control and to safeguard life and property;



   (D)   Operate or drive any vehicle at a speed in excess of ten mph,
except upon such roads as the Superintendent may designate, by posted signs,
for speedier travel;



   (E)   Park a vehicle in other than an established or designated
parking area, and such use shall be in accordance with the posted directions
there at and with the instructions of any attendant who may be present;



   (F)   Double park any vehicle on any road or parkway unless directed
by a park official or in any manner block any roadway within a park;



   (G)   Drive any motor vehicle on any area except the paved park
roads or parking area;



   (H)   Ride a bicycle on other than a paved vehicular road or path
designated for that purpose and ride a bicycle other than on the right-hand
side of the road paving as close to the edge as conditions permit. A
bicyclist shall at all times operate his or her machine with reasonable
regard to the safety of others, signal all turns, pass to the right of any
vehicle he or she is overtaking and pass to the right of any vehicle he or
she may be meeting; or



   (I)   Operate a motor vehicle of any kind on the walking trails.



(Prior Code, § 1.08.007)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.08  BEHAVIOR.



   No person in a park shall, unless authorized by the Superintendent:



   (A)   Bring alcoholic beverages into a park, nor shall any person
consume alcoholic beverages at any time in a park; however, alcoholic
beverages may be served and consumed inside the city civic center building
located at Lake Forest Park in the city in accordance with all laws of the
state and ordinances of the city concerning alcoholic beverages and public
intoxication. Service and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages outside said
building and inside the respective park in which said building is located are
prohibited;



   (B)   Enter or remain in a park while under the influence of
alcoholic beverages, controlled substances or dangerous drugs;



   (C)   Discharge, set off or otherwise cause to explode or discharge
or burn any firecracker, torpedo, rocket or any other fireworks or explosives
of inflammable material;



   (D)   Build or attempt to build a fire, except in such areas and
under such regulations as may be designated by Superintendent; or



   (E)   Gamble or participate in or aid any game of chance.



(Prior Code, § 1.08.008)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.09  GLASS CONTAINERS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to bring into, have in
one’s possession or leave any glass containers within any city park.



   (B)   Should any person, firm or corporation or his, her or their
agent, servant or employee violate the terms and/or provisions of this
sections, such persons, firm or corporation, their agents, servants or
employees shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, by a court of competent jurisdictions, such person, firm or
corporation, their agents, servants or employees may be fined as provided in
§ 10.99.



(Prior Code, § 1.08.009)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.10  RECREATION ACTIVITIES.



   No person in a park shall:



   (A)   Swim, bathe or wade in any water or waterways in or adjacent
to any park, except in such water and at such places as are provided
therefore, and in compliance with such regulations as are set forth in this
chapter;



   (B)   Must wear a bathing suit or other clothing as defined in
Ordinance 95-6-5 so as not to indecently expose his or her person;



   (C)   Bring into or operate any boat or other watercraft, whether
motor powered or not, upon any waters, except at places designated by the
Superintendent;



   (D)   Fish in any waters, except in waters designated by the
Superintendent for that use and under such regulations and restrictions as
have been or may be prescribed by the Superintendent. Traps, nets and seines
are prohibited;



   (E)   Hunt, stalk, trap or kill any bird, animal or other wildlife
in or upon the grounds of a public park or recreation area;



   (F)   Possess, carry or discharge any firearm, except as allowed by
state law;



   (G)   Possess or discharge any bow and arrow, crossbow or other
archery equipment;



   (H)   Drive, putt or otherwise hit a golf ball in or upon the
grounds of any public park;



   (I)   Skateboard or skate in any areas other than designated for
that purpose; or



   (J)   Occupy tennis courts for any purpose other than playing tennis
or handball.



(Prior Code, § 1.08.010)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.11  DOGS; OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY.



   (A)   All dogs entering city parks shall be leashed at all times.



   (B)   Owners shall be responsible for collecting and disposing of
their dog’s solid waste at all times within park property.



(Prior Code, § 1.08.011)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.12  LIVESTOCK AND FOWL.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, being the owner of or having
control thereof, and without the permission of the city, to suffer or permit
any chickens, ducks, geese, hogs, swine, cattle, horses, sheep, goats or any
other livestock or fowl, as defined in Chapter 90, to stray into or to run at
large or unattended or to trespass upon any park. If any of the livestock or
fowl prohibited by this section, straying into, running at large or
unattended or trespass onto park property, such animals may be impounded by
animal control.



(Prior Code, § 1.08.012)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.13  POLICY REGARDING ADVERTISING INSIDE CITY PARKS.



   Businesses, firms, organizations and individuals are allowed to
advertise their respective businesses by displaying a four-foot by eight-foot
banner located on the softball fields from the left field foul pole to the
right field foul pole. An annual fee, which is on file with the City
Secretary, is charged for the advertisement and the banner material must
comply with the city’s zoning ordinance. The banners must be installed by
the city and removed if renewal payment is not received the following year.
The advertiser shall be responsible for the condition of the banner, whether
or not deterioration is caused by vandalism or by the weather. The city shall
not be responsible for damaged or stolen banners, once installed. No
alcoholic beverage, foods or others beverages, other than water, may be
advertised on the outside of a building located in the park or on the outside
of a vending trailer acting as a concession stand or on the banners. The City
Manager will review all applications prior to approval.



(Prior Code, § 1.08.013)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.14  VENDORS.



   Vendors will be allowed into parks by permit only. Applications must be
made through the Community Development Department and must meet the
requirements described in Title XI. No advertisements of foods or beverages,
other than water, may be made in the park, except for advertisements erected
inside of a building or enclosed trailer acting as a concession stand.



(Prior Code, § 1.08.014)  (Ord. 11-09-14, passed 9-13-2011)



CHAPTER 95:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section




Generally




   95.001   Selling of merchandise and the like on public lands and
rights-of-way



   95.002   Specifications for sidewalks, curbs and gutters



   95.003   Street numbers for buildings




Blocking, Excavating and the like in Public Rights-of-Way




   95.015   Definitions



   95.016   Permit required



   95.017   Application for permit



   95.018   Approval or disapproval of permit



   95.019   Special requirements



   95.020   Revocation of permit



   95.021   Restoration of work



   95.022   Persons requiring permits; contractor’s requirements



   95.023   Contract work by city; prepared construction plans



   95.024   City forces and public utility company requirements



   95.025   Emergency situations




Improvements




   95.040   Adoption of state law



   95.041   Obstruction of public ways generally



   95.042   Interference, obstruction of public improvements prohibited



   95.043   Manner of work; cleanliness of premises




Growth of Shrubs and the Like at Intersections




   95.055   Definition



   95.056   Enforcement



   95.057   Sight distance and visibility



   95.058   Maximum height of shrubs and the like



   95.059   Minimum clearance of trees




Skateboards, Roller Skates and the Like




   95.070   Definitions



   95.071   Use of skateboards or roller skates in business districts



   95.072   Bicycles on sidewalks in business districts



   95.073   Sales and rentals




Private Use of Rights-of-Way




   95.085   Definitions



   95.086   Authorized private use of city rights-of-way



   95.087   Approval of agreements



   95.088   Traversing right-of-way



   95.089   City priority in use



   95.090   Fees for use of city right-of-way



   95.091   Removal of private instrumentalities



   95.092   City and public priority



   95.093   Repair of damages



Charter references:



   Opening streets, see Art. II, § 16



   Repair of sidewalks, see Art. II, § 13



   Sidewalks, curbs and gutters, see Art. II, § 12



   Street, etc., paving, improvements, assessments, see Art. II, § 11



   Street improvements, widening, etc., see Art. II, § 15



Statutory reference:



   Street improvements and assessments in cities having more than 1,000
inhabitants, see Tex. Transportation Code, Ch. 313




GENERALLY




§ 95.001  SELLING OF MERCHANDISE AND THE LIKE ON PUBLIC LANDS AND
RIGHTS-OF-WAY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale any goods,
wares or merchandise on any of the public land or public rights-of-way
located in or around the traffic circle of the city as follows:



      (1)   From the center of Traffic Star, west along Highway 64
approximately 6,500 feet to the centerline of Van Buren Street;



      (2)   From the center of Traffic Star, north along Highway 259
north approximately 3,300 feet to the centerline of Millville Street;



      (3)   From the center of Traffic Star, northeast along Highway
43 approximately 5,000 feet to the city limits boundary;



      (4)   From the center of Traffic Star, east along Highway 79
north approximately 1,450 feet to the centerline of Wilson Street; or



      (5)   From the center of Traffic Star, south along U.S. 259
and U.S. 79 south approximately 2,450 feet to the centerline of Red Bud
Street.



   (B)   The violation of any provision of this section shall be deemed
an offense and punishable pursuant to § 10.99.



(Prior Code, § 1.09.001)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.002  SPECIFICATIONS FOR SIDEWALKS, CURBS AND GUTTERS.



   All sidewalks, curbs and gutters and driveways constructed in the city
shall conform to the plans and specifications established by the city and on
file in the office of the city’s designee.



(Prior Code, § 1.09.002)



§ 95.003  STREET NUMBERS FOR BUILDINGS.



   (A)   All buildings fronting on any street or alley in the city
shall be numbered in some conspicuous place, by the owner thereof, according
to the map made by the city’s designee for such purpose and on file in his
or her office, all odd numbers being on one side of the street and all even
numbers on the other.



   (B)   Any person desiring to have a number put on his or her
building shall first apply to the city’s designee for the proper number,
and any person failing or refusing to put the proper number on his or her
building or putting the wrong number thereon or failing or refusing to comply
with any other requirement of this section shall be guilty of a violation of
this code.



(Prior Code, § 1.09.003)  Penalty, see § 10.99




BLOCKING, EXCAVATING AND THE LIKE IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY




§ 95.015  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CONTRACTOR.  Any person entering into an agreement with the city.



   DETOUR.  An alternate route in which vehicular traffic is directed
around a street which is closed.



   EMERGENCY.  An unforeseen combination of circumstances, or the
resulting state, that calls for immediate action.



   MANUAL.  The Manual on Uniform Barricading Standards.



   PERMIT.  A written letter of approval from the city.



   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.  Any public street, highway, roadway, alley or
sidewalk.



   STREETS and ALLEYS.  A traveled way for vehicular traffic, whether
designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road,
avenue, boulevard, lane, place or however designated within the city.



      (1)   ALLEYS.  Minor traveled ways which are used primarily
for vehicular service access to the back or the side of properties otherwise
abutting on a street.



      (2)   COLLECTOR STREETS.  Those which carry traffic from
minor streets to the major system of arterial streets and highways including
the principal entrance streets of a residential development and streets for
circulation within such a development.



      (3)   MAJOR THOROUGHFARES OR ARTERIAL STREETS.  Principal
traffic arteries more or less continuous across the city which are intended
to connect remote parts of the city and which are used primarily for fast or
heavy volume traffic and shall include but not be limited to each street
designated as a major street on the major street plan.



      (4)   MINOR STREETS.  Those which are used primarily for
access to abutting residential properties which are intended to serve traffic
within a limited residential district.



(Prior Code, § 1.09.061)



§ 95.016  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   Any person who undertakes to perform any work including
excavations and openings upon, in, under, above or about any public street,
highway, roadway, alley or sidewalk, hereinafter collectively called public
right-of-way, which requires that the street be partially or completely
closed for construction and/or maintenance operations, which work shall
require excavation within or occupancy of the whole or a portion of the width
of any such public right-of-way by equipment, materials, debris or workers
shall use barricades, signals, flags, flares and all other traffic-control
and warning devices and procedures about the work area during the duration of
the work within the public right-of-way of the type and in the manner
required by the uniform barricading standards hereby adopted by the City
Council. Such persons shall also be required to obtain a permit from the city
if the specifications stated in § 95.017 are applicable, with the exception
of the State Department of Transportation conducting work on any
state-designated system. In such cases no permit is required. This permit
must be acquired before construction is begun. The purpose of the permit is
to ensure that ample consideration has been given to the effect of such
construction work on the flow of traffic.



   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of the permit holder to
provide, erect, place and maintain all warning signs, traffic-control devices
and barricades required by the State Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control
Devices and the city. All such signs, devices and barricades should be in
good condition, clean and legible and shall be of the type required by the
State Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices; provided, that the city may
authorize the use of different or special devices and equipment if, in its
opinion, such equipment will be at least as effective for its intended
purpose as that set forth for such purpose in the State Manual on Uniform
Traffic-Control Devices.



(Prior Code, § 1.09.062)



§ 95.017  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   When a permit is required under this subchapter, the permit application
shall, unless otherwise authorized by the city for good cause shown, be filed
with the city at least five days prior to the day the applicant seeks to
first close or block any part of the roadway, and shall contain the following
information:



   (A)   The name, telephone number, local address and principal place
of business of the applicant;



   (B)   The name and day and night telephone number of the engineer,
foreman or other person who will be in charge of the construction or repairs
for which the application is requested;



   (C)   The time of the day and total number of calendar days the
applicant seeks to block the roadway;



   (D)   A statement signed by the applicant, or a person authorized to
bind the applicant, that the applicant will indemnify and forever hold
harmless the city against each and every claim, demand or cause of action
that may be made or come against it by reason of or in any way arising out of
the excavating, closing or blocking of the roadway by the applicant under a
permit from the city, if such permit is granted;



   (E)   A standard barricading layout showing placement of barricades,
cones and informational signs used on the project;



   (F)   An explanation as to the nature or type of work that is to be
performed along with its location; and



   (G)   Any other information deemed necessary by the city.



(Prior Code, § 1.09.063)



§ 95.018  APPROVAL OR DISAPPROVAL OF PERMIT.



   (A)   The city shall either approve or disapprove the application in
five business days after it is submitted. The city may approve an application
either as applied for or subject to special requirements, as provided in §
95.019, which special requirements shall be endorsed on the permit when
issued and become a part thereof. If an application is not approved, the city
shall so notify the applicant, in writing, stating the reasons for
disapproval. An applicant may, if he or she so desires, undertake the
revision of the unapproved application and resubmit it to the city which
shall approve, subject to special requirements, or disapprove the amended
application within two business days.



   (B)   The city may disapprove applications for permits under this
subchapter only for the following reasons:



      (1)   The proposed barricading, channelizing, signing, warning
or other traffic-control procedures or the equipment therefor do not comply
with the requirements of the manual;



      (2)   The nature of the work to be performed or its location
is such that the work may, without imposing any undue hardship on the
applicant, be performed without the necessity of blocking or closing the
roadway;



      (3)   The work or the manner in which it is to be performed
will violate a city ordinance or a state statute;



      (4)   Either failure to supply the city with proof to its
satisfaction that the applicant is adequately insured or has security
sufficient to cover damage to property of persons which may occur from his
occupancy and excavation of the city streets and alleys or failure to enter
into an indemnity agreement to hold the city harmless for any damages of
whatever nature which may result from the acts or omissions of the applicant,
its principal, agents, representatives or employees, and which acts or
omissions are a proximate cause;



      (5)   Failure to furnish all of the information required by
this subchapter or, except for good cause shown, to file the application
within the time prescribed by this subchapter; or



      (6)   Misrepresenting or falsifying any information in the
application.



(Prior Code, § 1.09.064)



§ 95.019  SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The city may, at the time the permit application is approved
or any time after a permit is issued, require:



      (1)   The use or specific location of additional barricades,
signals, signs or other traffic-control or safety devices or the pursuance of
special traffic-control or safety procedures;



      (2)   The work be performed only at certain hours during the
day or night, or during specified days of the week;



      (3)   Only a specified area or not more than a specified
number of lanes shall be blocked at the same time or at specified times of
the day;



      (4)   Materials and equipment used in the work site and dirt
removed from any excavation be located other than in the vehicle traffic
lanes of such roadway; and



      (5)   All equipment be moved from the traffic lanes and any
excavation in the traffic lanes be covered or filled with materials of
sufficient strength and construction to permit vehicular traffic to pass over
such excavation during all or part of the peak traffic periods or at night.



   (B)   When such requirements are deemed necessary by the city in the
interest of public safety and to avoid traffic congestion, any such special
requirements shall be endorsed on the permit and shall be a part thereof



(Prior Code, § 1.09.065)



§ 95.020  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   The city may revoke a permit issued under this subchapter if
any of the permit holder’s barricading, signing, channelizing, warning or
other traffic-control procedures or the equipment at the work site do not
comply with the requirements of the manual, or with any special requirements
imposed by the city. The permit holder, or the person named as responsible
for or in charge of the work in the permit, shall first be notified of the
failure or defect and be given a reasonable time, such length of time to be
determined by the city and not to exceed 24 hours, to correct same before
such permit is revoked.



   (B)   If a permit issued under this subchapter is revoked, it shall
be unlawful to continue to block the roadway, except to restore the site to
its proper condition as required herein.



(Prior Code, § 1.09.066)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.021  RESTORATION OF WORK.



   In the event a permit issued under this subchapter is revoked, the
permit holder shall immediately commence operations to restore the work area
within the roadway to its proper condition, such work to be completed within
24 hours. In addition, except as required to restore the work area to its
proper condition, the permit holder shall remove all equipment, men,
materials and debris from the roadway. In the event such restoration is not
done, the city shall be authorized, at its election, to take charge of the
work and restore the premises to its proper condition, and shall be entitled
to recover from the permit holder by civil action the actual expenses
incurred by the city in restoring the premises, including, but not limited
to, cost of labor, materials, overhead, rental of any equipment used by the
city in restoring the site and attorney’s fees, and for such purposes the
city shall have a right of action against any bonds in effect running from
the holder of the permit to the city, conditioned upon compliance with the
ordinances of the city in the performance of such work.



(Prior Code, § 1.09.067)



§ 95.022  PERSONS REQUIRING PERMITS; CONTRACTOR’S REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Any contractor or individual undertaking any work, whether of
his or her own, or under contract for any other person, and such work is
within a city street and does not require that a set of plans be drawn up,
shall be required to give a 24-hour notice of such work, giving location,
time and type of work to be performed.



   (B)   Any contractor undertaking any work, whether of his or her
own, or under contract for any other person, and such work is within a city
street and requires that a set of plans be drawn up due to the extensive
and/or complex nature of the work, will be subject to the provisions set
forth in this section and must file for a permit before beginning
construction. Proof must also be shown that he or she has obtained approval
by other affected agencies of the city to actually perform the work.



   (C)   A plan must be prepared by the contracting agency showing
where work is to be performed. The plan will include a standard barricading
layout showing placement of barricades, cones and informational signs used on
the project. In most cases, layouts will be similar to those shown in the
latter part of the manual which is on file in the city offices. Deviation
from the manual will be allowed only with approval of the city.



   (D)   The plan mentioned in division (C) above must be submitted a
minimum of five business days prior to actual beginning of the construction
work. This time period will allow the designated department the opportunity
to survey the construction site in an attempt to uncover any traffic problems
which might develop as a result of the barricading.



   (E)   Each contractor or construction agency will provide with his
barricading plan a listing of all persons directly responsible for the safety
on each project to include an address or a telephone listing at which such
person can be reached at any hour of the day if a hazardous condition
develops.



(Prior Code, § 1.09.068)



§ 95.023  CONTRACT WORK BY CITY; PREPARED CONSTRUCTION PLANS.



   In the event the contractor undertakes work based on plans prepared by
the designated department, all detour and barricading requirements will be
inserted as part of the construction plans. In this situation, the
contractor’s acceptance of the construction project will serve as
indication that he understands the layout and is responsible subject to the
penalties established.



(Prior Code, § 1.09.069)



§ 95.024  CITY FORCES AND PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANY REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All city forces, as well as public utility companies
performing construction work within a street which requires that a set of
plans be drawn up due to the extensive and/or complex nature of work, will be
subject to the same requirements established in § 95.022. Such work would
include major street construction (street cuts, street widening and the
like), water and sewerage line laying or relocation or off-street
construction which requires that a portion of the adjacent roadway be
barricaded.



   (B)   Construction work performed by city forces or utility
companies, minor enough such that a set of plans need not be drawn up, will
not be subject to the same requirements established in § 95.022. Such work
includes minor street construction (resurfacing, patching, striping), minor
utility work (use of manholes such that a lane must be barricaded) and the
like. These forces will be required, however, to comply with all other
provisions set forth in this manual as to the construction site barricade
layout and signing. In addition, the city shall be contacted before such
construction work is begun and be informed of the location and nature of
construction. This work shall not be performed during the peak hour
congestion periods of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m.,
unless approved by the city.



(Prior Code, § 1.09.070)



§ 95.025  EMERGENCY SITUATIONS.



   The requirements of this subchapter are to be used for all planned
construction projects. In the event of an emergency-type situation,
notification of work to be done can be made by telephone, directly to the
city, thereby bypassing the requirements of this subchapter. Under these
conditions, the contractor or agency will still be required to follow the
basic barricading standards as outlined in the manual.



(Prior Code, § 1.09.071)




IMPROVEMENTS




§ 95.040  ADOPTION OF STATE LAW.



   The provisions of Tex. Transportation Code, Ch. 313, are hereby adopted
by the city as controlling the establishment, construction and repair of
street improvements within the city.



(Prior Code, § 1.09.101)



§ 95.041  OBSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC WAYS GENERALLY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city without
obtaining a permit to erect, construct, reconstruct, alter or repair or to
permit the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration or repair of
any fence, wall, hedge, structure or any other character of obstruction:



      (1)   Over, on or across any public property, way, alley,
street, sidewalk or park; or



      (2)   Between the property line of any lot and a public street
or alley line.



   (B)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this
section or fail to comply therewith shall be guilty of a violation of this
code. The owner or owners of any building or premises or part thereof, where
anything in violation of this section shall be placed or exist, and any
architect, builder, contractor, agent or person assisting in the commission
of any such violation shall also be guilty of a separate violation of this
code.



(Prior Code, § 1.09.102)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.042  INTERFERENCE, OBSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or obstruct any
public improvements authorized by the City Council, the mayor or other city
officials by means of threats, coercion, duress or any other method
whatsoever, either directly or indirectly.



(Prior Code, § 1.09.103)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.043  MANNER OF WORK; CLEANLINESS OF PREMISES.



   (A)   All work done or performed under the provisions of this
subchapter shall be done or performed in a good, workmanlike manner.



   (B)   Such work shall not be accepted or approved by the city until
the premises thereof have been cleaned and cleared of all debris, trash and
rubbish which may have accumulated during such work.



(Prior Code, § 1.09.104)




GROWTH OF SHRUBS AND THE LIKE AT INTERSECTIONS




§ 95.055  DEFINITION.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, the phrase STREET GUTTER FLOW LINE
shall mean the street gutter flow line of the curb adjacent to and bordering
upon each such restricted area; in the event there be no such curb, the
height restrictions set forth in this subchapter shall be based upon the
actual level of the paved or used portion of the public street adjacent to
and bordering upon each such restricted area.



(Prior Code, § 1.09.131)



§ 95.056  ENFORCEMENT.



   In addition to any penalty which may be imposed for the violation of
this subchapter, the city shall be entitled to enter upon and remove from the
triangular corner areas described in this subchapter any of the growths
prohibited by this subchapter. Such entry and removal shall be without
liability to the owners thereof.



(Prior Code, § 1.09.132)



§ 95.057  SIGHT DISTANCE AND VISIBILITY.



   (A)   Rigid compliance with these landscaping requirements shall not
be such as to cause visibility obstructions and/or blind corners at
intersections. Whenever an intersection of two or more public rights-of-way
occurs, a visibility sight triangle, as described below, shall be required.
Landscaping within the visibility sight triangle shall be designed to provide
unobstructed visibility at a level between three and ten feet measured from
the street grade at the middle of the closest traffic lane. Ornamental trees
may be permitted in this area provided they are trimmed in such a manner that
no limbs and foliage extend into the visibility sight triangle. Large trees
are prohibited from being planted in the visibility sight triangle.



   (B)   The visibility sight triangles are described as follows.



      (1)   Driveways and alleys. The areas of property on both
sides of the intersection of an alley accessway and public right-of-way and
on both sides of the intersection of each private driveway and public
right-of-way shall have a visibility sight triangle with two sides of each
triangle being a minimum of ten feet in length from the point of intersection
and the third side being a line connecting the ends of the other two sides.



      (2)   Intersection of streets. The areas of property located
at a corner formed by the intersection of two of more public rights-of-way
shall have a visibility sight triangle with two sides of each triangle being
a minimum of 25 feet in length from the point of the intersection and the
third side being a line connecting the ends of the other two sides.



      (3)   Intersection of street with state or federal highway.
The areas of property located at a corner formed by one or more state or
federal highways shall have a visibility sight triangle with two sides of
each triangle being a minimum of 30 feet in length from the point of the
intersection and the third side being a line connecting the ends of the other
two sides.



(Prior Code, § 1.09.133)



§ 95.058  MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF SHRUBS AND THE LIKE.



   No person shall plant, grow or maintain in any restricted area any
plant, hedge, shrub or other growth, except trees, at a height greater than
three feet from the street gutter flow line.



(Prior Code, § 1.09.134)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.059  MINIMUM CLEARANCE OF TREES.



   Any trees planted, grown and maintained in any restricted area shall
not have branches or foliage extending from the trunk thereof at a height
lower than 15 feet from the street gutter flow line.



(Prior Code, § 1.09.135)




SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES AND THE LIKE




§ 95.070  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALLEY.  A public way within a block, generally giving access to the
rear of lots or buildings, and not used for general traffic circulation.



   BICYCLE.  Every device propelled by human power upon which any person
may ride, having two tandem wheels, either of which is more than 12 inches in
diameter.



   BUSINESS DISTRICT.  The territory contiguous to and including any
street which is built up with structures devoted to business or industry
situated at intervals of less than 100 feet for a distance of a quarter of a
mile or more.



   PARKWAY.  The portion of a street other than a roadway or a sidewalk,
including, but not limited to, parking areas.



   ROADWAY.  The portion of a street which is divided into two or more
clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.



   SIDEWALK.  The portion of a street between the curbline or roadway and
the adjacent property line designated for pedestrian use.



   SKATEBOARD.  A short, oblong board with two or more wheels at each
end, ridden as down an incline.



(Prior Code, § 1.09.161)



§ 95.071  USE OF SKATEBOARDS OR ROLLER SKATES IN BUSINESS DISTRICTS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or otherwise operate a
skateboard or roller skates on any parkway, roadway, street, highway or
sidewalk located in any business district of the city, except for the purpose
of crossing the street. The rules relating to pedestrians crossing streets
shall apply to persons crossing a street on roller skates or a skateboard. No
person crossing a street on roller skates or a skateboard shall travel too
fast for safety under the conditions then existing.



(Prior Code, § 1.09.162)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.072  BICYCLES ON SIDEWALKS IN BUSINESS DISTRICTS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, drive or otherwise operate
a bicycle on any sidewalk located in any business district of the city.



(Prior Code, § 1.09.163)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.073  SALES AND RENTALS.



   Any commercial establishment selling or renting street skates, roller
skates of any kind, or skateboards shall post a copy of this subchapter, or a
summary of the rules set out in this subchapter, in a conspicuous place where
persons buying or renting skates will see it.



(Prior Code, § 1.09.164)




PRIVATE USE OF RIGHTS-OF-WAY




§ 95.085  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CITY.  The City of Henderson, Texas.



   CITY COUNCIL.  The City Council of Henderson, Texas.



   CODE OF ORDINANCES.  The code of ordinances of the city.



   DIRECTOR.  The Director of the City Public Services Department, or
such successor position with similar duties.



   PUBLIC UTILITIES.  Any utility operated by the city and/or any utility
that has a franchise agreement with the city. This includes any like term.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY.  The right-of-way of all streets, thoroughfares or
alleys of the city, whether “owned” in fee, as an easement, by dedication
to the public, or long continued use as a city street, thoroughfare or alley.



(Ord. 12-04-03, passed 4-17-2012)



§ 95.086  AUTHORIZED PRIVATE USE OF CITY RIGHTS-OF-WAY.



   Private use of city rights-of-way for purposes other than normal
traffic uses, which are regulated by the code of ordinances and state law,
and by franchise agreements with public utilities is hereby authorized by
private agreements with the city.



(Ord. 12-04-03, passed 4-17-2012)



§ 95.087  APPROVAL OF AGREEMENTS.



   All such agreements between a person or private entity and the city
must be approved by the City Council before a permit is issued to the person
or private entity.



(Ord. 12-04-03, passed 4-17-2012)



§ 95.088  TRAVERSING RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   Any such use of a right-of-way by a person or private entity in a
manner that would go across a street, thoroughfare or alley must cross any
street, thoroughfare or alley by boring under the street, thoroughfare or
alley, and the boring must be at least three feet below the lowest level of
the street, thoroughfare or alley, and not interfere in any way with any
public utility lines, or be at such deeper depth as determined by the
Director of the Public Services Department.



(Ord. 12-04-03, passed 4-17-2012)



§ 95.089  CITY PRIORITY IN USE.



   No use of right-of-way may be made, laid or constructed in such a
manner as would interfere with the use of any street, thoroughfare or alley,
with any public utility, or with reasonable access to any private property
along said right-of-way. All such determinations of interference or
noninterference as proscribed in this subchapter shall be made in the sole
judgment of said Director.



(Ord. 12-04-03, passed 4-17-2012)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.090  FEES FOR USE OF CITY RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   All fees for use of city right-of-way and liability insurance, naming
the city as an additional insured, and/or bond requirements shall be set by
the City Council upon the recommendation of the City Manager.



(Ord. 12-04-03, passed 4-17-2012)



§ 95.091  REMOVAL OF PRIVATE INSTRUMENTALITIES.



   All instrumentalities of such use shall be promptly removed when such
use terminates.



(Ord. 12-04-03, passed 4-17-2012)



§ 95.092  CITY AND PUBLIC PRIORITY.



   Priority shall always be given to the city, the public and public
utilities in the use of such right-of- way over any use authorized by this
subchapter.



(Ord. 12-04-03, passed 4-17-2012)



§ 95.093  REPAIR OF DAMAGES.



   Any damages, destruction, erosion or the like caused by such private
use of public right-of-way shall be promptly repaired by the person or entity
making such private use and the surface of the right-of-way shall be returned
to the condition that it was in immediately before such use began, or to such
better use as approved by the Director. All efforts must be made to prevent
erosion or washing of soil, and any such erosion or washing of soil must be
promptly contained and repaired. If such damage, destruction, erosion or the
like is not promptly repaired and the city, a public utility or some other
person or entity makes such repairs, then the person or entity holding the
city permit will be liable in monetary damages to the city, public utility,
person or entity whose properly was damaged or destroyed for repairing such
damages, destruction, erosion or the like, including any attorney’s fees
expended in obtaining such reimbursement for such repairs.



(Ord. 12-04-03, passed 4-17-2012)



CHAPTER 96:  PUBLIC TREE CARE



Section



   96.01   Purpose



   96.02   Definitions



   96.03   Authority and power



   96.04   Tree Advisory Board



   96.05   Tree planting and care standards



   96.06   Prohibition against harming public trees



   96.07   Certain trees declared a nuisance



 



   96.99   Violations and penalty



§ 96.01  PURPOSE.



   To enhance the quality of life and the present and future health,
safety, and welfare of all citizens, to enhance property values, and to
ensure proper planting and care of trees on public property, the City Council
herein delegates the authority and responsibility for managing public trees,
creates a Tree Advisory Board, establishes practices governing the planting
and care of trees on public property.



(Ord. 15-12-03, passed 1-12-2016)



§ 96.02  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings indicated:



   DAMAGE.  Any injury to or destruction of a tree, including but not
limited to: uprooting; severance of all or part the root system or main
trunk; storage of material on or compaction of surrounding soil; a
substantial change in the natural grade above a root system or around a
trunk; surrounding the tree with impervious paving materials; or any trauma
caused by accident or collision.



   NUISANCE. Any tree, or limb thereof, that has an infectious disease or
insect; is dead or dying; obstructs the view of traffic signs or the free
passage of pedestrians or vehicles; or threatens public health, safety and
welfare.



   PARKWAY. The area along a public street between the curb and the
sidewalk; or if there is no curb or sidewalk, the unpaved portion of the area
between the street right-of-way line and the paved portion of the street or
alley.



   PUBLIC PROPERTY. All grounds and rights-of-way (ROWs) owned or
maintained by the city.



   PUBLIC TREE. Any tree or woody vegetation on city-owned or
city-maintained property or rights-of-way.



   TOP or TOPPING. The non-standard practice of cutting back of limbs to
stubs within a tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal
canopy and disfigure the tree.



(Ord. 15-12-03, passed 1-12-2016)



§ 96.03  AUTHORITY AND POWER.



   (A)   Delegation of authority and responsibility. The Public
Services Department Director and/or his designee, hereinafter referred to as
the "Director," shall have the authority and responsibility to plant, prune,
maintain and remove trees and woody plants growing in or upon all city
streets, rights-of-ways, city parks, and other public property. This shall
include the removal of trees that may threaten electrical, telephone, gas, or
any municipal water or sewer line, or any tree that is affected by fungus,
insect, or other pest disease.



   (B)   Coordination among city departments. All city departments will
coordinate as necessary with the Director and will provide services as
required to ensure compliance with this chapter as it relates to streets,
alleys, rights-of-way, drainage, easements and other public properties not
under direct jurisdiction of the Director.



   (C)   Interference. No person shall hinder, prevent, delay, or
interfere with the Director or his agents while engaged in carrying out the
execution or enforcement of this chapter.



(Ord. 15-12-03, passed 1-12-2016)



§ 96.04  TREE ADVISORY BOARD.



   The City Council hereby creates a "Tree Advisory Board," hereinafter
referred to as the "Board."



   (A)   Membership. The Board shall consist of four members or their
designees, the president of Keep Henderson Beautiful, the Community
Development Manager, the Parks and Recreation Superintendent, and a member of
a state or federal forestry agency approved by City Council. Members of the
Board will serve without compensation.



   (B)   Officers. The Board shall annually select one of the members
to serve as chair, may appoint a second member to serve as vice-chair, and
may appoint a third member to serve as secretary.



   (C)   Meetings. The Board shall meet a minimum of four times each
year. All meetings shall be open to the public. The Board chair may schedule
additional meetings as needed.



   (D)   Duties. The Board shall act in an advisory capacity to the
Director and shall:



      (1)   Coordinate and promote Arbor Day activities;



      (2)   Review and update a five-year plan to plant and maintain
trees on city property;



      (3)   Support public awareness and education programs relating
to trees;



      (4)   Review city department concerns relating to tree care;



      (5)   Assist with the annual application to renew the Tree
City USA designation;



      (6)   Develop of a list of recommended trees for planting on
city property.



(Ord. 15-12-03, passed 1-12-2016)



§ 96.05  TREE PLANTING AND CARE STANDARDS.



   (A)   Standards. All planting and maintenance of public trees shall
conform to the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) A-300 "Standards
for Tree Care Operations" and shall follow all tree care Best Management
Practices (BMPs) published by the International Society of Arboriculture (a
copy is located at the Texas A&M Forest Service, Henderson District office).



   (B)   Requirements of franchise utility companies. Franchise utility
companies shall provide advance notice to the city of their intended
non-emergency tree pruning schedule and location of impacted area. The
maintenance of public trees for utility clearance shall conform to all
applicable utility industry standards.



   (C)   Tree species list. The Director shall develop and maintain an
official list of desirable tree species for planting on public property in
two size classes: Ornamental (20 feet or less in height at maturity) and
Shade (greater than 20 feet at maturity). Only trees from this approved list
may be planted without written approval from the Director.



   (D)   Planting distances. The Director shall develop and maintain an
official set of spacing requirements for the planting of trees on public
property. No tree may be planted within the visibility triangle of a street
intersection or within ten feet of a fire hydrant.



   (E)   Planting trees under electric utility lines. Only trees listed
as ornamental trees on the official city tree species list may be planted
under or within 15 lateral feet of any overhead utility wire.



   (F)   Protection of public trees during construction. Any person,
firm, corporation, or city department performing construction in the area of
any public tree must employ appropriate measures to protect the tree,
including, but not limited to, placing barriers around the tree to prevent
any damage.



(Ord. 15-12-03, passed 1-12-2016)



§ 96.06  PROHIBITION AGAINST HARMING PUBLIC TREES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
damage, remove, or cause the damage or removal of a tree on public property
without written permission from the Director.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
attach any cable, wire or signs or any other object to any street, park, or
public tree.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
TOP any public tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, where
best pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this provision at
the determination of the Director.



(Ord. 15-12-03, passed 1-12-2016)



§ 96.07  CERTAIN TREES DECLARED A NUISANCE.



   Any tree, or limb thereof, on private property determined by the
Director to have contracted a lethal, communicable disease or insect; to be
dead or dying; to obstruct the view of traffic signs or the free passage of
pedestrians or vehicles; or that threatens public health, safety, and welfare
is declared a nuisance and the city may require its treatment or removal.
Private property owners have the duty, at their own expense, to remove or
treat nuisance trees on their property. The city may remove such trees at the
owner's expense if the owner does not comply with treatment and/or removal as
specified by the Director within the written notification period.



(Ord. 15-12-03, passed 1-12-2016)



§ 96.99  VIOLATIONS AND PENALTY.



   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter
shall be deemed guilty of a class C misdemeanor and shall be subject to a
fine not to exceed $500 for each offense.



(Ord. 15-12-03, passed 1-12-2016)



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      110.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      111.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



      112.   ALARM SYSTEMS



      113.   CARNIVALS



      114.   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES



      115.   TAXICABS



      116.   OIL, GAS AND SALT WATER DISPOSAL WELLS



      117.   SOLICITORS



      118.   PRECIOUS METAL AND GEM DEALERS



      119.   WRECKER SERVICE



CHAPTER 110:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section




Miscellaneous Provisions




   110.001   Bond or liability insurance required for amusement rides



   110.002   Garage sales



   110.003   Temporary signs



   110.004   Maintenance of signs and support structures




Flea Markets




   110.015   Definitions



   110.016   Exceptions



   110.017   License required



   110.018   Records of licensee



   110.019   Operation of more than one market



   110.020   Unlawful transactions



   110.021   Purchases from children



   110.022   Parking




Pawnbrokers




   110.035   Definition



   110.036   Compliance with state law



   110.037   Records to be kept



   110.038   Inspection of records and articles



   110.039   Retention period



   110.040   Order stopping sale and the like of property



   110.041   Dealing with minors



   110.042   Responsibility of owners and the like for employees or
agents




Religious Solicitation in Public Places




   110.055   Definitions



   110.056   Exceptions



   110.057   Registration



   110.058   Prohibited conduct



   110.059   Use of streets and parkways




Itinerant Vendors




   110.070   Definitions



   110.071   Exempt activities



   110.072   Vendors on public property



   110.073   License for vendors on private property; required;
application



   110.074   Display of license; unauthorized use or reproduction



   110.075   License; denial, suspension, revocation



   110.076   Appeal of denial, suspension or revocation



 



   110.999   Penalty



Statutory references:



   Texas Pawnshop Act, see Tex. Finance Code, Ch. 371



   Zoning regulations and district boundaries applicable to pawnshops, see
Tex. Local Gov’t Code, § 211.0035




MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS




§ 110.001  BOND OR LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIRED FOR AMUSEMENT RIDES.



   No person shall conduct, operate, manage or sponsor any Ferris wheel,
merry-go-round or other amusement ride operated for hire or for the purpose
of promoting or advertising any trade or business, without first filing with
the City Secretary a bond or certificate of liability insurance, in the
amount of at least $100,000, indemnifying the public against damages
sustained by reason of the operation of such ride. Such bond or certificate
of insurance shall be subject to approval by the City Attorney. This section
shall apply to all persons, whether or not a license is required by any other
provision of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 4.01.001)  Penalty, see § 110.999



Statutory reference:



   Regulation of amusement rides, see Tex. Occupations Code, Ch. 2151



§ 110.002  GARAGE SALES.



   A permit must be obtained from the city prior to posting a sign or
starting a garage sale. Garage sale signs are limited to outside of the
right-of-way; six square feet maximum in size. Garage sale signs must be
located on private property with the permission of property owner or person
in charge or legal control of property. Garage sale signs in the right-of-way
(including on utility poles and street signs) are subject to immediate
removal. Garage sale signs may be erected no more than 48 hours prior to the
garage sale and must be removed prior to 24 hours after the garage sale.



(Prior Code, § 4.14.001)



§ 110.003  TEMPORARY SIGNS.



   Business occupants, owners or organizations may display a temporary
sign approved by the City Manager or designee for a period not to exceed 14
consecutive days and only after obtaining a permit to display the approved
sign. No portion of the temporary sign may be located nearer than five feet
from the public right-of-way.



(Prior Code, § 4.15.001)  (Ord. 07-12-21, passed 12-11-2007)  Penalty, see
§ 110.999



§ 110.004  MAINTENANCE OF SIGNS AND SUPPORT STRUCTURES.



   (A)   All signs and sign support structures, together with all of
their supports, braces, guys and anchors, shall be kept in good repair and in
proper state of preservation. The display surfaces of all signs shall be kept
neatly painted or posted at all times.



   (B)   Any sign in disrepair, torn or tattered as determined by the
City Manager designee is declared in violation of this section and as such
shall be brought into compliance with this section by the owner or permit
holder or removed within 30 calendar days.



(Prior Code, § 4.15.002)  Penalty, see § 110.999



Statutory reference:



   Authority of municipality to regulate signs, see Tex. Local Gov’t
Code, Ch. 216




FLEA MARKETS




§ 110.015  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   FLEA MARKET. A market, indoors or out-of-doors, where new or used items
are sold to the general public from individual locations, with each location
being operated independently from the other locations. Items sold include,
but are not limited to, household items, antiques, rare items, decorations,
used books and used magazines.



   FLEA MARKET SELLER.  A person, firm or corporation selling items or
offering items for sale at a flea market.



   MARKET.  A place where goods are sold to the public.



(Prior Code, § 4.08.001)



§ 110.016  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   No person, firm or corporation operating as a secondhand store
shall be required to obtain a license under this subchapter for the same
business location.



   (B)   Garage sales are exempt from coverage under this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 4.08.002)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.017  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person, firm or corporation shall operate the business of renting
space or allocating space to flea market sellers without first obtaining a
license therefor. Applications for licenses shall be made to the city
designee, on forms to be provided by the city designee. Only one license
shall be required for each flea market, and the individual flea market
sellers shall not be required to obtain a license under this section. The fee
for such license shall be on file in the City Secretary’s office.



(Prior Code, § 4.08.003)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.018  RECORDS OF LICENSEE.



   Each licensee of a flea market shall maintain a record of every vendor
participating in each such flea market for at least one year from the date of
the last sale made by each such vendor. The record required by this section
shall include the name, business and residential addresses, business and
residential telephone numbers, and federal tax identification number or
Social Security number of each vendor.



(Prior Code, § 4.08.004)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.019  OPERATION OF MORE THAN ONE MARKET.



   Any person, firm or corporation renting or allocating space to flea
market sellers in more than one place of business shall be required to obtain
a license for each place of business, provided that one license shall be
adequate for locations that are on the same lot, adjacent lots or lots
separated only by an alley.



(Prior Code, § 4.08.005)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.020  UNLAWFUL TRANSACTIONS.



   No person shall sell or offer for sale at any flea market any goods
known to such person to be stolen or mortgaged.



(Prior Code, § 4.08.006)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.021  PURCHASES FROM CHILDREN.



   No flea market seller shall purchase any used household item, antique
or used article whatsoever from any person under the age of 18 years, unless
such person is accompanied by the person’s parent or guardian.



(Prior Code, § 4.08.007)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.022  PARKING.



   (A)   Indoor markets. There shall be provided and adequately
maintained off-street parking for occupants, employees and patrons according
to the requirements set forth by Zoning Ordinance No. 84-8-8, § 24.12,
subsection 4(B), item 20, which addresses retail stores. One parking space
per every 300 square feet of gross floor space is required.



   (B)   Outdoor markets. There shall be provided and adequately
maintained off-street parking for occupants, employees and patrons at a rate
of one parking space per every separate booth space occupied, leased or
reserved.



(Prior Code, § 4.08.008)




PAWNBROKERS




§ 110.035  DEFINITION.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, the word PAWNBROKER shall mean one
who pursues the business of lending money upon interest and receiving upon
deposit any personal property as security for the payment of such loan and
interest.



(Prior Code, § 4.13.001)



§ 110.036  COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW.



   It is unlawful for any pawnbroker, or person doing business as such, to
receive any article in pledge or sell any article pledged to him or her,
without complying with the statutes regulating pawnbrokers.



(Prior Code, § 4.13.002)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.037  RECORDS TO BE KEPT.



   All pawnbrokers shall keep books in connection with their business,
wherein shall be entered an accurate description of all property pledged or
sold to them, giving the name and address of the person pledging or selling
same, and the place where the same occurs, and in the case of watches, motors
and other articles having identification letters or numbers, the name of the
maker and the model or serial number of the piece, and in all cases all
property shall be as accurately and fully described as the nature of the
article permits, and in such books there shall also be entered a general
description of the person by whom same is deposited or sold, and the time
when the same was done, and the explanation given by the person as to the
source of such articles. These entries shall be made as soon after any
transaction is had as possible, in no event allowing more than one hour to
elapse after such transaction before the above-provided entry is made
concerning the same.



(Prior Code, § 4.13.003)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.038  INSPECTION OF RECORDS AND ARTICLES.



   (A)   These records and the articles themselves so pledged or sold
shall at all reasonable times be subject to inspection and examination by the
police officers of the city or the county sheriff and his or her deputies, or
any other law enforcement officer in the city.



   (B)   All pawnbrokers shall have their goods arranged in stock so as
to enable the same to be inspected by the law enforcement officials and those
in their company. It shall be unlawful for any such dealer to refuse to admit
such officer to such place of business to inspect such property.



(Prior Code, § 4.13.004)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.039  RETENTION PERIOD.



   All property obtained by a pawnbroker shall be held in an unaltered
condition in the local store or warehouse for a period of at least ten days
before the same may be sold or disposed of or moved out of the city.



(Prior Code, § 4.13.005)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.040  ORDER STOPPING SALE AND THE LIKE OF PROPERTY.



   (A)   Any law enforcement official shall have the right, upon
written order addressed to a particular pawnbroker, to stop the sale or
removal or redelivery of any properly for a stated period of time or until
the properly is released by such officer.



   (B)   After receipt of such order, it shall be unlawful for a
pawnbroker to sell, dispose of, remove or redeliver such property until the
property is released by the officer issuing the order.



(Prior Code, § 4.13.006)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.041  DEALING WITH MINORS.



   It shall be unlawful for any owner, manager or employee of any
pawnbroker to buy or receive from any minor any goods, chattels or other
property, unless such minor shall have in his or her possession the written
consent of his or her parent or guardian, provided that this provision shall
not apply to any minor who is married or who has had the disability of nonage
removed.



(Prior Code, § 4.13.007)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.042  RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS AND THE LIKE FOR EMPLOYEES OR AGENTS.



   Any owner, manager or operator of any pawnbroker business whose
employees or agents fail to observe any of the provisions of this subchapter
shall be equally guilty with the offender and subject to the same penalties.



(Prior Code, § 4.13.008)




RELIGIOUS SOLICITATIONS IN PUBLIC PLACES




§ 110.055  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  Any property open or devoted to public use.



   RELIGIOUS PURPOSE.  The use of money or property for the support of a
church, religious society or other religious sect, group or order.



   RELIGIOUS SOLICITATION.  Conduct whereby a person, organization,
society, corporation or its agent, member or representative:



      (1)   Solicits property, financial aid, gifts in money or any
article representing monetary value; or



      (2)   Sells or offers to sell a product, article, tag, service
or printed material; on the plea or representation, whether express or
implied, that the proceeds from the solicitation or sale are for a religious
purpose.



(Prior Code, § 4.06.001)



§ 110.056  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to the sale
of:



      (1)   Any food; or



      (2)   Any ticket to an entertainment event, dinner, breakfast
or luncheon, sports event, benefit dance, fair, bazaar or other type of
organized social activity, provided that the activity for which the ticket is
sold actually occurs on the date and time and at the place as represented by
the ticket seller. It is a defense to prosecution under this division (A)(2)
that the event did not occur for reasons beyond the control of the ticket
seller or promoter and that a bona fide attempt was made to refund all
tickets sold.



   (B)   It shall not be necessary for the City Attorney to negate
exceptions in the accusatory pleading and prosecution of cases arising under
this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 4.06.002)



§ 110.057  REGISTRATION.



   (A)   A person who engages in religious solicitation in a public
place shall first register with the city designee, giving the following
information:



      (1)   Name of registrant;



      (2)   Name of organization receiving the funds;



      (3)   Duration and locations of proposed solicitations;



      (4)   Number of participants; and



      (5)   A general description of products sold or method of
solicitation.



   (B)   Registration expires after one year and must be renewed
annually. If a change occurs in any of the information submitted with the
registration, the person or organization shall notify the city designee of
the change.



   (C)   If a person, organization, society or corporation conducting a
religious solicitation obtains a charitable solicitation permit, that person,
organization, society or corporation is not required to comply with the
requirements of this section.



(Prior Code, § 4.06.003)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.058  PROHIBITED CONDUCT.



   A person engaged in religious solicitation in a public place shall not:



   (A)   Misrepresent the religious purpose of the solicitation; or



   (B)   Misrepresent the religious affiliation of those engaged in the
solicitation.



(Prior Code, § 4.06.004)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.059  USE OF STREETS AND PARKWAYS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in
religious solicitation upon the streets or parkways of the city.



(Prior Code, § 4.06.005)  Penalty, see § 110.999




ITINERANT VENDORS




§ 110.070  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMMERCIAL PRINTED MATTER.  Any printed or written matter, whether a
sample, device, leaflet, circular, pamphlet, paper or booklet, whether
printed, reproduced or copied, which:



      (1)   Advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity
or service;



      (2)   Directs attention to a business or commercial
establishment or other activity for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting sales;



      (3)   Directs attention to or advertises a meeting,
performance, exhibition or event for which an admission fee is charged for
private gain or profit but does not include a meeting, performance,
exhibition or event for which an admission fee is charged or a collection is
taken up only for the purpose of defraying expenses; or



      (4)   While containing reading matter other than advertising
matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed
or circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit and gain of
any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.



   GOODS.  Any goods, wares, merchandise, livestock, poultry, other wild
or domesticated creatures, and all other tangible personal property of any
nature whatsoever, but shall not include natural botanical and agricultural
products, food and beverages intended for human consumption, and securities,
policies of insurance and other intangibles.



   ITINERANT VENDOR.  Any person, whether or not a resident of the city,
who engages in the transient business of selling goods within the city. The
term ITINERANT VENDOR shall include any agent, independent contractor,
employee or other representative of any such person.



   PUBLIC PROPERTY.  Any property open or devoted to public use or owned
by the city, county, state or federal government, including, but not limited
to, parks, buildings, sidewalks, streets and public parkways.



   SALE or SELLING. The exchange of goods, wares or merchandise in
exchange for consideration, or the offer, exhibition, solicitation or taking
of orders for the sale of goods, wares or merchandise, or the distribution of
commercial printed matter in aid of any such sale.



   TRANSIENT BUSINESS.  The sale of goods in or on any real property
within the city not owned, leased or rented by such vendor for a period of at
least 60 consecutive days.



(Prior Code, § 4.04.001)



§ 110.071  EXEMPT ACTIVITIES.



   This subchapter shall not apply to the following activities:



   (A)   Nonretail sales. The sale of goods by a manufacturer or
wholesaler to a retailer or to another wholesaler having a permanent place of
business within the city;



   (B)   Religious and charitable sales. The sale of goods by any
religious, charitable, philanthropic, scholastic or eleemosynary institution,
organization or association;



   (C)   Trade shows. The sale of goods at any convention, trade fair,
trade mart, trade show or similar function held at a municipal convention
center;



   (D)   Arts and crafts fairs. The sale of goods at an arts and crafts
fair or similar event held:



      (1)   Within a structure on private property that is entirely
enclosed;



      (2)   With no outside display of goods, wares or merchandise;
and



      (3)   In compliance with all zoning, health and sanitation and
other applicable codes; or



      (4)   Outdoors on the grounds of the municipal convention
center or other municipal property including city streets and alleys,
provided that such events are conducted in compliance with all ordinances and
regulations appertaining thereto and each such event receives prior approval
of the City Council.



   (E)   Home occupations. The sale of goods in connection with a home
occupation lawfully conducted in accordance with ordinances governing zoning,
and other applicable laws and ordinances;



   (F)   Insurance, securities, other intangibles. The sale of
insurance contracts, securities or other intangibles;



   (G)   Produce. The sale of raw agricultural products, flowers or
produce;



   (H)   Garage sales. The sale, offer, exhibition or solicitation of
orders for the sale of goods at a garage sale held on private residential
premises;



   (I)   Newspapers, periodicals. The sale of newspapers or periodicals
done in a manner as not to obstruct or impede pedestrian or motor vehicle
traffic;



   (J)   Food products. The sale of goods, beverages or other
commodities intended for human consumption by authority of a permit issued by
the Henderson/Rusk County Health Department or otherwise in accordance with
all laws, ordinances and regulations applicable thereto;



   (K)   Noncommercial printed matter. The sale or distribution of
printed matter that is not commercial printed matter, including but not
limited to newspapers, magazines, books and the like, where such sale is
otherwise than from a coin-operated machine as described in division (I)
above; or



   (L)   Flea markets. Flea markets operated in conformity with and as
authorized by §§ 110.015 through 110.022.



(Prior Code, § 4.04.002)



§ 110.072  VENDORS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   (A)   Prohibited. Except as herein provided, it shall be unlawful
for any itinerant vendor to sell any goods on public property or to
distribute commercial printed matter in aid of any such sale.



   (B)   Exceptions. It is a defense to prosecution under this section
that the person selling goods on public property was:



      (1)   Doing so in connection with official government business;



      (2)   Doing so by authority of a contract, lease or other
agreement with the city, county, state or federal government to operate a
business or concession on designated areas of public property; or



      (3)   Doing so under the authority of some other valid permit
issued by the city.



(Prior Code, § 4.04.003)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.073  LICENSE FOR VENDORS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY; REQUIRED; APPLICATION.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any itinerant vendor to sell goods on
private property within the city without an itinerant vendor’s license
issued in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.



   (B)   The license shall be secured prior to the actual sale, offer,
exhibit or solicitation of orders for the sale of goods by an itinerant
vendor.



   (C)   The application for an itinerant vendor’s license may be
secured during business hours at City Hall.



   (D)   At the time of application each itinerant vendor shall
provide, at a minimum, the following data for identification of such
applicant and each employee, agent or representative who will sell, offer,
exhibit or solicit orders on his or her behalf:



      (1)   Name;



      (2)   Address (residence and business);



      (3)   Social Security number;



      (4)   Date of birth;



      (5)   Telephone numbers (residence and business);



      (6)   Name and address of the person, corporation or other
entity from whom goods, wares or merchandise to be sold are secured (sources
of goods);



      (7)   Recent photograph (or photocopy of the same) of the
applicant and all employees, agents or representatives;



      (8)   Current driver’s license number of the applicant and
all employees, agents or representatives;



      (9)   A written statement, signed and dated by the owner of
the private property on which the vendor proposes to sell, evidencing the
consent of such owner to the sale of goods thereon by the vendor; and



      (10)   A true and correct copy of the applicant’s current
state sales tax permit or, in the event the applicant is an agent, employee
or representative of another, a true and correct copy of his or her
principal’s current state sales tax permit.



   (E)   Each application for an itinerant vendor’s license shall be
accompanied by a license fee in an amount to be set by the city designee with
approval of the City Council; and an additional fee, also set by the city
designee, shall be required for each employee, agent or representative of the
applicant vendor who will sell, offer, exhibit or solicit orders for the sale
of goods, wares or merchandise for, or on behalf of, the applicant vendor.



   (F)   Each itinerant vendor shall be required to receive his or her
license in person and acknowledge receipt thereof on a form provided for this
purpose by the city designee.



   (G)   Each itinerant vendor’s license issued under this subchapter
shall be valid for a fixed term from the date of issuance, and each license
shall state the term, such term to be determined according to the fee
schedule set by the city designee.



   (H)   The primary term indicated in division (G) above may be
extended once for an additional 45 days by filing a renewal application on a
form provided for this purpose by the office of the city designee prior to
the expiration date of the primary license term.



   (I)   Each renewal application shall be accompanied by a license
renewal fee for each applicant vendor and for each employee, agent or
representative selling, offering, exhibiting or soliciting orders for the
sale of goods on behalf of the applicant vendor. Such fee is on file in the
City Secretary’s office.



   (J)   A license issued under the authority of this subchapter
constitutes a purely personal privilege which may not be sold, assigned or
otherwise transferred and shall not inure to the benefit of a person other
than the original licensee.



   (K)   Notwithstanding the issuance of a license hereunder, no
itinerant vendor shall sell goods in an area or zoning district or upon
premises where such activity is prohibited or restricted or in violation of
any law or ordinance otherwise prohibiting, restricting or regulating such
activity.



(Prior Code, § 4.04.004)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.074  DISPLAY OF LICENSE; UNAUTHORIZED USE OR REPRODUCTION.



   (A)   A license issued under this subchapter shall be prominently
displayed in a conspicuous place such that the same may be easily read at any
time during the sale, offer, exhibition or solicitation of orders for the
sale of goods.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for an itinerant vendor or any employee,
agent or representative of such itinerant vendor to sell goods in the city
without prominently and conspicuously displaying his or her itinerant
vendor’s license as required in the preceding section.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to present, display or
sell goods within the city under the authority of an itinerant vendor’s
license issued to another.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any itinerant vendor to fail or
refuse to display or exhibit his or her itinerant vendor’s license or other
identification upon request by the city designee, any member of the City
Police Department or other law enforcement officer, or any citizen.



   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any itinerant vendor to sell goods
under the authority of any false, counterfeit, invalid or altered itinerant
vendor’s license.



(Prior Code, § 4.04.005)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.075  LICENSE; DENIAL, SUSPENSION, REVOCATION.



   (A)   The city designee may deny, suspend or revoke an itinerant
vendor’s license when he or she determines that:



      (1)   The vendor has given false or misleading information in
his or her application for an itinerant vendor’s license;



      (2)   The vendor has sold goods in violation of this
subchapter or violated other applicable laws and ordinances pertaining to
such activity in the course of such sale;



      (3)   The vendor has employed, contracted or otherwise
associated or enlisted unlicensed vendors as agents, employees or
representatives to sell, offer, exhibit or solicit orders for the sale of
goods in violation of this subchapter;



      (4)   The vendor has unlawfully permitted another person to
sell goods while displaying an itinerant vendor’s license issued to such
vendor;



      (5)   The vendor has unlawfully duplicated, reproduced or
altered an itinerant vendor’s license for the purpose of circumventing the
provisions of this subchapter;



      (6)   The vendor presents or exhibits a false, counterfeit or
altered itinerant vendor’s license to the city designee or to any law
enforcement officer;



      (7)   The vendor fails to display conspicuously his or her
itinerant vendor’s license in the course of selling goods within the city;



      (8)   The vendor engages in the sale of goods of a character
or in such a manner as to endanger the health, safety, morals or welfare of
the public;



      (9)   The vendor fails to obey any lawful order of the city
designee or any law enforcement officer having jurisdiction within the city;



      (10)   The vendor fails to appear in the Municipal Court with
respect to a summons or citation issued for violation of this subchapter;



      (11)   The vendor fails to supply requested information
pertaining to his or her state sales tax permit;



      (12)   The vendor is found to be selling goods at retail
without a valid state sales tax permit;



      (13)   The vendor violates any law or regulation of the state
pertaining to registration, filing of reports or payment of any applicable
state sales tax; and



      (14)   The vendor’s state sales tax permit is suspended,
expires or is revoked under state law.



   (B)   Where the city designee denies, suspends or revokes a license
issued under this subchapter, he or she shall, within five days of such
action, forward written notice to the applicant or licensee setting forth the
reasons therefor. Upon receipt of a notice of suspension or revocation, an
itinerant vendor shall forthwith cease and refrain from the sale, offer,
exhibition or solicitation or taking of orders for the sale of goods within
the city and from the distribution of commercial printed matter in aid of
such sale.



(Prior Code, § 4.04.006)



§ 110.076  APPEAL OF DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.



   (A)   Any person aggrieved by the denial, suspension or revocation
of an itinerant vendor’s license under this subchapter may appeal such
action within ten days from the date thereof in the manner and in accordance
with the procedures set forth.



   (B)   In the absence of an appeal made in accordance with the
procedures above described, the decision of the city designee shall be final.



   (C)   Where an appeal is timely prosecuted as above provided, the
finality of the decision thereon shall be governed by the rules set forth.



(Prior Code, § 4.04.007)



§ 110.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   (1)   Penalty. Any person violating any provision of §§
110.015 through 110.022 shall be fined not less than $25, nor more than $500
for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each
day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.



      (2)   Violations deemed separate offenses. Each sale, offer,
exhibition, solicitation, taking of orders or distribution of commercial
printed matter in aid of the sale of goods in violation of §§ 110.015
through 110.022 shall constitute a separate offense.



      (3)   Enforcement officers. The city designee or any officer
of the City Police Department is authorized to issue summons and citations,
as applicable, for violations of §§ 110.015 through 110.022.



(Prior Code, § 4.08.009)



   (C)   (1)   Penalty. Any person violating any provision of §§
110.055 through 110.059 shall be fined not less than $25, nor more than $500
for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each
day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.



      (2)   Violations deemed separate offenses. Each sale, offer,
exhibition, solicitation, taking of orders or distribution of commercial
printed matter in aid of the sale of goods in violation of §§ 110.055
through 110.059 shall constitute a separate offense.



      (3)   Enforcement officers. The city designee, his or her
authorized designee, or any officer of the City Police Department is
authorized to issue summons and citations, as applicable, for violations of
§§ 110.055 through 110.059.



(Prior Code, § 4.06.006)



   (D)   (1)   Penalty. Any person violating any provision of §§
110.070 through 110.076 shall be fined not less than $25, nor more than $500
for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each
day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.



      (2)   Violations deemed separate offenses. Each sale, offer,
exhibition, solicitation, taking of orders or distribution of commercial
printed matter in aid of the sale of goods in violation of §§ 110.070
through 110.076 shall constitute a separate offense.



      (3)   Enforcement officers. The city designee, his or her
authorized designee, or any officer of the City Police Department is
authorized to issue summons and citations, as applicable, for violations of
§§ 110.070 through 110.076.



(Prior Code, § 4.04.008)



CHAPTER 111:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



Section




General Provisions




   111.01   Purpose



   111.02   Definitions




Permits




   111.15   Required



   111.16   Fees established



   111.17   Payment of fees



   111.18   Issuance of permit



   111.19   Cancellation and suspension of permits



   111.20   Violations and procedures



   111.21   Retail sales near churches, public or private schools and
public hospitals



   111.22   Sale of beer and/or wine in residential area prohibited



   111.23   Hours of sale; beer or wine



   111.24   No outside consumption



   111.25   Warning sign required



   111.26   Failure to require and properly check identification



 



   111.99   Penalty



Statutory references:



   Regulation of alcoholic beverages generally, see Tex. Alcoholic
Beverage Code, §§ 1.01 et seq.



   Local regulation of alcoholic beverages, see Tex. Alcoholic Beverage
Code, §§ 109.31 et seq.




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 111.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of alcoholic beverage regulations is to protect the public
health, safety and public welfare.



(Prior Code, § 4.16.001)



§ 111.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. For the
purposes of this chapter, all definitions of words, terms and phrases as set
forth in the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code are adopted and made a part of
this chapter.



   BUSINESS.  An establishment, including, but not limited to, a general
merchandise or food store and/or shop of any size or motor vehicle fueling
station, filling or service station engaged or an establishment primarily
engaged in the selling of beer and/or wine to the general public for
off-premises personal or household consumption and rendering services
incidental to the sale of such goods or an establishment which prepares and
serves food for on-premises consumption and derives more than 50% of its
gross sales from the sale of such food.



   CHURCH. A building which is primarily used for religious purposes by a
group of persons organized for religious purposes.



   OPEN CONTAINER.  A container that is no longer sealed.



   PERMIT.  An authorization granted by the city for the sale of
alcoholic beverages within the city.



   PERSON.  A natural or association of natural persons, trustee,
receiver, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, organization
or the manager, agent, servant or employee or any of them.



   PRIVATE SCHOOL.  A school that offers a course of instruction for
students in one or more grades from kindergarten through grade 12, and has
more than 100 students enrolled and attending courses at a single location.



   PUBLIC HOSPITAL. An establishment that:



      (1)   Offers services, facilities and beds for use for two or
more unrelated individuals requiring diagnosis, treatment or care for
illness, injury, deformity, abnormality or pregnancy;



      (2)   Regularly maintains, at a minimum, clinical laboratory
services, diagnostic X-ray services, treatment facilities, including surgery
or obstetrical care, and other definitive medical or surgical treatment of
similar extent; and



      (3)   Is licensed to operate as a hospital by the State
Department of State Health Services or its successor.



(Prior Code, § 4.16.002)




PERMITS




§ 111.15  REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, distill, brew, sell
and/or possess for the purpose of sale any beer, wine or other alcoholic
beverage, or otherwise engage in any activity for which a license or permit
is required by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended, within the
city, unless the person has a current and unrevoked permit issued by the city.



(Prior Code, § 4.16.031)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.16  FEES ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   Permit fee. The annual permit fee for issuing a permit to
operate, conduct and maintain a business establishment selling alcoholic
beverages in the city shall be in an amount that does not exceed 50% of the
state fee for which an alcoholic beverage permit is required under the Texas
Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended. The permit fee shall be established by
resolution of the City Council.



   (B)   Exemptions. The city adopts those exemptions from the permit
fee requirement as provided in the Tex. Alcoholic Beverage Code, § 11.38(d).



   (C)   License fee. The annual license fee for a business
establishment selling alcoholic beverages in the city shall be in an amount
that does not exceed 50% of the state fee for which an alcoholic beverage
license is required under the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended. The
license fee shall be established by resolution of the City Council.



   (D)   Application and inspection fee. The application and inspection
fee for verifying the information needed in applications and for approvals by
the city shall be in an amount established by resolution of the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 4.16.032)



§ 111.17  PAYMENT OF FEES.



   All fees required under this chapter, except for the application and
inspection fee, shall be paid in advance to the City Secretary for a one-year
term at the same time that the state annual fee is due and payable for each
respective license and/or permit, including renewals thereof. All payments
must be made by either cash, cashier’s check, certified check or money
order.



(Prior Code, § 4.16.033)



§ 111.18  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   (A)   The Community Development Department shall, in the name of the
city, issue and deliver to such applicant or person a permit (a receipt
evidencing payment of the fee(s) shall be sufficient proof of a city permit)
to engage in a business that sells alcoholic beverages within the city of the
character described in and authorized by the state permit or license held by
such applicant or person. This permit issued in the name of the city shall
authorize the conduct of such business upon the premises described in the
state permit or license, and shall remain in full force only so long as the
state permit or license remains in force. The city permit will be issued upon
payment to the Community Development Department of the applicable fee(s) for
a permit or license as required by this chapter and according to state law.
The Community Development Department shall keep a record of all permits
and/or receipts issued under this chapter.



   (B)   The permit shall be valid only for one year from the date of
its issuance. All permits issued for the payment of permit or license fees
under the terms of this chapter shall terminate at midnight on the day before
the anniversary date of their issuance, and no receipt shall be issued
covering a longer term than one year. Upon expiration of any permit issued
under this chapter, the applicant or person shall renew annually thereafter
during the time that such person is engaged in the business of selling
alcoholic beverages within the city.



   (C)   Permit applications shall be filed with the Community
Development Department.



   (D)   All permits or licenses issued under this chapter shall be
displayed in a conspicuous place at all times on the premises for which the
permit or license is issued.



(Prior Code, § 4.16.034)



§ 111.19  CANCELLATION AND SUSPENSION OF PERMITS.



   A permit issued under this chapter may be canceled, denied or revoked
as provided under Tex. Alcoholic Beverage Code, Ch. 11 or 61, as amended. The
city shall have all powers, duties and remedies permitted under state law.



(Prior Code, § 4.16.035)



§ 111.20  VIOLATIONS AND PROCEDURES.



   Before the City Secretary shall sign any city permit or application for
a permit or license under the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended, or
any annual renewal, the city permit and application shall be submitted to the
appropriate city departments, as determined by the City Manager, to ensure
that the city permit and application comply with all city ordinances and
regulations and are for premises located in a wet area.



(Prior Code, § 4.16.036)



§ 111.21  RETAIL SALES NEAR CHURCHES, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE SCHOOLS AND PUBLIC
HOSPITALS.



   (A)   Distance requirements. Alcoholic beverages shall not be sold
by a dealer or person whose place of business is within 300 feet of a church,
public or private school, or public hospital.



   (B)   Measurement requirements.



      (1)   The measurement of the distance between the place of
business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the church or public hospital
shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to
front door, and in a direct line across intersections. In places of business
with one or more front doors, measurement shall begin at a point equidistant
between the two front doors that are farthest apart.



      (2)   The measurement of the distance between the place of
business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the public or private school
shall be in a direct line from the property line of the public or private
school to the property line of the place of business, and in a direct line
across intersections.



   (C)   Variance procedures. The City Council may allow variances to
the regulation when it determines that enforcement of the regulation in a
particular instance is not in the best interest of the public, constitutes
waste or inefficient use of land or other resources, creates an undue
hardship on an applicant for a license or permit, does not serve its intended
purpose, is not effective or necessary, or for any other reason, if, after
consideration of the health, safety and welfare of the public and the
equities of the situation, determines that it is in the best interest of the
community.



(Prior Code, § 4.16.037)



Statutory reference:



   Sales near church, school or hospital, see Tex. Alcoholic Beverage
Code, § 109.33



§ 111.22  SALE OF BEER AND/OR WINE IN RESIDENTIAL AREA PROHIBITED.



   (A)   The sale of beer and/or wine is prohibited at a location that
is within residential zoned areas, or within residential zoning districts
where residential uses are allowed. Residential areas include properties that
allow vertical mixed use developments with a residential component, except
the central business district.



   (B)   Under this chapter, RESIDENTIAL AREAS shall mean any property
located in the following districts as described in the city’s zoning
ordinance, as amended from time to time:



      (1)   Residential Estate District (RE);



      (2)   Single-Family Detached, Low Density District (R-1);



      (3)   Single-Family Detached, Medium Density District (R-2);



      (4)   Single-Family Detached, High Density District (R-3);



      (5)   Single-Family HUD-Code Manufacturing and Modular Housing
District (R-4);



      (6)   Multiple-Family Residential, Low Density District (MF-1);



      (7)   Multiple-Family Residential, Medium Density District
(MF-2);



      (8)   Multiple-Family Residential, High Density District
(MF-3);



      (9)   HUD-Code Manufactured Home Park District (MH-1); and



      (10)   “PUD” Planned Unit Development Districts.



(Prior Code, § 4.16.038)



§ 111.23  HOURS OF SALE; BEER OR WINE.



   (A)   Beer and/or wine shall not be sold, offered for sale, or
delivered at any time not permitted by this section.



   (B)   Monday through Saturday: beer and/or wine may be sold, offered
for sale or delivered between 7:00 a.m. and midnight on any day except Sunday.



   (C)   Sunday: beer and/or wine may be sold between midnight and 1:00
a.m. and between 12:00 p.m. and 12:00 a.m., except that permittees or
licensees authorized to sell for on-premises consumption may sell beer or
wine between 10:00 a.m. and noon if beer or wine is served to a customer
during the service of food to a customer.



(Prior Code, § 4.16.039)  Penalty, see § 111.99



Statutory references:



   City’s authority to regulate hours of sale of beer, see Tex.
Alcoholic Beverage Code, § 109.32



   Hours of sale of beer, see Tex. Alcoholic Beverage Code, § 105.05



   Hours of sale of mixed beverages, see Tex. Alcoholic Beverage Code, §
105.03



   Hours of sale of wine and beer retailers, see Tex. Alcoholic Beverage
Code, § 105.04



§ 111.24  NO OUTSIDE CONSUMPTION.



   (A)   It is prohibited for persons, including customers, to leave
the premises with open containers of alcoholic beverages and it is the
permittee/licensee’s responsibility to ensure that no open container
containing alcoholic beverages are sold and carried out.



   (B)   With the exception of decks, patios and gardens appurtenant to
an establishment that derives more than 50% of its gross sales from the sale
of prepared food (restaurant) and public events sanctioned and licensed by
the State Alcoholic Beverage Commission, it is prohibited for persons,
including customers, to gather outside an establishment selling alcoholic
beverages and consume alcoholic beverages.



   (C)   It is prohibited for the manager or any employee to allow
persons, including customers, to gather inside the property boundaries of an
establishment selling alcoholic beverages and consume alcoholic beverages.



   (D)   A person commits an offense if the person knowingly consumes
liquor, beer or wine on the premises of a holder of a wine and beer
retailer’s off-premises permit or a retail dealer’s off-premises license.
A person is presumed to have knowingly violated this provision if the
permittee/licensee has the warning sign displayed on the premises as required
by either Tex. Alcoholic Beverage Code, §§ 26.05 or 71.10, as amended.



(Prior Code, § 4.16.040)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.25  WARNING SIGN REQUIRED.



   Each permittee of a wine and beer retailer’s off-premises permit
shall display in a prominent place on his or her premises a sign stating in
letters at least two inches high: “IT IS A CRIME (MISDEMEANOR) TO CONSUME
LIQUOR OR BEER ON THESE PREMISES”.



(Prior Code, § 4.16.041)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.26  FAILURE TO REQUIRE AND PROPERLY CHECK IDENTIFICATION.



   (A)   All permittees, licensees and/or their employees shall require
and properly check identification before selling any alcoholic beverage to
any customer to ensure an underage person is not sold and/or does not have in
his or her possession alcoholic beverages while in a licensed business.



   (B)   IDENTIFICATION in this section shall mean any document issued
by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such
person’s photograph and giving such person’s date of birth and shall
include, without being limited to, a passport, military ID card, driver’s
license or State Department of Public Safety ID card.



(Prior Code, § 4.16.042)



§ 111.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   (1)   Any person violating or failing to comply with any of
the provisions of this chapter shall be fined, upon conviction, not less than
$1, nor more than $500, unless the violation involves fire safety, zoning or
public health and sanitation, in which case the person shall be fined an
amount not to exceed $2,000. Each day any violation or noncompliance
continues shall constitute separate and distinct offenses. The penalty
provided herein shall be cumulative of other remedies provided by state law,
and the power of injunction as provided in Tex. Local Gov’t Code, §§
54.012 and 54.016, as may be amended, may be exercised in enforcing this
chapter, whether or not there had been a complaint filed.



      (2)   The penal provisions imposed under this section are
cumulative of all other remedies and nonexclusive. These penal provisions
shall not be deemed nor construed to limit the availability of any remedy
against any person or property otherwise provided by law, including without
limitation fines, penalties, closure and injunction. The city retains all
legal rights and remedies available to it pursuant to local, state and
federal law.



      (3)   A person who violates a provision of this chapter in
which a specific penalty is not provided, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, on
conviction, is punishable as provided in § 10.99. The term SPECIFIC PENALTY,
as used in this section, means a penalty that might be imposed as a result of
a criminal prosecution.



(Prior Code, § 4.16.043)



   (B)   A person commits an offense of § 111.23 if the person sells
or offers for sale an alcoholic beverage during prohibited hours or consumes
or permits the consumption of an alcoholic beverage on the person’s
licensed or permitted premises during prohibited hours. An offense under §
111.23 is a Class A misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 4.16.039)



   (C)   A violation of § 111.24 is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine
of not less than $25, nor more than $200, unless a person has been convicted
of a violation of this provision occurring within one year or a subsequent
violation. In this case, the subsequent violation is a misdemeanor punishable
by a fine of not less than $100 or more than $200.



(Prior Code, § 4.16.040)



   (D)   A permittee who fails to comply with § 111.25 commits a
misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $25.



(Prior Code, § 4.16.041)



(Ord. 11-12-15, passed 12-13-2011)



CHAPTER 112:  ALARM SYSTEMS



Section



General Provisions



   112.01   Short title



   112.02   Purpose



   112.03   Automobile alarms exempted



   112.04   Definitions



   112.05   Audible alarm shutoffs



   112.06   Obligation to instruct alarm system operators



   112.07   Reporting telephones



   112.08   Audible alarms similar to sirens



   112.09   Compliance with applicable laws and regulations required



   112.10   Maintenance of alarm systems



   112.11   Periodic inspections, reports



   112.12   Responsibility of alarm system owner



   112.13   Evidence of false alarms



   112.14   Reimbursement for false alarm responses



   112.15   Enforcement



   112.16   Confidentiality



   112.17   Fee exemption




Permit




   112.35   Alarm systems constituting hazard



Statutory references:



   Burglar alarm systems, see Tex. Local Gov’t Code, §§ 214.191 et seq.



   Municipal authority to enact ordinances regulating alarm systems, see
Tex. Local Gov’t Code, § 233.095



   Private Security Act, see Tex. Occupations Code, Ch. 1702




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 112.01  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known as the Public Safety Alarm System Ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 4.02.001)



§ 112.02  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to:



   (A)   Set forth regulations governing burglary, robbery, fire and
medical alarm systems, businesses and agents within the city;



   (B)   Require permits for alarm systems monitored by the city;



   (C)   Provide the authority to establish fees;



   (D)   Provide for reimbursement fees for excessive false alarms; and



   (E)   Provide for punishment of violations of provisions of this
chapter.



(Prior Code, § 4.02.002)



§ 112.03  AUTOMOBILE ALARMS EXEMPTED.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to audible alarms
affixed to automobiles.



(Prior Code, § 4.02.003)



§ 112.04  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALARM AGENT.  Any person who is employed by an alarm business, either
directly or indirectly, whose duties include any of the following: selling,
maintaining, leasing, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, removing or
installing on or in any building, structure or facility any alarm system.



   ALARM BUSINESS.  The occupation by any individual, partnership,
corporation or other entity of: selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing,
repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing any alarm system or
causing to be sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered,
replaced, moved or installed any alarm system in or on any building,
structure or facility. Exemption: the provisions of this definition do not
include a business which engages in the manufacture or sale of an alarm
system unless such business services, installs, monitors or responds to alarm
systems.



   ALARM SYSTEM.  Any mechanical or electrical device which may be
designed or used for the detection of burglary, robbery, fire or need for
medical assistance within a building, structure or facility or for alerting
others to the commission of an unlawful act or hazard within a building,
structure or facility, or both; and which emits a sound or transmits a signal
or message when actuated. ALARM SYSTEMS include, but are not limited to,
direct dial telephone devices, audible alarms and proprietor alarms. Devices
which are not designed or used to register alarms that are audible, visible
or perceptible outside of the protected building, structure or facility are
not included within this definition, nor are auxiliary devices installed by
the telephone company to protect telephone systems which might be damaged or
disrupted by the use of an alarm system. An ALARM SYSTEM includes all of the
necessary equipment designed and installed for the detection of burglary,
robbery, fire, need for medical assistance or other hazard in a single
building, structure or facility or for alerting others of the commission of
an unlawful act within a building, structure or facility, or both.



   ALARM SYSTEM OWNER.  Any person, firm or corporation possessing and
using an alarm system.



   APPELLANT.  A person who perfects an appeal pursuant to this chapter.



   APPLICANT.  A person who files an application for a new or renewal
permit as provided by this chapter.



   AUDIBLE ALARM.  A device designed for the detection of burglary,
robbery, fire or medical assistance on premises which generates an audible
sound on the premises when it is actuated.



   BURGLARY ALARM.  An alarm system designed or used for the detection of
burglaries and/or fires, but not robberies.



   COMMUNICATIONS DIRECTOR.  The Chief of Police of the city or his or
her authorized representative.



   DAY.  Calendar day.



   FALSE ALARMS.  The activation of an alarm system through mechanical
failure, malfunction, improper installation or the negligence of the owner or
lessee of an alarm system, or his or her employees or agents. In addition,
the use of an alarm to summon Police or Fire Department personnel for reasons
other than those listed on alarm system permits will also be considered a
FALSE ALARM. FALSE ALARMS shall not include alarms caused by electrical
interruptions, floods or other natural disasters.



   PERMITTEE.  Any person who shall be granted a permit as provided in
this chapter and his or her agents and representatives.



   PERSON.  Natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation.



   PROPRIETOR ALARM.  An alarm which is not serviced by an alarm business.



   REPORTING TELEPHONE.  Any intrusion, detection device which, when
activated, causes, either mechanically, electronically or by any other
automatic means, intrastate dialing of any telephone number and then
transmits a prerecorded message.



   ROBBERY ALARM.  An alarm system designed or used for the purpose of
alerting others of a robbery in progress. This function may be in addition to
other functions.



   SUBSCRIBER.  Any person who purchases, leases, contracts for or
otherwise obtains an alarm system or contracts for the servicing or
maintenance of an alarm system from an alarm business.



(Prior Code, § 4.02.004)



§ 112.05  AUDIBLE ALARM SHUTOFFS.



   Upon notification by the city’s Police Department that an audible
alarm is activated, the alarm system owner or permittee, his or her
representative or his or her alarm agent, shall immediately proceed to
silence the alarm, and the silencing shall be finished within 30 minutes.
Alternately, the alarm system may be equipped with an automatic shutoff
device, which shall silence the alarm within 15 minutes, thus eliminating the
need for a personal response as otherwise required by this section.



(Prior Code, § 4.02.006)



§ 112.06  OBLIGATION TO INSTRUCT ALARM SYSTEM OPERATORS.



   Each alarm business, alarm agent or permittee who installs or services
an alarm system shall clearly instruct the operators of the alarm system in
the proper use and operation of the alarm system, as frequently as necessary,
especially in those factors which can cause false alarms.



(Prior Code, § 4.02.007)



§ 112.07  REPORTING TELEPHONES.



   (A)   No person shall use or operate, attempt to use or operate or
cause to be used or operated or arrange, adjust, program or otherwise provide
or install any device or combination of devices that will, upon activation,
either mechanically, electronically or by other automatic means, initiate the
intrastate calling, dialing or connection to any telephone number, assigned
to any subscriber by a public telephone company, without the prior written
consent of such subscriber.



   (B)   The term TELEPHONE NUMBER includes any additional numbers
assigned by a public utility company engaged in the business of providing
communications services and facilities to be used by means of a rotary or
other system to connect the subscriber to such primary number when the
primary telephone number is in use. In no case will the prerecorded message
from such reporting telephone terminate at any city-owned facility.



(Prior Code, § 4.02.008)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.08  AUDIBLE ALARMS SIMILAR TO SIRENS.



   It is unlawful to install on the exterior or interior of a building an
intrusion detection device or burglar alarm system which upon actuation emits
a sound exceeding 80 decibels when measured from outside the premises, which
is similar to sirens in use on emergency vehicles or on vehicles used for
civil defense purposes.



(Prior Code, § 4.02.009)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.09  COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE LAWS AND REGULATIONS REQUIRED.



   (A)   Alarm business. No person shall engage in, conduct or carry on
an alarm business within the city without complying with all applicable state
laws. Each alarm business owner and operator is required to provide the
Communications Director with the name, address and telephone number of each
new subscriber within the city prior to the activation of the new alarm
system, or upon notification that an existing alarm system has been sold or
transferred to another subscriber.



   (B)   Alarm agent. No person shall operate as an alarm agent within
the city without complying with all applicable state laws.



(Prior Code, § 4.02.012)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.10  MAINTENANCE OF ALARM SYSTEMS.



   Each alarm system owner shall maintain each alarm system in good
working order, providing the necessary service to prevent false alarms, to
prevent malfunctions endangering persons or property and to prevent other
malfunctions.



(Prior Code, § 4.02.013)



§ 112.11  PERIODIC INSPECTIONS, REPORTS.



   (A)   Each alarm system owner shall cause each alarm system owned to
be inspected regularly by a representative of the company with a service
contract or other person qualified to inspect and service such equipment.
Inspections shall be complete enough to detect any likely malfunctions and
may include testing of the equipment. Particular attention shall be paid to
the conditions that have the potential for causing false alarms. The person
making the inspection shall provide a written report to the owner of the
alarm system, and the report shall be kept on hand for 12 months, subject to
being shown to any representative to the Communications Department of the
city when requested during business hours.



   (B)   Each alarm business, alarm agent or permittee shall display to
the Communications Director, when requested, their records of inspection or
repair of an installed alarm system.



(Prior Code, § 4.02.014)



§ 112.12  RESPONSIBILITY OF ALARM SYSTEM OWNER.



   The owner of each alarm system shall be responsible for maintaining the
alarm system, and he or she shall look to the report of the Inspector for
guidance, but shall not limit his or her maintenance effort to matters on the
report of the Inspector.



(Prior Code, § 4.02.015)



§ 112.13  EVIDENCE OF FALSE ALARMS.



   In determining whether an alarm is a false alarm, all circumstances
shall be considered. Setting off an alarm may cause a person who was
attempting a break-in to flee. In investigating whether an alarm is false, a
careful check will be made for signs of attempts to break in, such as
scratches around windows. False alarms caused by weather will not counted as
a false alarms for purposes of levying the reimbursement fee or a fine under
this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 4.02.016)



§ 112.14  REIMBURSEMENT FOR FALSE ALARM RESPONSES.



   Each owner of an alarm system shall reimburse the city for the cost of
the Police or Fire Department manpower and equipment response to each false
alarm caused by an alarm system owned by that owner. There shall be no charge
levied for the first five false alarms within a 180-day period of time. The
amount of such reimbursement shall be $25 for the sixth false alarm in any
consecutive 180-day period and an additional $25 for each additional false
alarm thereafter within the same consecutive 180-day period of time, from any
one building or facility. Notification of excessive false alarms and any
charge levied hereunder shall be made to the owner of the alarm system
responsible within ten days from the sixth (or more) false alarm.



(Prior Code, § 4.02.017)



§ 112.15  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The conviction or punishment of any person for violation of
the provisions of this chapter shall not release such person from paying the
permit fee or reimbursement for false alarms due and unpaid at the time of
such conviction, nor shall payment of any permit fee or reimbursement for
false alarms prevent criminal prosecution for violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   All remedies shall be cumulative, and the use of one or more
remedies by the city shall not bar the use of another remedy.



   (C)   The amount of any permit fee or reimbursement for false alarms
shall be deemed a debt to the city.



   (D)   An action may be commenced in the name of the city in any
court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of any delinquent permit fee
or reimbursement for false alarms.



   (E)   All unpaid permit fees or reimbursement for false alarms shall
be deemed delinquent 30 days after they are due and payable.



(Prior Code, § 4.02.018)



§ 112.16  CONFIDENTIALITY.



   The information furnished and secured pursuant to this chapter shall be
confidential in character and shall not be subject to public inspection, and
shall be kept so that the contents thereof shall not be known except to
persons charged with the administration of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 4.02.019)



§ 112.17  FEE EXEMPTION.



   The United States government, the state, counties, municipal
corporations, departments thereof and other governmental entities are exempt
from fees required by this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 4.02.020)




PERMIT




§ 112.35    ALARM SYSTEMS CONSTITUTING HAZARD.



   No permit shall be issued for an alarm system which, due to the nature
of its construction or installation, constitutes an unreasonable hazard to
life and limb of any person.



(Prior Code, § 4.02.062)



CHAPTER 113:  CARNIVALS



Section



   113.01   License required



   113.02   Application required



   113.03   Action on application



   113.04   Fee



   113.05   Exemptions from permit fee



   113.06   Issuance



   113.07   Term



   113.08   Permitted operations under license



Statutory reference:



   Regulation of circuses, carnivals and zoos, see Tex. Occupations Code,
Ch. 2152



§ 113.01  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to show or exhibit any
carnival within the city without first obtaining a license from the City
Council.



   (B)   Any person showing or exhibiting or in any manner connected
with or taking part in the showing or exhibiting of a carnival within the
city without first applying for and obtaining such license shall, upon
conviction, be punished pursuant to § 10.99.



(Prior Code, § 4.10.031)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.02  APPLICATION REQUIRED.



   Any person desiring to conduct or show a carnival within the city shall
make application for a license to the City Council and file the same with the
City Secretary not less than 45 days prior to the time when it is desired to
show or exhibit such carnival. Such application shall give the name and
permanent address of the owner of the carnival, and if the carnival is owned
by a company or corporation, the application shall show such fact, and shall
also show the name of the manager or other officer in charge of the carnival.
In any event, the application shall show the person in active charge and
control of showing and exhibiting the carnival. The application shall further
give a list of all shows, rides, booths and other businesses and attractions
operated in connection with the carnival, listing same by name and with a
description of each show or attraction. Such applicant shall also submit with
the application, in the form of affidavits and statements, evidence as to the
solvency and responsibility of the owner of the carnival, and as to the kind
and character of shows and attractions exhibited by the carnival. In making
such application, the person making same shall also state, at the end of the
application, that he or she agrees to conduct the carnival and each and all
shows, attractions and exhibits therein in a decent, orderly and law-abiding
manner.



(Prior Code, § 4.10.032)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.03  ACTION ON APPLICATION.



   After an application is filed under this chapter, the City Secretary
shall refer the same to the City Council for action, and if the City Council
is convinced from the evidence submitted that the owner of the carnival is
solvent and that he or she has in the past, and proposes to while showing in
the city, conduct the carnival pursuant to state and local laws, the City
Council shall approve the application.



(Prior Code, § 4.10.033)



§ 113.04  FEE.



   As a condition and requirement to the licensing of a carnival to show
in the city, the applicant for such license shall pay to the City Secretary a
license fee in a sum which is on file in the City Secretary’s office.



(Prior Code, § 4.10.034)



§ 113.05  EXEMPTIONS FROM PERMIT FEE.



   Any show or exhibition supported and managed entirely by local
operators for charitable and benevolent purposes, and not for individual or
personal profit to those managing and operating the same, regardless of
whether such local show or exhibition shall have some of the features of a
carnival in connection with the same, nor shall it apply to Ferris wheels,
merry-go-rounds, rides and similar amusement devices sponsored by local
merchants, service clubs or other organizations and not operated in
connection with any show or exhibition shall be exempt from paying a fee for
the permit required by this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 4.10.035)



§ 113.06  ISSUANCE.



   Upon approval of an application for a license under this chapter by the
City Council, and payment of the required fee, a license shall be issued to
the applicant to show and exhibit the carnival in the city. Such license
shall not be issued unless the applicant complies with § 110.001, if
applicable.



(Prior Code, § 4.10.036)



§ 113.07  TERM.



   A license issued under this chapter shall cover one appearance in the
city, and shall be good only for the days the carnival remains continuously
in the city as stated on the permit. A new license shall be required each
time the carnival returns to the city.



(Prior Code, § 4.10.037)



§ 113.08  PERMITTED OPERATIONS UNDER LICENSE.



   Any person obtaining a license to show and exhibit a carnival within
the city limits shall have the right to show, maintain and operate only such
shows, rides, booths and other attractions as shall be under the direct
charge and supervision of the owner or operator of the carnival. It shall not
be lawful for any person to show or exhibit in connection with the carnival
any show, attraction or concession of any kind or character independent of
the carnival ownership and management, the license granted to such carnival
covering and permitting only such shows, attractions and concessions as are
owned and operated by the person applying for the license.



(Prior Code, § 4.10.038)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 114:  SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES



Section



   114.01   Definitions



   114.02   Intent and purpose



   114.03   Location and signage



   114.04   License required



   114.05   Display of license



   114.06   Application for license



   114.07   Investigation, issuance or denial of license



   114.08   License fee



   114.09   Transfer of license



   114.10   Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit
films or videos



   114.11   Additional regulations for adult motels



   114.12   Exceptions



   114.13   Enforcement and inspection



   114.14   Suspension and revocation of licenses



   114.15   Unlawful acts



   114.16   Injunction



   114.17   Not to legalize anything prohibited by state law or city



 



   114.99   Penalty



Statutory references:



   Authority of municipality to regulate sexually oriented businesses, see
Tex. Local Gov’t Code, Ch. 243



   Employment harmful to children, see Tex. Penal Code, § 43.251



   Sexual offenders as owners, operators, managers or employees of
sexually oriented businesses, see Tex. Business and Commerce Code, Ch. 102



§ 114.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADULT BOOKSTORE/ADULT VIDEO STORE.  A commercial establishment which
as one of its business purposes offers for sale or rental for any form of
consideration any one or more of the following:



      (1)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter,
or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video
reproductions, slides or other visual representations which depict or
describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and/or



      (2)   Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed
for use in connection with specified sexual activities.



   ADULT CABARET.  A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features:



      (1)   Persons who appear in a state of nudity;



      (2)   Live performances which are characterized by the
exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or



      (3)   Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



   ADULT MOTEL.  A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which:



      (1)   Offers accommodations to the public for any form of
consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions,
films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign
visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of
this adult type of photographic reproductions;



      (2)   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time
that is less than ten hours; or



      (3)   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to
subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours.



   PERSON.  An individual, partnership or corporation or other entity.



   RESIDENTIAL AREA. Any area zoned R-1, R-2, R-3 single-family, duplex,
apartment or single-family/manufactured homes.



   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS.  Any commercial enterprise whose major
business is the offering of a product or service which is intended to provide
sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to the customer, and which is
distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas or where the employer, employees or patrons in the presence of another
adult, may be nude, partially nude or with specified anatomical areas not
covered. This term shall include, but not be limited to, adult video arcades,
adult bookstores, adult cabarets, adult video stores, adult movie theaters,
adult theaters, sex parlors, massage parlors, nude studios, modeling studios,
love parlors, adult tanning salons, topless or nude bars, topless carwashes
or other establishments where services are preformed nude or topless, and
other establishments.



   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.  Any one of the following: less than
completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region or pubic hair,
buttock, female breast or breasts below a point immediately above the top of
the areola, or any combination of the foregoing; or human male genitals in a
discernibly erect state, even if completely and opaquely covered.



   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.  The depiction or display, in person or
by picture, of any one of the following: human genitals in a discernible
state of sexual stimulation or arousal; acts of human masturbation, sexual
intercourse or sodomy; fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals,
pubic region or pubic hair, buttock or female breast or breasts; or any
combination of the foregoing.



(Prior Code, § 4.09.001)  (Ord. 95-6-5, passed 6-27-1995)



§ 114.02  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   It is the purpose of this chapter to:



      (1)   Regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the
health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the city;



      (2)   Protect and preserve the quality, property values and
character of the city;



      (3)   Prevent the concentration of sexually oriented
businesses within the city; and



      (4)   Minimize the potential negative impacts of sexually
oriented businesses on residential areas, churches, schools and public areas.



   (B)   It is expressly not the intent or effect of this chapter to
impose a limitation upon rights under the First Amendment.



(Prior Code, § 4.09.002)  (Ord. 95-6-5, passed 6-27-1995)



§ 114.03  LOCATION AND SIGNAGE.



   (A)   A sexually oriented business shall be located at least 1,500
feet from the property line of any residentially zoned property, and at least
2,000 feet from the property line of any lot on which is located a church,
school, college, child/adult care center, park, hospital, nursing home or
swimming pool. For the purposes of this section, measurement shall be made in
a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from
the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the
premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest
property line of the premises of a church, school, park, college, child care
center or residential district.



   (B)   Each sexually oriented business shall comply with all of the
city’s sign ordinance requirements, including all requirements, as such
ordinance may be amended from time to time. Additionally, such signs as are
used shall not advertise, either graphically or verbally, either by explicit
or literal expression, connotation or implied reference, any specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.



(Prior Code, § 4.09.003)  (Ord. 95-6-5, passed 6-27-1995)  Penalty, see §
114.99



§ 114.04  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   All sexually oriented businesses to be operated within the
city shall first obtain a valid license under the provisions of this chapter.
A license shall be valid for one year, but may be renewed annually.



   (B)   A license shall only be issued for sexually oriented
businesses that fulfill the locational requirements of § 114.03.



   (C)   A business is not exempt from regulation under this chapter
because it holds a license or permit under the Alcoholic Beverage Code
authorizing the sale or service of alcoholic beverages.



(Prior Code, § 4.09.004)  (Ord. 95-6-5, passed 6-27-1995)  Penalty, see §
114.99



§ 114.05  DISPLAY OF LICENSE.



   A license issued under these regulations shall be displayed at all
times in an open and conspicuous place on the premises of the sexually
oriented business for which it is issued.



(Prior Code, § 4.09.005)  (Ord. 95-6-5, passed 6-27-1995)  Penalty, see §
114.99



§ 114.06  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   (A)   (1)   Any person desiring a license shall file a sworn
written application with the City Secretary.



      (2)   The application shall set forth the following:



         (a)   The name of the applicant and whether the
applicant is an individual, general partnership, limited partnership,
corporation or other entity;



         (b)   The name under which the sexually oriented
business is to be operated and a general description of the services or
products to be provided;



         (c)   The address and legal description of the parcel of
land on which the sexually oriented business is to be located;



         (d)   The name, residence address and telephone number
of the manager or other individual to be principally in charge of the
operation of the sexually oriented business;



         (e)   A written declaration that the information
contained in the application is true and correct; and



         (f)   If the applicant is an individual, the application
shall be signed and verified by the applicant. If the applicant is a
partnership, the application shall be signed and verified by all of the
partners thereof. If the applicant is a corporation or other entity, the
application shall be signed and verified by the president and the treasurer
of such corporation or entity.



   (B)   In addition, the application shall be accompanied by the
following:



      (1)   Payment of the license fee, as provided in this chapter;



      (2)   A certified copy of the assumed name certificate filed
in compliance with the Assumed Business or Professional Name Act (Tex.
Business and Commerce Code, Ch. 71), if the applicant is to operate the
sexually oriented business under the assumed name;



      (3)   If the applicant is a Texas corporation, a certified
copy of the articles of incorporation, together with all amendments thereto,
shall be filed;



      (4)   If the applicant is a foreign corporation, a certified
copy of the certificate of authority to transact business in the state,
together will all amendments thereto, shall be filed;



      (5)   If the applicant is a foreign or limited partnership, a
certified copy of the certification of limited partnership, together will all
amendments thereto, filed in the office of the clerk of the state under the
Texas Limited Partnership Act (Tex. Business Organizations Code, Ch. 153);



      (6)   A complete list of persons employed by the sexually
oriented business, including their age, date and place of birth, Social
Security number, driver’s license number and salary or wage rate. This list
shall be updated monthly by a verified report to the City Secretary, listing
all above information for employees hired during the previous month; and



      (7)   A detailed development plan which describes the
dimensions and location of the sexually oriented business and clearly shows
it to be in compliance with the locational requirements of § 114.03.



(Prior Code, § 4.09.006)  (Ord. 95-6-5, passed 6-27-1995)



§ 114.07  INVESTIGATION, ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Upon receiving an application for a license, the City
Secretary, or designee, shall conduct an investigation for the purpose of
determining whether the requirements of this chapter have been satisfied or
not. The City Secretary shall coordinate this investigation with the Director
and planning in order to determine if the application complies with the
locational and sign requirements as set forth in these regulations. The City
Secretary shall deny the application for a license if any requirement of this
chapter is not satisfied.



   (B)   The City Secretary shall deny the application for a license if
one or more of the following is determined to be true:



      (1)   An applicant is under 18 years of age;



      (2)   An applicant or an applicant’s spouse is overdue in
payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against or
imposed upon the applicant or the applicant’s spouse in relation to a
sexually oriented business;



      (3)   An applicant has failed to provide information
reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a
question or request for information on the application form;



      (4)   An applicant or applicant’s spouse has been convicted
of a violation of a provision of this chapter, other than the offense of
operating a sexually oriented business without a license, within two years
immediately preceding the application; the fact that a conviction is being
appealed shall have no effect;



      (5)   The license fee required by this chapter has not been
paid;



      (6)   An applicant has been employed in a sexually oriented
business in a managerial capacity within the preceding 12 months and has
demonstrated an inability to operated or manage a sexually oriented business
premises in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by
law enforcement officers; or



      (7)   An applicant or an applicant’s spouse or any employee
has been convicted of a crime involving:



         (a)   Any of the following offenses as described in Tex.
Penal Code, Ch. 43: prostitution; promotion of prostitution; aggravated
promotion of prostitution; obscenity; sale, distribution or display of
harmful material to minors; sexual performance by a child; possession of
child pornography;



         (b)   Any of the following offenses as described in Tex.
Penal Code, Ch. 21: public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a
child;



         (c)   Sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault as
described in Tex. Penal Code, Ch. 22;



         (d)   Incest, solicitation of a child or harboring a
runaway child as described in Tex. Penal Code, Ch. 25; or



         (e)   Criminal attempt, conspiracy or solicitation to
commit any of the foregoing offenses.



   (C)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no
effect on the disqualification of the applicant or applicant’s spouse.



   (D)   The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of
the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date and the
address of the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at
any time.



   (E)   The City Secretary shall notify each applicant of their
eligibility for a license within 20 days of the receipt of the completed
application. If the applicant complies with the provisions of these
regulations, then the City Secretary shall issue a license. In the event that
any applicant fails to comply with these regulations, then the applicant
shall be so notified and be entitled to a hearing held pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 4.09.007)  (Ord. 95-6-5, passed 6-27-1995)



§ 114.08  LICENSE FEE.



   To defray the cost of processing the license application, the applicant
shall pay a fee as provided in § 35.40. No portion of any fee collected
under this section shall be returned after license has been issued or denied.
The license may be renewed annually, if all provisions of this chapter have
been compiled with, upon payment of a renewal fee as provided in § 35.40.



(Prior Code, § 4.09.008)  (Ord. 95-6-5, passed 6-27-1995)



§ 114.09  TRANSFER OF LICENSE.



   A license shall not be transferred to another, nor shall a license
holder operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license
at any place other than the address designated in the application.



(Prior Code, § 4.09.009)  (Ord. 95-6-5, passed 6-27-1995)



§ 114.10  REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT FILMS
OR VIDEOS.



   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business, which exhibits a film, videocassette or other video reproduction
which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas,
shall comply with the following requirements.



   (A)   Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the
application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan
thereof specifying the location of one or more manager’s stations and the
location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the
premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A professionally prepared
diagram in the nature of an engineer’s or architect’s blueprint shall not
be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or some
designation scale or with marked interior dimensions sufficient to show the
various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to
an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The City Secretary may waive the
foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram
that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the
premises has not been altered since it was prepared.



   (B)   The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant.



   (C)   No alteration in the configuration or location of a
manager’s station may be made without the prior approval of the City
Secretary.



   (D)   It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to
ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager’s
station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.



   (E)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a
manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager’s station of every
area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose
excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment.
If the premises have two or more manager’s stations designated, then the
interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is
an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is
permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager’s
stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of
sight from the manager’s station.



   (F)   It shall be the duty of the owners and operator and it shall
be the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises to ensure
that the view area specified in division (E) above remains unobstructed by
any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all to
ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which
has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the
application filed pursuant to division (A) above.



   (G)   The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures
of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are
permitted access at an illumination of not less than one footcandle as
measured at floor level.



   (H)   It shall be the duty of the owners and operator and it shall
also be the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises to
ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that
any patron is present on the premises.



(Prior Code, § 4.09.010)  (Ord. 95-6-5, passed 6-27-1995)  Penalty, see §
114.99



§ 114.11  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ADULT MOTELS.



   (A)   Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar
commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a
period of time that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption
that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this
chapter.



   (B)   A person commits an offense if, as the person in control of a
sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that does
not have a sexually oriented business license, he or she rents or subrents a
sleeping room to a person and, within ten hours from the time the room is
rented, he or she rents or subrents the same sleeping room again.



   (C)   For purposes of division (B) above, the term RENT or SUBRENT
means the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of
consideration.



(Prior Code, § 4.09.011)  (Ord. 95-6-5, passed 6-27-1995)



§ 114.12  EXCEPTIONS.



   The regulations contained in this chapter do not apply to the following:



   (A)   Any business operated by or employing psychologists, physical
therapists, athletic trainers, masseuses, cosmetologists or barbers, licensed
by the state and performing functions authorized under the licenses held;



   (B)   Any business operated by or employing physicians, osteopaths,
nurses or chiropractors, licensed by the state, engaged in practicing the
healing arts; and



   (C)   Any retail business whose major business is the offering of
wearing apparel for sale to customers.



(Prior Code, § 4.09.012)  (Ord. 95-6-5, passed 6-27-1995)



§ 114.13  ENFORCEMENT AND INSPECTION.



   (A)   The Chief of Police, or his or her designee, shall have the
power to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter upon
presentation of proper identification to the owner, agent or tenant in charge
of any premises where a sexually oriented business is located. The Chief of
Police, or his or her designee, may enter, for the purposes of inspection in
investigation to ensure compliance with the terms of these regulations, any
building, structure or other premises where the sexually oriented business is
located, at any time it is occupied and open for business.



   (B)   A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his or
her agent or employee commits an offense if he or she refuses to permit a
lawful inspection of the premises by a representative of the City Secretary,
the Chief of Police or their designee, at any time it is occupied or open for
business.



   (C)   However, when the City Secretary, his or her designee, or the
Chief of Police, or his or her designee, is denied permission to inspect any
premises, inspection shall be made only under the authority of a warrant
issued by a magistrate authorizing the inspection for violation of these
regulations.



      (1)   In applying for such a warrant, the Chief of Police, or
his or her designee, shall submit an affidavit to a magistrate, setting forth
his or her belief that a violation of these regulations exists with respect
to the premises sought to be inspected and the reasons for such belief.



      (2)   The affidavit shall describe the location of such
operator, or occupant thereof. If the magistrate finds that probable cause
exists for a search of the premises, such warrant describing the premises
with sufficient certainty to identify the same shall be issued.



      (3)   A warrant so issued shall constitute authority for the
Chief of Police, or his or her designee, to enter upon or inspect the
premises described therein.



(Prior Code, § 4.09.013)  (Ord. 95-6-5, passed 6-27-1995)



§ 114.14  SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSES.



   The City Manager, or his or her designee, is hereby granted and shall
have the power to suspend any and all licenses authorized by these
regulations, if he or she determines that a licensee or employee or business
invitee or guest of the licensee has:



   (A)   Violated or is not in compliance with any provision of this
chapter;



   (B)   Engaged in the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages
while on the sexually oriented business premises;



   (C)   A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually
oriented business during a period of time when the licensee’s license was
suspended;



   (D)   A licensee or employee has been convicted of an offense listed
in § 114.07(B);



   (E)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any specified
sexual activities to occur in or on the sexually oriented business premises;
or



   (F)   A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city for taxes,
fee, fines or penalties.



(Prior Code, § 4.09.014)  (Ord. 95-6-5, passed 6-27-1995)



§ 114.15  UNLAWFUL ACTS.



   (A)   False or fraudulent statements. It shall be unlawful for any
person to knowingly make any false, fraudulent or untruthful statement,
either written or oral, or in any way knowingly to conceal any material fact
or to give or use any assumed name or fictitious name other than the one duly
filed for record in compliance with the Assumed Business or Professional Name
Act (Tex. Business and Commerce Code, Ch. 71).



   (B)   Use of another’s license. It shall be unlawful for any
individual, partnership, corporation or other entity to use a license which
has been issued to another individual, partnership, corporation or other
entity.



   (C)   Defacing, altering and the like license. It shall be unlawful
for any person to counterfeit, forge, change, deface or alter a license.



(Prior Code, § 4.09.015)  (Ord. 95-6-5, passed 6-27-1995)  Penalty, see §
114.99



§ 114.16  INJUNCTION.



   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business without a valid license or in violation of this chapter is subject
to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations.



(Prior Code, § 4.09.016)  (Ord. 95-6-5, passed 6-27-1995)  Penalty, see §
114.99



§ 114.17  NOT TO LEGALIZE ANYTHING PROHIBITED BY STATE LAW OR CITY.



   These regulations do not legalize anything prohibited under the Penal
Code or any other state law or city ordinance. Further, any violation of the
Penal Code or other state law or city ordinance shall be deemed grounds for
revocation of the license issued.



(Prior Code, § 4.09.017)  (Ord. 95-6-5, passed 6-27-1995)



§ 114.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction in the
municipal court, shall be punished by fine not to exceed the sum of $2,000
for each offense, and each day that such offense shall continue shall
constitute a separate offense.



(Prior Code, § 4.09.018)  (Ord. 95-6-5, passed 6-27-1995)



CHAPTER 115:  TAXICABS



Section




Generally




   115.001   Definitions



   115.002   Prosecution for violation



   115.003   Liability of city




Administration




   115.015   Chief of Police; enforcement generally



   115.016   Recommendations of Chief



   115.017   Administrative duties of Chief




Franchise




   115.030   Required



   115.031   Application



   115.032   Notice of application



   115.033   Objections to issuance



   115.034   Hearing



   115.035   Factors in determining public convenience and necessity



   115.036   Findings by Chief of Police



   115.037   Issuance



   115.038   Denial



   115.039   Franchise fee



   115.040   Inspection of records



   115.041   Assignment prohibited



   115.042   Revocation of franchise, licenses, permits



   115.043   Terminals




Regulations




   115.055   Cruising



   115.056   Actual operation restricted



   115.057   Disposition of property left in vehicle



   115.058   Transportation for unlawful purposes



   115.059   Payment of ad valorem taxes



   115.060   Solicitation of passengers at depots



   115.061   Drivers to stay with vehicles



   115.062   Inspection of vehicles



   115.063   Identification of vehicles; generally



   115.064   Substitute vehicles



   115.065   Receipt, discharge of passengers



   115.066   Maximum seating



   115.067   Use of streets for taxicab stand purposes



   115.068   Alcoholic beverages; transportation prohibited



   115.069   Consumption in vehicle



   115.070   Sale of alcoholic beverages



   115.071   Transportation of persons other than for hire



   115.072   Appearance



   115.073   Insurance required



   115.074   Minimum amount of coverage



   115.075   Persons protected



   115.076   Provision for continuing liability



   115.077   Increasing amount upon return of execution unsatisfied



   115.078   Cancellation



   115.079   City not liable for solvency of insurer; owner’s
liability not affected; suits on policy



   115.080   Council to fix rates



   115.081   Multiple passengers



   115.082   Refusal to pay fare



   115.083   Duty to issue receipt



Statutory reference:



   Authority of municipality to regulate taxicabs, see Tex. Local Gov’t
Code, § 215.004




GENERALLY




§ 115.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CRUISE or CRUISING.  The movement of unoccupied taxicabs over the
public streets of the city, in search of or soliciting prospective passengers
for hire; except, however, unoccupied taxicabs proceeding to answer a
telephone call for taxicab service from an intending passenger, and taxicabs
returning to a taxi stand or subtaxi stand, by the most direct route, after
having discharged a passenger or passengers, to the garage where such taxicab
is housed or to the place of discharge of the passenger or passengers, shall
not be considered to be CRUISING.



   DRIVER or CHAUFFEUR.  Every person in actual charge of the operation
of a taxicab, whether as owner or agent, servant or employee of the owner.



   FRANCHISE or GRANT.  An authority issued by the Chief of Police or the
City Council, after a finding that public convenience and necessity so
require it, which may be issued to an owner or owners of taxicabs. The term
FRANCHISE shall apply to an owner or operator of taxicabs which authorizes
such owner or operator of taxicabs to engage in the business of
transportation by taxicab. The term FRANCHISE shall also mean the award of a
certificate of public convenience and necessity; and an application as well
as an authority to operate more vehicles than originally granted by the
certificate of public convenience and necessity within a franchise is
tantamount to an amendment of the franchise by granting additional licenses
for additional taxicabs.



   LICENSE.  When used alone, shall apply to the authorization made to
the franchise holder, which is a license to operate one or more taxicabs, and
although a franchise may be held by an owner and taxicab operator for a
designated number of licenses to operate a specified number of taxicabs,
application must be made by the franchise holder for placing more taxicabs
within his or her license to operate.



   OWNER or TAXICAB OPERATOR. Any person who has the control, direction,
maintenance and the benefit of the collection of revenue derived from the
operation of taxicabs on or over the streets or public ways of the city,
whether as owner or otherwise, except a driver.



   PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY.  A public convenience which is
fitting and suited to public need, and a public necessity which embraces a
great and urgent public convenience. This term as applied to a proposed
service by an applicant shall mean that applicant is fit, able and willing to
perform transportation by taxicabs in accordance with the requirements of
this chapter and that public CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY require the service
proposed by such applicant.



   TAXICAB.  Every automobile or motor-propelled vehicle used for
transportation of passengers for hire over the public streets of the city,
and not over a defined or fixed route, and irrespective of whether or not the
operations extend beyond the city limits, at rates for distance traveled, or
for wait time, or for both, or at rates per hour, per week, or per month,
which such vehicle is routed to destinations under the direction of such
passenger or passengers, or such person hiring the same; provided, however,
the term TAXICAB shall not apply to motorbuses operated within the city under
a franchise from the city, over a fixed or definite route, nor shall such
term apply to motorbuses regularly operated in the city along fixed routes to
and from points outside the incorporated limits of the city, nor shall such
term apply to motor vehicles regularly engaged in interstate commerce.



   TERMINAL.  The taxi depot at which place the taxicabs shall be housed
or parked, and at which place the telephone calls and requests for service
shall be made, and at which place a dispatcher shall control the movements of
the taxicabs to the points of request for taxicab service; this term shall
likewise be synonymous with TAXI TERMINAL, and shall mean and embrace that
space and area of land and buildings off of the streets of the city, and upon
private property, and shall be and constitute the main office of the owner
and taxicab operator. The term TERMINAL shall also mean and include any place
at which the drivers of taxicabs, or chauffeurs of taxicabs, shall use to
receive calls from the dispatcher as such calls may be relayed from the
terminal, and shall likewise mean and embrace that space and area used by
taxicabs in waiting for passengers.



   WAITING TIME.  Such time as may be consumed or lost at the special
instance and request of a passenger after such passenger has first entered
the taxicab to make a trip and before reaching his or her final destination;
and no charge will be made against a passenger for any time lost on account
of any other delay whatsoever.



(Prior Code, § 4.12.001)



§ 115.002  PROSECUTION FOR VIOLATION.



   In a prosecution for violation of this chapter, it shall not be
necessary for the complaint to allege, or for proof to be made, that the act
was knowingly done; nor shall it be necessary for the complaint to negate any
exception contained in this chapter concerning any prohibited act.



(Prior Code, § 4.12.002)



§ 115.003  LIABILITY OF CITY.



   The city shall not be liable for any reason for an amount due to any
claim or on account of any act or omission of any officer of the city in
connection with any matter relating to taxicabs.



(Prior Code, § 4.12.003)




ADMINISTRATION




§ 115.015  CHIEF OF POLICE; ENFORCEMENT GENERALLY.



   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to enforce the provisions
of this chapter, and all other applicable provisions of this code, state law
and city ordinances, rules and regulations.



(Prior Code, § 4.12.031)



§ 115.016  RECOMMENDATIONS OF CHIEF.



   The Chief of Police shall recommend to the City Council reasonable
rules and regulations which, when approved by the City Council by appropriate
measures, shall become binding upon the holder of any franchise granted under
the provisions of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 4.12.032)



§ 115.017  ADMINISTRATIVE DUTIES OF CHIEF.



   Without limiting the power or authority of the City Council, the Chief
of Police shall perform the following normal functions of office affecting
the holder of any franchise issued under the provisions of this chapter:



   (A)   Make reasonable orders respecting character, extent, quality
and standard of service;



   (B)   Recommend to be fixed by the City Council such rates as are
not in conflict with the express provisions hereof and make reasonable orders
respecting same;



   (C)   Prescribe the number of cabs to be operated by such grantee
and prescribe the number of cabs to be operated on various days of the week
and hours of the days, applying thereto the principles of public necessity
and convenience;



   (D)   Inspect any and all equipment used or proposed to be used by
grantee for the purpose of exercising any right or privilege under such
franchise;



   (E)   Require examination and recommend the licensing of all drivers
or operators of any cab or vehicle operated or maintained by such grantee
under the provisions hereof;



   (F)   Inspect the books of such grantee at all reasonable times and
prescribe reasonable rules and regulations concerning the method of keeping
such records by such grantee;



   (G)   Receive from owners all applications for franchises to operate
taxicabs, receive applications for chauffeurs’ licenses, conduct hearings
thereon, and from time to time inspect the operations of taxicabs within the
incorporated limits of the city; and



   (H)   Make such other rules and regulations as may be reasonably
necessary to facilitate the service to be rendered to the public under such
franchise, which rules when approved by the City Council shall become binding
on the grantee.



(Prior Code, § 4.12.033)




FRANCHISE




§ 115.030  REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, use or operate on any
street within the city any taxicab, unless a written franchise for such
taxicab shall have first been obtained from the City Council by the person
owning or controlling such taxicab, and unless such franchise shall be in
effect at such time.



(Prior Code, § 4.12.061)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.031  APPLICATION.



   Any applicant for a taxicab franchise under the provisions of this
subchapter shall make proper application therefor on blanks to be furnished
by the Chief of Police.



(Prior Code, § 4.12.062)



§ 115.032  NOTICE OF APPLICATION.



   Upon the filing of any application for a taxicab franchise, the Chief
of Police shall cause a notice thereof to be published in one of the daily
newspapers of the city, the cost of publishing such notice shall be advanced
in full by the applicant. Such notice shall set out the facts that the
certain application has been filed for a taxicab franchise, the name of the
applicant, kind of equipment and all other pertinent data from such
application, which the Chief of Police may deem necessary. Such publication
shall constitute a notice of all holders of existing taxicab franchises and
to the public that a public hearing will be held at a public place in the
city, to be designated by the Chief of Police in such notice, and at a
designated time given in such notice, which such designated time shall not be
less than five days nor more than 15 days after the date of the first
publication of such notice, and such notice shall be published for three
successive days.



(Prior Code, § 4.12.063)



§ 115.033  OBJECTIONS TO ISSUANCE.



   All holders of existing taxicab franchises or any other citizen shall
be entitled to file any complaints or protests that such party may see fit
against the issuance of a franchise to the applicant therefor.



(Prior Code, § 4.12.064)



§ 115.034  HEARING.



   (A)   At the time of the holding of the investigation and hearing
with reference to whether the public convenience and necessity requires the
operation of such additional vehicle or vehicles covered in the application
filed under the provisions of this subchapter, the Chief of Police shall
consider all of the complaints and protests and, in conducting the hearing,
shall have the right to call such witnesses as he or she shall see fit.



   (B)   In all such hearings, the burden of proof shall be upon the
applicant to establish by clear, cogent and convincing evidence that the
public convenience and necessity require such operation of the vehicle or
vehicles for which such application has been made and that the applicant is
fit, able and willing to perform such transportation of persons and property
by taxicab as proposed in the application.



(Prior Code, § 4.12.065)



§ 115.035  FACTORS IN DETERMINING PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY.



   (A)   In determining whether public convenience and necessity
require the licensing of taxicabs for which application may be made, the
Chief of Police shall take into consideration:



      (1)   Whether the demands of public convenience and necessity
require such proposed or such additional taxicab service within the city;



      (2)   The financial responsibility of the applicant;



      (3)   The number, kind, type and equipment, the color scheme
to be used by applicant;



      (4)   The increased traffic congestion on the streets of the
city which may result;



      (5)   Whether the safe use of the streets of the city by the
public, both vehicular and pedestrian, will be unduly endangered by the
granting of such additional licenses;



      (6)   Whether applicant is fit, able and willing to perform
transportation by taxicabs; and



      (7)   Such other relevant facts as the Chief of Police may
deem advisable or necessary, which may throw light on public necessity and
convenience.



   (B)   No application will be granted and no finding shall be made of
public convenience and necessity unless and until there is a finding that
such applicant is fit, able and willing to perform transportation by taxicab
as provided in this chapter and that there is public demand and need for the
type of service proposed.



(Prior Code, § 4.12.066)



§ 115.036  FINDINGS BY CHIEF OF POLICE.



   If the Chief of Police finds from his or her investigation and hearing
that the public convenience and necessity justify the operation of the
additional taxicabs for which franchise is desired, he or she shall notify
the applicant of his or her finding. Within five days thereafter, the
applicant shall furnish to the Chief of Police any and all relevant
information which may be required. If the Chief of Police then finds that the
applicant is the owner or lessee of and intends to become the bona fide
operator of the taxicabs for which franchise is desired, he or she shall
require of such applicant a policy of public liability, bodily injury and
property damage insurance and a performance bond as provided, and if he or
she shall further find that such policy of insurance and performance bond has
been filed and deposited with the City Secretary, and that such taxicabs
comply with and the applicant has complied with all relevant ordinances of
the city and all of the rules and regulations established by the Chief of
Police to more effectively carry out the purpose and intent of this chapter,
he or she shall issue his or her written certificate to the City Secretary,
not less than ten days after his or her findings have been declared,
certifying that the public convenience and necessity require operation of
said taxicabs, or any number thereof which the applicant desires and proposes
to operate, and that the applicant is entitled to have such franchise to
operate taxicabs upon complying with all other provisions of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 4.12.067)



§ 115.037  ISSUANCE.



   If the Chief of Police finds that the public convenience and necessity
would be served by the issuance of a franchise under the provisions of this
subchapter and so notifies the City Secretary to that effect, the City
Secretary shall then issue such franchise to the applicant therefor.



(Prior Code, § 4.12.068)



§ 115.038  DENIAL.



   If the Chief of Police finds from his or her investigation and hearing
that the public convenience and necessity do not justify the operation of the
taxicabs for which franchise is desired, he or she shall forthwith notify the
applicant of such finding and the franchise applied for shall be denied.



(Prior Code, § 4.12.069)



§ 115.039  FRANCHISE FEE.



   The franchise fee for each franchise shall be due and payable on
October 1. The franchise fee is to remain the same, regardless of the number
of taxicabs operated by the franchise holder.



(Prior Code, § 4.12.070)



§ 115.040  INSPECTION OF RECORDS.



   The Chief of Police shall have the authority to inspect the business
records of any owners and operators of taxicabs during regular business
hours, which records each taxicab owner and operator must make available for
inspection during regular business hours.



(Prior Code, § 4.12.071)



§ 115.041  ASSIGNMENT PROHIBITED.



   No franchise issued under the provisions of this subchapter shall be
transferable or assignable.



(Prior Code, § 4.12.072)



§ 115.042  REVOCATION OF FRANCHISE, LICENSES, PERMITS.



   Any franchise, license or permit issued under the provisions of this
chapter may be revoked for the violation of or the failure to perform any
duty required by the provisions of this chapter or other applicable
provisions of this code, state law or city ordinance, rule or regulation.



(Prior Code, § 4.12.073)



§ 115.043  TERMINALS.



   (A)   Every franchise owner shall maintain within the city limits an
off-street terminal of sufficient size to accommodate all of the franchise
owner’s taxicabs. The franchise owner shall maintain at such terminal, 24
hours per day, telephone service and all records pertaining to the operation
of his or her franchise. Such records shall be open for inspection to any
police officer, City Auditor and Chief of Police.



   (B)   Subtaxi stands at hotels, depots and other places shall be
designated by the Chief of Police. No subterminal in any residential section
of the city shall be installed or approved by the Chief of Police which will
violate the peace and quietude; provided, however, that a prima facie case
reflecting such peace and quietude shall be considered to have been
introduced upon the introduction of written consent of 90% of the lot owners
within 300 feet of such subtaxi stand.



   (C)   The form and type of terminal shall be of such a nature as
best meets public convenience and necessity and affords a safe, sanitary and
lawful operation of transportation by taxicabs. The site, location, type of
proposed buildings and the sanitary conditions of the taxi stand shall be
reflected in an application to the Chief of Police. The equipment, site and
place of a terminal must be found by the Chief of Police to best meet public
convenience and necessity prior to an authorization to a franchise holder to
operate such terminal. An affirmative finding in favor of the applicant,
reflecting adequate sufficiency of the place of any off-street terminal,
shall be considered as having an established prima facie case thereon, upon
it appearing within the application that the operator of taxicabs is
presently operating for his or her own exclusive use such off-street terminal
in the commercial areas of the city.



(Prior Code, § 4.12.074)  Penalty, see § 10.99




REGULATIONS




§ 115.055  CRUISING.



   It shall be unlawful for the grantee, its officers, agents or
employees, operating any automobile for hire within the city to cruise,
except between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. Cruising shall consist of
seeking, searching or soliciting employment while operating an automobile for
hire by repeatedly and persistently driving such automobile for hire to and
fro on the public streets of the city and offering accommodations thereof to
prospective passengers, either by signal, word of mouth, or by carrying a
sign with the word “vacant” thereon, or some other word of similar import
or otherwise, in any manner whatsoever operating such vehicle upon the public
streets of the city for the purpose of soliciting passengers, or driving an
automobile for hire upon the public streets while unoccupied by a passenger
without having a fixed destination thereof; however, a vacant cab may pick up
a passenger on signal, when returning to his or her regular taxi stand or
terminal after delivering a passenger.



(Prior Code, § 4.12.101)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.056  ACTUAL OPERATION RESTRICTED



   It shall be unlawful for any taxicab to be driven or operated within
the corporate limits of the city by any person except the owner of such
taxicab or the authorized agent or employee of the owner.



(Prior Code, § 4.12.102)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.057  DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY LEFT IN VEHICLE.



   It shall be the duty of every taxicab driver to immediately return to
the owner, if known, any luggage, merchandise or other property left in
taxicabs. If the owner is not known, the driver shall immediately, upon
return to his or her terminal, turn over to the manager of the terminal any
property whatsoever left in his or her taxicab with a complete report of when
it was left in his or her taxicab. Such article shall be tagged, and if not
called for within seven days, shall be turned over to the Chief of Police
with all available information as to the probable owner.



(Prior Code, § 4.12.103)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.058  TRANSPORTATION FOR UNLAWFUL PURPOSES.



   It shall be unlawful for any driver of a taxicab, knowingly, to
transport any passenger to the abode of a prostitute, or to knowingly
transport any known criminal, narcotic peddler, prostitute, bootlegger, in
the commission of a crime or the infraction of the law in any manner, or act
in any manner as a pimp for prostitutes, or a contact man for unlawful
establishments of any character.



(Prior Code, § 4.12.104)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.059  PAYMENT OF AD VALOREM TAXES.



   No operator of taxicabs shall engage in the transportation of persons
by taxicab at any time when the ad valorem taxes assessed against such
terminal, taxicabs and taxicab equipment shall be delinquent.



(Prior Code, § 4.12.105)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.060  SOLICITATION OF PASSENGERS AT DEPOTS.



   When any taxicab is at any rail, air or bus depot within the city, it
shall be unlawful for the driver or person in charge thereof to leave the
same and enter the depot or go upon the sidewalk or private property of any
railroad company, airfield or bus station for the purpose of soliciting the
transportation of any passengers arriving on the trains, planes or buses at
such depot.



(Prior Code, § 4.12.106)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.061  DRIVERS TO STAY WITH VEHICLES.



   The drivers of taxicabs using subterminals shall remain seated in their
vehicles at all times while such vehicle is at a public stand; provided,
however, such drivers may leave their vehicles when actually necessary to
assist passengers to enter or leave same, or in any case of accident,
necessity or emergency beyond the control of such driver.



(Prior Code, § 4.12.107)



§ 115.062  INSPECTION OF VEHICLES.



   Every taxicab which is or may be licensed under the provisions of this
chapter shall be inspected at least once every month for the purpose of
determining whether such vehicle is in a safe and sanitary condition to be
operated as a taxicab; and to such inspection the owner of such vehicle shall
submit the same, at such time and place that may be specified by the Chief of
Police. If the Chief of Police finds it to be in a safe condition, he or she
shall paste a paper seal of a type and design adopted by the Chief of Police
on some portion of such vehicle, stating the date such vehicle was inspected,
and that such vehicle was approved by the Chief of Police. No taxicab shall
be operated in the city without the approval seal of the Chief of Police
being attached thereto. No inspection fee shall be charged. No taxicab found
to be unsafe by the Chief of Police shall be operated over the streets of the
city. Nothing herein, however, shall prevent the Chief of Police from
inspecting any taxicab at any reasonable time that he or she sees fit, and he
or she is expressly given power to do so, and upon finding such taxicab to be
in a defective condition he or she shall order its use as a taxicab
discontinued until the same has been approved by him or her.



(Prior Code, § 4.12.108)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.063  IDENTIFICATION OF VEHICLES; GENERALLY.



   (A)   Every taxicab shall have painted on each side and the rear of
the cab the name of the owner or the name under which the owner operates,
together with the company’s telephone number, the franchise number and the
cab number.



      (1)   All of the lettering mentioned in this division (A)
shall not be less than two and one-half inches in height and not less than
five-sixteenths-inch stroke, and the paint used therefor shall be either
enamel or oil paint that will weather the elements and must be kept legible
at all times.



      (2)   All lettering on all taxicabs owned by the same
franchise owner shall be the same wording, same color, same size letters, and
on the same place on each taxicab.



      (3)   All taxicab franchise owners shall adopt a standard
color or combination of colors and shall not operate a taxicab until all of
such taxicabs are painted the color or combination of colors adopted by the
franchise owner. The color or combination of colors shall be filed with the
Chief of Police and shall be approved by him or her. After the color or
combination of colors has been approved by the Chief of Police, the same
shall not be changed without his or her consent.



   (B)   Whenever any taxicab shall have been discontinued in use and
no longer designated as one of the cars permitted to be operated under the
franchise, such taxicab shall not be driven upon the streets of the city by
any person with such taxicab company identification thereon.



(Prior Code, § 4.12.109)



§ 115.064  SUBSTITUTE VEHICLES.



   In the event that a franchise owner shall purchase and put in operation
for taxicab service a substitute car for one of its regular cars, a period of
five days from the date of placing such substitute car in service shall be
allowed within which to paint such car and equip same with the identification
required by § 115.063; provided, however, at all times such substitute car
shall be equipped with a lighted sign with the word “taxi” or
“taxicab”, installed on the top and front part of such car, so as to
clearly designate the same as being in taxi service. The franchise owner,
immediately when such substitute car is placed in service, shall notify the
Chief of Police of such substitution and shall present evidence that such car
is covered by the liability insurance policy required by the provisions of
this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 4.12.110)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.065  RECEIPT, DISCHARGE OF PASSENGERS.



   No driver of a taxicab shall receive or discharge passengers in the
roadway of any street, but shall drive to the right-hand sidewalk, as nearly
as possible, or, in the absence of a sidewalk, to the extreme right-hand side
of the road, and there receive or discharge passengers.



(Prior Code, § 4.12.111)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.066  MAXIMUM SEATING.



   It shall be unlawful to carry more than five passengers in any taxicab,
and in no event shall more than two passengers ride in the front seat with
the driver.



(Prior Code, § 4.12.112)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.067  USE OF STREETS FOR TAXICAB STAND PURPOSES.



   It shall be unlawful for any taxicab owner or operator to use the
public streets or any part thereof as a taxi stand.



(Prior Code, § 4.12.113)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.068  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; TRANSPORTATION PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful to transport alcoholic beverages, not owned and in
the exclusive possession and control of a fare-paying passenger, in the
taxicab or for any taxicab driver to have on his or her person any alcoholic
beverage while driving and operating a taxicab in service.



(Prior Code, § 4.12.114)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.069  CONSUMPTION IN VEHICLE.



   It shall be unlawful for any driver of any taxicab to drink alcoholic
beverages of any kind while inside the taxicab.



(Prior Code, § 4.12.115)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.070  SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.



   No driver of a taxicab or owner of a taxicab shall engage in selling
intoxicating liquors or soliciting business for any person selling
intoxicating liquors.



(Prior Code, § 4.12.116)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.071  TRANSPORTATION OF PERSONS OTHER THAN FOR HIRE.



   No taxicab driver or owner shall permit any other person to occupy or
ride in a taxicab, except a passenger for hire. No taxicab driver or owner
shall carry any person in such taxicab while on the streets of the city
unless such person has agreed to pay for the use and hire of such taxicab.



(Prior Code, § 4.12.117)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.072  APPEARANCE.



   It shall be the responsibility of every person operating a taxicab
business or service in the city to require the drivers in his or her employ
to be neat and clean in appearance while on duty.



(Prior Code, § 4.12.118)



§ 115.073  INSURANCE REQUIRED.



   Before any franchise shall be issued under this chapter to any owner of
a taxicab, or before any renewal of such a franchise shall be granted, the
owner shall file with the City Secretary, and thereafter keep in full force
and effect, a policy of public liability insurance approved by the Chief of
Police and executed by an insurance company duly authorized to do business in
the state, and performable in this county, insuring the public against any
loss or damage that may result to any person or property from the operation
of the taxicab covered or to be covered by such license.



(Prior Code, § 4.12.119)



§ 115.074  MINIMUM AMOUNT OF COVERAGE.



   (A)   The maximum amount of recovery in a policy of insurance
required by this subchapter shall not be less than the following sums:



      (1)   For the injury or death of any one person in any one
accident, $10,000;



      (2)   For total liability in any one accident or personal
injuries or death, $20,000; and



      (3)   For injury or destruction of property in any one
accident, $5,000.



   (B)   The minimum amount of insurance liability shall never be less
than the amount established by the statutes of the state under the Texas
Motor Vehicle Safety Responsibility Act, being Tex. Transportation Code, Ch.
601 or amendments thereto.



(Prior Code, § 4.12.120)



§ 115.075  PERSONS PROTECTED.



   The above public liability insurance required by this subchapter shall
be for the protection of the passengers of the insured taxicab and for the
public, but shall not cover personal injuries sustained by the servants,
agents or employees of the person filing the insurance.



(Prior Code, § 4.12.121)



§ 115.076  PROVISION FOR CONTINUING LIABILITY.



   All policies of public liability insurance required by this subchapter
shall contain a provision for a continuing liability thereon up to the full
amount thereof, notwithstanding any recovery thereon.



(Prior Code, § 4.12.122)



§ 115.077  INCREASING AMOUNT UPON RETURN OF EXECUTION UNSATISFIED.



   In the event of the return unsatisfied of any execution issued on any
final judgment rendered against any taxicab owner in any suit for damages on
account of injury to person or property occasioned by the operation of any
taxicab, such owner, within ten days after the return of such execution
unsatisfied, provided the judgment is still unpaid, shall increase the amount
of his or her insurance by the amount of such judgment, and failing to do so
shall forthwith cease the operation of taxicabs in the city until such
additional insurance is deposited or such judgment is paid.



(Prior Code, § 4.12.123)



§ 115.078  CANCELLATION.



   (A)   In the event that any insurer desires to be released from any
insurance filed under this subchapter, it may give written notice of such
desire to the Director of Transportation at least 30 days before it desires
its liability released, and the Chief of Police shall thereupon give written
notice, by personal delivery or by mail, to the insured and demand that he or
she furnish new assurance by the expiration of the 30-day period above
provided for, and shall discharge such first insurer from any liability which
shall accrue after the time of approval of such new policy, or shall
discharge such first insurer after the expiration of such 30-day period.



   (B)   In the event any policy is so canceled upon the request of the
insurer, and no new insurance policy is filed before the cancellation of the
original insurance, the license to operate taxicabs granted to the insured
shall be automatically revoked.



(Prior Code, § 4.12.124)



§ 115.079  CITY NOT LIABLE FOR SOLVENCY OF INSURER; OWNER’S LIABILITY NOT
AFFECTED; SUITS ON POLICY.



   Neither the city nor any officer thereof shall be held liable for the
pecuniary responsibility or solvency of any insurer under the provisions of
this subchapter, or in any manner become liable for any sum on account of any
such claim or act or omission relating to the insured vehicle, nor shall the
liability of the owner of any such vehicle be in any manner limited or
changed by reason of the provisions of this subchapter, but the judgment
creditors having causes of action secured thereby shall be authorized to sue
directly on such policy of insurance without impleading the city, and all
persons known to any insurer to have been injured or damaged in the same
accident and claiming damages thereunder may be made parties without priority
of claim on payment in any suit had or instituted on account of such matters.



(Prior Code, § 4.12.125)



§ 115.080  COUNCIL TO FIX RATES.



   The City Council shall have the power to fix the rates, charges and
fares of all taxicabs operating within the city.



(Prior Code, § 4.12.126)



§ 115.081  MULTIPLE PASSENGERS.



   The first passenger employing a taxicab shall be entitled to its
exclusive use until delivered to his or her destination by the most practical
direct route, and no other passenger may be carried unless the passenger
first engaging the taxicab shall consent to additional passengers who are not
with him or her or his or her party.



(Prior Code, § 4.12.127)



§ 115.082  REFUSAL TO PAY FARE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the legal fare of
any taxicab after having hired the same, and it shall be unlawful for any
person to hire any taxicab with intent to defraud the person from whom it is
hired of the value of such service.



(Prior Code, § 4.12.128)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.083  DUTY TO ISSUE RECEIPT.



   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any taxicab within the city to
fail or refuse to issue a receipt for any fare or charge collected by him or
her from any passenger who shall request such receipt.



(Prior Code, § 4.12.129)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 116:  OIL, GAS AND SALT WATER DISPOSAL WELLS



Section




General Provisions




   116.001   Definitions



   116.002   Appointment of Oil and Gas Inspector



   116.003   Premises to be kept clean and sanitary



   116.004   Fence



   116.005   Violation of state laws or regulations



   116.006   Authority to prohibit drilling at particular location



   116.007   Necessity of contract with surface owner



   116.008   Streets and alleys



   116.009   Well location



   116.010   Driveway approach to street from well location




Permit




   116.025   Required



   116.026   Application



   116.027   Filing fee



   116.028   Issuance or refusal



   116.029   Insurance and bond



   116.030   Termination



   116.031   Annual usage fee




Drilling Regulations




   116.045   Maximum depth



   116.046   Permit for deeper drilling



   116.047   Derrick and rig



   116.048   Pits



   116.049   Casing



   116.050   Setting and cementing casing



   116.051   Valves and blowout preventers



   116.052   Drilling fluid



   116.053   Drill stem tests



   116.054   Tubing



   116.055   Bradenhead



   116.056   Christmas tree and wellhead connections



   116.057   Mufflers required



   116.058   Storage tanks and separators



   116.059   Venting and flaring of gas



   116.060   Abandonment and plugging



   116.061   Disposal of salt water




Pollution Control




   116.075   Definition



   116.076   Application of subchapter provisions



   116.077   Application of provisions within 5,000 feet of city limits



   116.078   Prerequisites when well is within 5,000 feet of city limits



   116.079   Inspector’s right of entry



   116.080   Pollution prohibited



   116.081   Setting of surface casing



   116.082   Notice, procedure upon drilling to Wilcox Sand



   116.083   Nonconforming wells declared nuisance



Statutory references:



   Lease of municipal oil, gas or mineral land, see Tex. Local Gov’t
Code, § 253.005



   Municipal regulation of exploration and development of mineral
interests, see Tex. Natural Resources Code, § 92.007



   Oil and gas, see Tex. Natural Resources Code, Ch. 52, 81 et seq.




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 116.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. All
technical or oil and gas industry words or phrases used herein and not
specifically defined herein shall have the meanings customarily attributable
thereto by prudent operators in the oil and gas industry.



   LEASE.  Any tract of land subject to an oil, gas and mineral lease or
other oil and gas development contract, or any unit composed of several
tracts and leases but operated as one lease, and any tract of land in which
the minerals are owned by an operator or someone holding under it or him or
her, but which, due to the fee royalty ownership, is developed and operated
as a separate tract.



   PERMITTEE.  The person to whom is issued a permit for the drilling and
operation of a well under the provisions of this chapter, and his or her
administrators, executors, heirs, successors and assigns.



   WELL.  Any hole or bore to any sand, formation, strata or depth for
the purpose of producing and recovering any oil, gas, liquid hydrocarbon, or
any of them, or for disposing of salt water, in any form or consistency
whatsoever, into such subsurface sand, formation, strata or depth.



(Prior Code, § 4.03.001)  (Ord. 09-10-17, passed 10-13-2009)



§ 116.002  APPOINTMENT OF OIL AND GAS INSPECTOR.



   The city designee is hereby designated the Oil and Gas Inspector and
shall enforce the provisions of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 4.03.002)  (Ord. 09-10-17, passed 10-13-2009)



§ 116.003  PREMISES TO BE KEPT CLEAN AND SANITARY.



   The premises of each oil, gas and/or salt water disposal well shall be
kept in a clean and sanitary condition, free from rubbish of every character,
to the satisfaction of the Health Officer at all times drilling operations or
reworking operations are being conducted, and as long thereafter as oil
and/or gas are being produced therefrom or salt water disposed of therein.



(Prior Code, § 4.03.003)  (Ord. 09-10-17, passed 10-13-2009)



§ 116.004  FENCE.



   The owners of each oil, gas and/or salt water disposal well(s) shall,
upon completion thereof, enclose said well, together with all surface
facilities and storage tanks, with a heavy steel fence of cyclone type, a
minimum of six feet high, with all gates to be kept locked, except when the
permittee or his or her employees are in actuality within the enclosure.



(Prior Code, § 4.03.004)  (Ord. 09-10-17, passed 10-13-2009)



§ 116.005  VIOLATION OF STATE LAWS OR REGULATIONS.



   Any violation of the laws of the state or any rules, regulations or
requirements of any state or federal regulatory body having jurisdiction in
reference to drilling, completing, equipping, operating, producing,
maintaining or abandoning an oil, gas and/or salt water disposal well(s) or
related appurtenances, equipment or facilities, or in reference to firewalls,
fire protection, blowout protection, safety protection or convenience of
persons or property, shall also be a violation of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 4.03.005)  (Ord. 09-10-17, passed 10-13-2009)



§ 116.006  AUTHORITY TO PROHIBIT DRILLING AT PARTICULAR LOCATION.



   The City Council shall have the power, and hereby reserves the
authority, to refuse any application for a permit to drill and operate any
well at any particular location within any drilling block where, by reason of
such particular location, the character and value of the permanent
improvements already erected on or approximately adjacent to the particular
location in question, and the use to which the land and surroundings are
adapted for school, college, university, hospital or civic purpose, or for
health reasons, or for safety reasons, or any of them, the drilling or
operation of such well on such particular location might be injurious or a
disadvantage to the city, or to its inhabitants as a whole, or to a
substantial number of its inhabitants or visitors as a group.



(Prior Code, § 4.03.006)  (Ord. 09-10-17, passed 10-13-2009)



§ 116.007  NECESSITY OF CONTRACT WITH SURFACE OWNER.



   Neither the provisions of this chapter nor any permit issued hereunder
shall be interpreted to grant any right or license to the permittee to enter
upon, use or occupy in any respect to the drilling or operation of any well,
any surface land except by the written contract of the surface owner; nor
shall it limit or prevent the free right of any owner to contract for the
amount of damages, rights or privileges with respect to his or her own land
and property.



(Prior Code, § 4.03.007)  (Ord. 09-10-17, passed 10-13-2009)



§ 116.008  STREETS AND ALLEYS.



   No oil, gas and/or salt water disposal well(s) shall be drilled, and no
permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled, at any location which is
within any of the streets or alleys of the city. No street or alley shall be
blocked or encumbered or closed in any drilling or production operation
except by special permit by order of the City Council and then only
temporarily.



(Prior Code, § 4.03.008)  (Ord. 09-10-17, passed 10-13-2009)



§ 116.009  WELL LOCATION.



   (A)   No oil, gas and/or salt water disposal well(s) shall be
drilled, and no permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled at any
location which is nearer than 750 feet of any residence or commercial
building without the applicant having first secured the written permission of
the owner or owners thereof.



   (B)   If, however, the applicant cannot obtain such written
permission from 100% of the owners of all residences and commercial buildings
located within 750 feet of the proposed oil, gas and/or salt water disposal
well(s) (measured from the center of where the well will actually be drilled
to the nearest part of the residence or commercial building) and such
proposed well will be located at least 200 feet from the nearest residence or
commercial building, then the applicant may request a public hearing before
the City Council to determine whether a variance to drill such oil, gas
and/or salt water disposal well(s) should be granted. The City Council may
grant or deny such application for such reasons as it might see fit.



   (C)   At least 20 days prior to such variance hearing, the applicant
shall by certified mail, return receipt requested, give notice of the date,
time and fact of such hearing to all owners of residences and commercial
buildings located within 750 feet of the proposed oil, gas and/or salt water
disposal well(s) who have not agreed in writing to such proposed well
drilling location, and publish notice, at least 20 days and not more than 30
days prior to such hearing, in a local newspaper in a form acceptable to the
city of the date, time and fact of such hearing. Proof of satisfaction of all
such notice requirements shall be provided to the Oil and Gas Inspector at
least ten days prior to such hearing.



(Prior Code, § 4.03.009)  (Ord. 07-04-03, passed 4-24-2007; Ord. 09-10-17,
passed 10-13-2009)



§ 116.010  DRIVEWAY APPROACH TO STREET FROM WELL LOCATION.



   (A)   No actual drilling operations shall be commenced on any oil,
gas or salt water disposal well until the driller and/or operator constructs
a driveway approach to any city street which the driller or operator, with
the approval of the City Public Service Director, intends to use to access
said well. Such driveway approach must be constructed of concrete with a
thickness of a minimum of five inches and with rebar reinforcement of a
minimum of three-eighths inch. Such concrete approach must be a minimum of 15
feet long (beginning at the edge of the paved street) and a minimum of 30
feet wide, and built according to the specifications furnished by the
City’s Public Service Director.



   (B)   Before reworking operations are begun on any currently
existing oil, gas or salt water disposal well, such driveway approach must be
constructed by the operator of such well.



   (C)   Such driveway approach must be constructed as provided above,
even though the driller or operator of such new well may elect to use a
driveway approach already in existence, unless the existing driveway approach
was constructed according to the above specifications, and is in acceptable
condition, as determined by the City Public Service Director.



(Prior Code, § 4.03.010)  (Ord. 11-06-07, passed 6-28-2011; Ord. 12-06-07,
passed 6-12-2012)  Penalty, see § 10.99




PERMIT




§ 116.025  REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person, acting either for
himself or herself or acting as agent, employee, independent contractor or
servant of any other person, to commence to drill or to operate any well
within the city or to work upon or assist in any way in the prosecution or
operation of any such well without a permit for the drilling and operation of
such well having first been issued by the authority of the City Council in
accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 4.03.036)  (Ord. 09-10-17, passed 10-13-2009)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 116.026  APPLICATION.



   (A)   Every application for a permit to drill and operate an oil,
gas and/or salt water disposal well(s) shall be in writing, signed by the
applicant or by some person duly authorized to sign the same on his or her
behalf, and shall be filed with the City Secretary. No application shall
request a permit to drill and operate but one well.



   (B)   The application shall include full information, including the
following:



      (1)   The date of the application;



      (2)   Name of the applicant;



      (3)   Address of the applicant;



      (4)   Proposed site of the well, including:



         (a)   Name of the fee owner;



         (b)   Name of the lease owner; and



         (c)   Brief description of the land.



      (5)   Type of derrick to be used; and



      (6)   The proposed depth of the well pursuant to § 116.045.



(Prior Code, § 4.03.037)  (Ord. 09-10-17, passed 10-13-2009)



§ 116.027  FILING FEE.



   Each application for a permit required by the provisions of this
subchapter shall be accompanied by a filing fee as provided in the fee
schedule.



(Prior Code, § 4.03.038)  (Ord. 09-05-06, passed 5-12-2009; Ord. 09-10-17,
passed 10-13-2009)



§ 116.028  ISSUANCE OR REFUSAL.



   (A)   The City Council, within 20 days after the filing of the
application for a permit to drill and operate an oil, gas and/or salt water
disposal well(s), shall determine whether or not such application complies in
all respects with the provisions of this chapter, and, if it does, the City
Council shall then fix the amount of the principal of the bond and insurance
provided for in § 116.029.



      (1)   After such determination, the Council shall issue a
permit for the drilling and operation of the well applied for.



      (2)   Each permit issued shall:



         (a)   By reference have incorporated therein all the
provisions of this chapter with the same force and effect as if this chapter
were copied verbatim in said permit;



         (b)   Specify the well location with particularity to
lot number, block number, name of addition or subdivision, or other available
correct legal description;



         (c)   Contain and specify that the term of such permit
shall be for a period of one year from the date of the permit and as long
thereafter as the permittee is engaged in drilling operations with no
cessation of such operations for more than 90 days, or oil or gas is produced
in commercial quantities from the well drilled pursuant to such permit, or
salt water disposed of into a salt water disposal well at least once every 90
days, provided that, if at any time after discovery of oil or gas the
production thereof in commercial quantities shall cease, the term shall not
terminate if the permittee commences additional reworking operations within
90 days thereafter, and if they result in the production of oil or gas, so
long thereafter as oil or gas is produced in commercial quantities from such
well;



         (d)   Contain and specify such conditions as are by this
chapter authorized;



         (e)   Specify the total depth to which the well may be
drilled, not exceeding the projected depth; and



         (f)   Contain and specify that no actual operations
shall be commenced until the permittee shall file and have approved an
indemnity bond in the designated principal amount as so determined by the
City Council and conditioned as specified in § 116.029.



   (B)   Such permit, in duplicate originals, shall be signed by the
City Secretary and, prior to delivery to the permittee, shall be signed by
the permittee (with one original to be retained by the city and one by the
permittee). When so signed the permit shall constitute the permittee’s
drilling and operating license and the contractual obligation of the
permittee to comply with the terms of such permit, and such bond, and this
chapter.



   (C)   If the permit for the well shall be refused, or if the
applicant notifies the City Council in writing that he or she does not elect
to accept the permit as tendered and wishes to withdraw his or her
application or if the bond of the applicant be not approved and the applicant
notifies the City Council in writing that he or she wishes to withdraw his or
her application, the cash deposit provided for to be filed with the
application shall be returned to the applicant, except that the city shall
retain a processing fee.



(Prior Code, § 4.03.039)  (Ord. 09-10-17, passed 10-13-2009)



§ 116.029  INSURANCE AND BOND.



   (A)   In the event a permit is issued by the City Council under the
provisions of this subchapter for the drilling and operation of a well, no
actual drilling operations shall be commenced until the permittee shall file
with the City Secretary a bond and a certificate of insurance, as follows:



      (1)   A bond in the principal sum of such number of dollars as
has been so determined by the City Council, but not to be less than $50,000.
Such bond shall be a cash bond and running to the city for the benefit of the
city and all persons concerned, conditioned that the permittee will comply
with the terms and conditions of this chapter in the drilling and operation
of the well. Such bond shall become effective on or before the date the same
is filed with the City Secretary, and remain in force and effect for at least
a period of six months subsequent to the expiration of the term of the permit
issued, and, in addition, the bond will be conditioned that the permittee
will promptly pay off fines, penalties and other assessments imposed upon the
permittee by reason of his or her breach of any of the terms, provisions and
conditions of this chapter, and that the permittee will promptly restore the
streets and sidewalks and other public property of the city, which may be
disturbed or damaged in their operations, to their former condition; and that
the permittee will promptly clear all premises of all litter, trash, waste
and other substances used, allowed or occurring in the drilling or producing
operations, and will, after abandonment, grade, level and restore such
property to the same surface condition, as nearly as possible, as existed
when operations for the drilling of the well or wells were commenced; and
that the permittee will indemnify and hold the city harmless from any and all
liability growing out of or attributable to the granting of such permit. If,
at any time, the City Council shall deem any permittee’s bond to be
insufficient for any reason, it may require the permittee to replenish the
amount of cash on deposit with the city in order to restore the cash on
deposit to the amount of the original bond, or, if circumstances warrant,
increase the amount of such bond; and



      (2)   In addition to the bond required in division (A)(1)
above, the permittee shall carry a policy of standard comprehensive public
liability insurance, including contractual liability covering bodily injuries
and property damage, naming the permittee and the city, in an insurance
company authorized to do business within the state; such policy in the
aggregate shall provide for the following maximum coverages: general
liability of $2,000,000.



   (B)   The permittee shall file with the City Secretary certificates
of said insurance as above stated, and shall obtain the written approval
thereof by the City Secretary, who shall act thereon within ten days from the
date of such filing. Such insurance policy or policies shall not be cancelled
without written notice to the City Secretary at least ten days prior to the
effective date of such cancellation. In the event said insurance policy or
policies are cancelled, the permit granted shall terminate, and permittee’s
rights to operate under such permit shall cease until permittee files
additional insurance as provided herein. If, after completion of a well,
permittee has complied with all of the provisions of this chapter, such as
removing derrick, clearing premises and the like, he or she may apply to the
City Council to have such insurance policies reduced as follows:



      (1)   General liability of $1,000,000; and



      (2)   During reworking operations, the amount of the insurance
policy or policies shall be increased to the original amount.



(Prior Code, § 4.03.040)  (Ord. 11-06-07, passed 6-28-2011)



§ 116.030  TERMINATION.



   When a permit shall have been issued under the provisions of this
subchapter, the same shall terminate and become inoperative without any
action on the part of the city unless, within 90 days from the date of
issuance, actual drilling of the well shall have commenced. The cessation for
a like period of the drilling operations, or the cessation of the production
of oil and gas from the well after production shall have commenced, or
disposal of salt water in a salt water disposal well after such injection
shall have likewise commenced, shall operate to terminate and cancel the
permit, and the well shall be considered as abandoned for all purposes of
this chapter. It shall be unlawful thereafter to continue the operation or
drilling of such well without the issuance of another permit.



(Prior Code, § 4.03.041)  (Ord. 09-10-17, passed 10-13-2009)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 116.031  ANNUAL USAGE FEE.



   Each driller and/or operator of an oil, gas and or salt water disposal
well(s) that uses one or more city streets to access such well(s) in any way,
his or her successors and assigns, shall pay an annual fee as provided for in
§ 35.40 or each such well, measured from the well or well site along the
city street to the state or county maintained highway or road over which
vehicles servicing that particular well primarily travel, for each oil, gas
and/or salt water disposal well within the city. Such street footage on which
said fee shall be assessed shall be the measurement from the center of the
roadway entrance to the well site to the nearest paved edge of said state or
county maintained highway or road. This fee shall be assessed against the
driller and/or operator, his or her successors and assigns, as to each oil,
gas and/or salt water disposal well(s) that has not been plugged and
abandoned, whether or not it has already been drilled, is in the process of
being drilled, or might be the subject of a future application for permit to
drill such a well, unless vehicles accessing such well or well site do not
obtain access to such well or well site by traveling at anytime on city
streets, alleys or other city owned passageways, in obtaining such access.
Said fee shall be assessed annually, beginning with the commencement of
operations to drill and operate such well and terminating when the well is
determined to be dry hole and abandoned or production has ceased and such
well is plugged and abandoned. Such fee shall be assessed against the driller
or operator of the well, his or her successors and assigns, by the tax
assessor collector of the city on each oil, gas and/or salt water disposal
well(s) referenced herein annually, on January 1 and be due and payable on or
before March 1 of that same year. Any fees not paid by said due date shall
bear the same interest and penalties as are provided for ad valorem taxes on
mineral interests and shall be subject to the same liens on property of the
permittee, its successors and assigns, and collection procedures as provided
for such ad valorem taxes in the Tax Code of the state. The payment of this
fee will in no manner relieve the driller or operator, his or her successors
or assigns, of any responsibility or liability for any and all damages to the
streets, curbs, gutters, water lines, fire hydrants and other city property
occasioned in any manner by the driller and/or operator, his or her successor
or assigns, in the drilling, operation or abandonment of each such well.



(Prior Code, § 4.03.042)  (Ord. 09-05-06, passed 5-12-2009; Ord. 09-10-17,
passed 10-13-2009; Ord. 12-06-07, passed 6-12-2012)




DRILLING REGULATIONS




§ 116.045  MAXIMUM DEPTH.



   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to drill an oil, gas
and/or salt water disposal well(s) within the city limits to a true vertical
depth in excess of 12,000 feet, and no drilling and operating permit shall be
granted for any well to a true vertical depth in excess of 12,000 feet.



(Prior Code, § 4.03.061)  (Ord. 09-10-17, passed 10-13-2009)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 116.046  PERMIT FOR DEEPER DRILLING.



   (A)   Once any oil, gas and/or salt water disposal well(s) has
either been completed as a producer or abandoned as a dry hole, it shall be
unlawful and an offense for any person to drill such well to a deeper depth
than that reached in the prior drilling operations without the permittee, as
to such well, obtaining a supplemental permit after filing a supplemental
application with the City Secretary, specifying:



      (1)   The then condition of the well and the casing therein;



      (2)   The depth to which it is proposed such well be deepened,
not to exceed in any event a total true vertical depth from the surface in
excess of 12,000 feet;



      (3)   The proposed casing program to be used in connection
with proposed deepening operations; and



      (4)   Evidence of adequate current tests showing that the
casing strings in such well currently pass the same tests as are in this
chapter provided for in the case of drilling the original well.



   (B)   In the event the City Council is satisfied that the well may
be deepened with the same degree of safety as existed in the original well, a
supplemental permit may be issued without an additional filing fee to the
permittee authorizing the deepening and operation of the well to such
specified depth as applied for, not exceeding in any event a total true
vertical depth from the surface in excess of 12,000 feet. In any deeper
drilling or any deeper completion or any deeper production operations, the
permittee shall comply with all other provisions contained in this chapter
and applicable to the drilling, completion and operation of a well or wells.



(Prior Code, § 4.03.062)  (Ord. 09-10-17, passed 10-13-2009)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 116.047  DERRICK AND RIG.



   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to use or operate,
in connection with the drilling or reworking of any oil, gas and/or salt
water disposal well(s) within the city limits, any wooden derrick or any
steam-powered rig, and all engines shall be equipped with adequate mufflers
approved by the Oil and Gas Inspector; or to permit any drilling rig or
derrick to remain on the premises or drilling site for a period longer than
60 days after completion or abandonment of the well. At all times from start
of erection of a derrick, or a mast, or a gin-pole, until the well is
abandoned and plugged or completed as a producer and enclosed with a fence as
herein provided, the permittee shall keep a watchman on duty on the premises
at all times; provided, however, it shall not be necessary to keep an extra
watchman on duty on the premises when other workmen of the permittee are on
the premises.



(Prior Code, § 4.03.063)  (Ord. 09-10-17, passed 10-13-2009)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 116.048  PITS.



   Either earthen or steel slush pits shall be permitted in connection
with the drilling operation. In the event a steel pit is used, such pit and
its contents shall be removed from the premises and the drilling site within
30 days after completion of the well. In the event an earthen slush pit is
used, all mud shall be removed, and the pit shall be filled and leveled
within 30 days after completion of the well. No drilling mud or chemicals
shall be turned into any storm sewer or sanitary sewer.



(Prior Code, § 4.03.064)  (Ord. 09-10-17, passed 10-13-2009)



§ 116.049  CASING.



   (A)   All casing, including surface protection and production
strings, shall be either seamless steel or equivalent quality oil well
casing. No lap weld casing will be permitted. Each production string of
casing must comply with at least the following minimum internal pressure
yield strength, computed in accordance with the A.P.I. standards:



 


Depth of String in Feet

 


 

Internal Pressure Rating (psi)





 
 

7” Casing:

 




0’ to 3,400’
 


 

2,720 pounds



3,400’ to 4,400’
 


 

3,740 pounds



4,400’ to 5,850’
 


 

4,360 pounds



5,850’ to 7,650’
 


 

6,340 pounds



7,650’ to 9,450’
 


 

7,240 pounds



9,450’ to 11,300’
 


 

8,160 pounds



 
 

5-1/2” Casing:

 




0’ to 4,400’
 


 

3,110 pounds



4,400’ to 5,600’
 


 

4,270 pounds



5,600’ to 6,900’
 


 

4,810 pounds



6,900’ to 8,000’
 


 

5,320 pounds



8,000’ to 10,005’
 


 

7,740 pounds





 



   (B)   Each joint and length of each particular casing string shall
have, prior to setting, unconditionally passed a complete cold water test.



(Prior Code, § 4.03.065)  (Ord. 09-10-17, passed 10-13-2009)



§ 116.050  SETTING AND CEMENTING CASING.



   No well shall be drilled within the city limits without properly
setting ten-inch surface casing to a minimum depth of 1,000 feet. No well
shall be drilled within the city without cementing the surface casing by the
pump and plug method with sufficient cement to completely fill all of the
annular space behind such casing to the surface of the ground; and without
cementing the production string by the pump and plug method with sufficient
cement to completely fill all the annular space behind the production string
to at least 600 feet above the highest oil and/or gas bearing horizon; and in
the event a protection string of casing be required under the terms of this
chapter, without cementing the protection string by the pump and plug method
with sufficient cement to completely fill all the annular space behind the
protection string to at least 600 feet above the highest oil and/or gas
bearing horizon.



(Prior Code, § 4.03.066)  (Ord. 09-10-17, passed 10-13-2009)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 116.051  VALVES AND BLOWOUT PREVENTERS.



   No well shall be drilled within the city limits without properly
equipping the surface casing when set with at least one master valve, and
without properly equipping the protection casing when set with at least one
master valve and one manual or fluid-operated ram type blowout preventer; and
without properly equipping the production casing during completion operations
and workover operations with at least one master valve and at least one
manual or fluid-operated ram type blowout preventer. On each well drilled, a
valve cock or kelly cock shall be installed on the kelly used. Each blowout
preventer shall test 6,000 pounds and its mechanical operation shall be
tested at least once every eight-hour period, and all control equipment shall
be in good working condition and order at all times.



(Prior Code, § 4.03.067)  (Ord. 09-10-17, passed 10-13-2009)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 116.052  DRILLING FLUID.



   No well shall be drilled within the city limits without using mud as
the drilling fluid after the setting of surface casing as provided in §
116.050. Prior to the time the well reaches a total depth of 5,000 feet or
the depth of the first known or encountered oil or gas bearing horizon,
whichever is the lesser depth, the weight of the mud-laden drilling fluid
shall be at all times maintained at not less than ten pounds per gallon.
After the well reaches a total depth of 5,000 feet or the depth of the first
known or encountered oil or gas bearing horizon, whichever is the lesser
depth, the weight of the mud-laden drilling fluid shall be at all times
maintained at such weight as will provide a hydrostatic head of not less than
500 pounds per square inch in excess of the formation pressure. In reworking
a well, a drilling fluid shall be at all times maintained at such weight as
will provide a hydrostatic head of not less than 500 pounds per square inch
in excess of the formation pressure.



(Prior Code, § 4.03.068)  (Ord. 09-10-17, passed 10-13-2009)



§ 116.053  DRILL STEM TESTS.



   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person, in connection with
the drilling or reworking operations of any well within the city limits, to
take and to complete any drill test or tests, except during daylight hours,
and then only if the well effluent during the test is produced through an
adequate oil and gas separator to storage tanks, and the effluent remaining
in the drill pipe at the time the tool is closed is flushed to the surface by
circulating drilling fluid down the annulus and up the drill pipe.



(Prior Code, § 4.03.069)  (Ord. 09-10-17, passed 10-13-2009)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 116.054  TUBING.



   All tubing used in any oil, gas and/or salt water disposal well(s)
within the city limits shall be seamless steel tubing having not less than a
minimum internal pressure yield strength of 5,280 pounds per square inch if
used in connection with a well completion at a depth not exceeding 7,000
feet, or less than a minimum internal pressure yield strength of 7,260 pounds
per square inch if used in connection with a well completion at a depth in
excess of 7,000 feet.



(Prior Code, § 4.03.070)  (Ord. 09-10-17, passed 10-13-2009)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 116.055  BRADENHEAD.



   Each well drilled within the city limits shall be equipped with a
bradenhead with a working pressure of not less than 3,000 pounds per square
inch. Bradenheads shall not be welded. The bradenhead installed on the
surface casing shall be set above ground level and shall be equipped with a
fitting having a working pressure rating of not less than 3,000 pounds per
square inch. The bradenhead pressure shall be checked at least once each
calendar month and, if pressure is found to exist, proper remedial measures
shall be taken immediately to eliminate the source and the existence of the
pressure.



(Prior Code, § 4.03.071)  (Ord. 09-10-17, passed 10-13-2009)



§ 116.056  CHRISTMAS TREE AND WELLHEAD CONNECTIONS.



   (A)   The Christmas tree and all wellhead connections on each well
drilled within the city limits shall be as follows.



      (1)   On all flowing wells completed at a depth of above 4,000
feet, the Christmas tree and wellhead connections shall have at least a
minimum working pressure of 2,000 pounds per square inch and a minimum test
pressure of at least 4,000 pounds per square inch.



      (2)   On all wells completed to a depth of from 4,001 to 7,000
feet, the Christmas tree and wellhead connections shall have at least a
minimum working pressure of 3,000 pounds per square inch and a minimum test
pressure of at least 6,000 pounds per square inch.



      (3)   On all wells completed below a depth of 7,000 feet, the
Christmas tree and wellhead connections shall be at least a minimum working
pressure of 5,000 pounds per square inch and a minimum test pressure of at
least 10,000 pounds per square inch.



   (B)   All piping and fittings connecting the wellhead to an oil and
gas separator shall have at least the same minimum working pressure and
minimum test pressure as herein above specified for Christmas tree and
wellhead connections.



   (C)   In the event the surface shut-in pressure of any well in the
city limits exceeds 2,000 pounds per square inch, the flowing of the
Christmas tree shall be equipped with an automatic closing safety valve in
addition to the regular control valves.



(Prior Code, § 4.03.072)  (Ord. 09-10-17, passed 10-13-2009)



§ 116.057  MUFFLERS REQUIRED.



   Motive power for all operations after completion of drilling operations
shall be electricity or properly muffled gas, gasoline or diesel engines;
such mufflers to be approved by the Oil and Gas Inspector prior to their use.



(Prior Code, § 4.03.073)  (Ord. 09-10-17, passed 10-13-2009)



§ 116.058  STORAGE TANKS AND SEPARATORS.



   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to use, construct or
operate in connection with any producing well within the city limits any
storage tanks, except to the extent of two steel tanks not exceeding 500
barrels’ capacity each, and so constructed and maintained as to be
vapor-tight with connecting overflow, and each surrounded separately with an
earthen firewall at such distance and at such height as will, under any
circumstances, hold and retain at least one and one-half times the maximum
capacity of each tank. Separators shall be of high test of the minimum of
6,000 pounds and shall be equipped with both a regulation pressure relief
safety valve and a bursting head.



(Prior Code, § 4.03.074)  (Ord. 09-10-17, passed 10-13-2009)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 116.059  VENTING AND FLARING OF GAS.



   No person engaged in drilling or operating any well shall permit gas to
escape or be vented in the air unless such gas is flared and burned. All gas
flared or burned from a torch, pipe or any other burning device within the
city limits must be done in such manner so as not to constitute a fire hazard
to any property; and the location of the torch, pipe or any other burning
device, the construction thereof, the maintenance thereof, and the operation
thereof, shall at all times be in full compliance with such regulations as
may, from time to time, be issued by the Oil and Gas Inspector.



(Prior Code, § 4.03.075)  (Ord. 09-10-17, passed 10-13-2009)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 116.060  ABANDONMENT AND PLUGGING.



   Whenever any well is abandoned, it shall be the obligation of the
permittee and the operator of the well to set a 200-foot cement plug in the
bottom of the surface casing with the bottom of the plug 100 feet below the
surface casing section, and the top of the plug 100 feet above the surface
casing section; and to set a 50-foot cement plug in the top of the surface
casing. No surface or conductor string of casing may be pulled or removed
from a well. During initial abandonment operations, it will be the obligation
of the permittee and the operator of the well to flood the well with
mud-laden fluid weighing not less than ten pounds per gallon, and the well
will be kept filled to the top with mud-laden fluid at all times; mud-laden
fluid of the above specifications will be left in the well bore below and
between cement plugs. Any additional provisions or precautionary measures
prescribed by the state or the state railroad commission in connection with
the abandonment and plugging of a well shall be complied with by the
permittee.



(Prior Code, § 4.03.076)  (Ord. 09-10-17, passed 10-13-2009)



§ 116.061  DISPOSAL OF SALT WATER.



   The permittee shall make adequate provisions for the disposal of all
salt water or other impurities which he or she may bring to the surface, and
such disposal to be made in such manner as to not contaminate the water
supply, present or prospective, or to injure surface vegetation.



(Prior Code, § 4.03.077)  (Ord. 09-10-17, passed 10-13-2009)




POLLUTION CONTROL




§ 116.075  DEFINITION.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, the phrase THE WATERSHED or SOURCE
OF WATER SUPPLY OF THE CITY is defined to be all areas of the freshwater
sands commonly known as the Carrizo Sand and Wilcox Sand from or through
which water flows or percolates to the wells maintained and operated by the
city as the source of its water supply within the city limits and within
5,000 feet of the city limits.



(Prior Code, § 4.03.101)  (Ord. 09-10-17, passed 10-13-2009)



§ 116.076  APPLICATION OF SUBCHAPTER PROVISIONS.



   All wells or holes of any type or size drilled through the impervious
stratum beneath the Wilcox Sand within the city limits shall conform to the
terms of this subchapter except that the City Council may, in its discretion,
waive all or any part of the permit fee and bond and insurance requirements
of this subchapter insofar as applicable to wells or holes drilled solely for
exploration purposes and not suitable for production of oil, gas or other
minerals.



(Prior Code, § 4.03.102)  (Ord. 09-10-17, passed 10-13-2009)



§ 116.077  APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS WITHIN 5,000 FEET OF CITY LIMITS.



   As to all wells or holes to which this subchapter is applicable,
located within 5,000 feet outside of the city limits, the driller or person
responsible for such operation shall give written notice of the location and
proposed depth of such well or hole to the Oil and Gas Inspector.



(Prior Code, § 4.03.103)  (Ord. 09-10-17, passed 10-13-2009)



§ 116.078  PREREQUISITES WHEN WELL IS WITHIN 5,000 FEET OF CITY LIMITS.



   Before any oil, gas and/or salt water disposal well(s) or hole to which
this chapter may be applicable is commenced outside of, but within, 5,000
feet of the city limits, the driller or person responsible for such operation
shall furnish the Oil and Gas Inspector with complete, full and accurate
information as to the location and proposed depth of such well or hole and
shall pay to the city a fee as provided in § 35.40 to defray its expenses in
connection with the inspection of such operations to determine their
compliance herewith and that all laws and regulations for the protection of
the city’s water supply are properly observed.



(Prior Code, § 4.03.104)  (Ord. 09-10-17, passed 10-13-2009)



§ 116.079  INSPECTOR’S RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   The Oil and Gas Inspector shall have the right to inspect all drilling,
digging or excavating operations to which this chapter may be applicable as
frequently and to such extent as may be necessary to ensure full compliance
with the terms of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 4.03.105)  (Ord. 09-10-17, passed 10-13-2009)



§ 116.080  POLLUTION PROHIBITED.



   All operations under the provisions of this chapter shall be conducted
in such a manner as to assure that there will be no interference with or
pollution of any of the sands or strata from which the water supply of the
city or of any individual or corporation in the city is produced. The
pollution of the watershed or source of water supply of the city shall be a
violation of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 4.03.106)  (Ord. 09-10-17, passed 10-13-2009)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 116.081  SETTING OF SURFACE CASING.



   It shall be unlawful to drill, dig or excavate any well or hole of any
size or type penetrating the first impervious stratum below the Wilcox Sand
at any location within the watershed or source of water supply of the city
unless surface casing shall be set into the first impervious stratum or shale
body immediately below the lowest freshwater producing sands and cemented
with sufficient cement to fill the annular space back of the casing to the
surface. This is to mean that if it is necessary to set additional casing in
excess of the 1,000 feet provided for in § 116.050 to protect the water
producing sands, said casing shall be set to required depth according to the
rules of the State Railroad Commission and/or the State Board of Water
Engineers. Such surface casing shall be set into the impervious stratum as
shown by electric log, copy of which shall be furnished to the Oil and Gas
Inspector after the setting of such casing, and such casing shall be set at a
point within such impervious stratum, approved by the Inspector. Cementing
shall be by pump and plug method, Halliburton method or equal. Cement shall
be allowed to stand a minimum of 24 hours under pressure and a total of 48
hours before drilling the plug or commencing deeper operations. All casing
used hereunder shall be of standard type and weight, approved by the
Inspector and such casing must be in such condition as is acceptable to the
Inspector.



(Prior Code, § 4.03.107)  (Ord. 09-10-17, passed 10-13-2009)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 116.082  NOTICE, PROCEDURE UPON DRILLING TO WILCOX SAND.



   When any oil, gas and/or salt water disposal well(s) or hole being
drilled within the watershed or source of water supply of the city reaches
the impervious stratum below the Wilcox Sand, immediate notice of the
reaching of such stratum shall be given to the Oil and Gas Inspector, and an
electric log of the well or hole to the bottom of such impervious stratum
shall be given to the Inspector. No further drilling operations shall be
conducted until the casing required under this chapter has been set and
cemented as required herein, and a copy of the report or certificate of the
cementing company has been furnished to the Inspector.



(Prior Code, § 4.03.108)  (Ord. 09-10-17, passed 10-13-2009)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 116.083  NONCONFORMING WELLS DECLARED NUISANCE.



   All oil, gas and/or salt water disposal well(s) or holes, and the
drilling, digging and excavating thereof below the impervious stratum below
the Wilcox Sand, which is the lowest known freshwater-producing sand used by
the city, without the setting and cementing of casing as required herein, are
hereby individually and severally declared to be a nuisance, and future
operations thereon may be enjoined on application of the city by any court
having jurisdiction over such cases. The application of any penal provision
for the violation of this chapter shall not preclude the enforcement hereof
by injunction.



(Prior Code, § 4.03.109)  (Ord. 09-10-17, passed 10-13-2009)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



CHAPTER 117:  SOLICITORS



Section




General Provisions




   117.01   Purpose



   117.02   Definitions



   117.03   Solicitation by minors



   117.04   Restrictions on activity



   117.05   Solicitation from vehicle




Registration




   117.20   Required



   117.21   Application



   117.22   Bond



   117.23   Application review and acceptance



   117.24   Issuance of certificate and identification badge



   117.25   Revocation or suspension



   117.26   Appeal of denial, revocation or suspension



 



   117.99   Penalty



Statutory reference:



   Authority of municipality to license, tax, suppress, prevent or
otherwise regulate peddlers, hawkers and pawnbrokers, see Tex. Local Gov’t
Code, § 215.031




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 117.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to:



   (A)   Protect the citizens against deceptive practices and fraud;



   (B)   Minimize the unwelcome disturbance of citizens and the
disruption of citizens’ privacy; and



   (C)   Preserve the public health, safety and general welfare by
registering and regulating solicitors.



(Prior Code, § 4.07.001)



§ 117.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CITY OFFICIAL.  The city official designated to issue registration
certificates and enforce this chapter.



   HANDBILL. Any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger,
circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise
reproduced original or copies of any matter.



   INTERSTATE COMMERCE.  Soliciting, selling or taking orders for or
offering to take orders for any goods, wares or merchandise, or acting in any
function as a solicitor, which, at the time the order is taken, are in or
will be produced in any federal district or territory, any commonwealth or
any state other than this state and shipped or introduced into this city in
the fulfillment of such orders.



   MINOR.  A person under the age of 18.



   NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION. An organization or entity that is exempt from
the payment of tax pursuant to I.R.C. § 501(c)(3).



   POLICE CHIEF.  The Police Chief or the Police Chief’s designated
representative.



   SELLING.  To sell, dispense, peddle, hawk, display, offer to sell or
solicit for sale by offering or exposing for sale any goods, wares,
merchandise or services.



   SOLICITATION ACTIVITIES.  Traveling either by foot or vehicle, going
door to door, house to house or building to building personally contacting
persons to ask, barter or communicate in any manner, whether orally, by
written or printed materials, including but not limited to handbills or
leaflets, hand signing or by any other method, direct or implied, for the
purpose of selling or taking orders for goods, wares, merchandise or services
or collecting money for any purpose. The term does not include:



      (1)   The activity of a salesperson with an appointment
calling upon or dealing with manufacturers, wholesalers, distributors,
brokers or retailers at their places of business or homes and in the usual
course of business;



      (2)   The activity of a person acting on behalf of an
organization that is only directed at the members of the organization; or



      (3)   The activity of a person collecting money or soliciting
funds only from foundations.



   SOLICITOR.  A person who engages in solicitation activities.



(Prior Code, § 4.07.002)



§ 117.03  SOLICITATION BY MINORS.



   (A)   A minor who conducts solicitation activities shall be
sponsored or employed by a person over the age of 18, a corporation, firm or
organization. The person, corporation, firm or organization that is
sponsoring or employing the minor is responsible for controlling the conduct
of the minor, and the minor shall be under the constant supervisor of a
person 18 years of age or older.



   (B)   A person, corporation, firm or organization that sponsors or
employs one or more minors as solicitors may submit one application and pay
one nonrefundable application fee for the registration of the minors,
regardless of the number of minors who conduct solicitation activities. The
sponsor or employer shall provide the city official the names, dates of
birth, addresses and driver’s license numbers, if applicable, and a
notarized parental consent for each minor who will be conducting solicitation
activities. The parental consent form, which shall be provided by the city
official, shall acknowledge the release of the information set forth above,
and shall state that the city is authorized to photograph the minor child.



   (C)   An exception to divisions (A) and (B) above shall be any minor
soliciting under the supervision of a school, church or any other 501(c)3
qualified organization.



(Prior Code, § 4.07.004)



§ 117.04  RESTRICTIONS ON ACTIVITY.



   (A)   A person commits an offense if the person engages in
solicitation activity at a residence before 8:30 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m.



   (B)   A person commits an offense if the person engages in
solicitation activity at a premises with a posted notice that such activity
is not welcomed or invited. It shall be presumed that there is notice that
solicitation activity is not welcomed or invited when there is exhibited in a
conspicuous place, on or near the main entrance of the premises, a sign, not
less than four inches by three inches in size, containing the words “no
solicitors”, “no trespassing” or words of similar meaning in letters
not less than two-thirds of one inch in height.



   (C)   A person, who is not the owner or tenant of a residence,
commits an offense if the person removes, defaces or otherwise renders
illegible a sign placed by the owner or tenant of the residence pursuant to
division (B) above.



   (D)   A person commits an offense if the person engages in
solicitation activities and remains or lingers on a premises after being
informed by the owner or tenant that he or she is not welcome.



   (E)   A person commits an offense if the person engages in
solicitation activities in an aggressive or intimidating manner. The term
AGGRESSIVE OR INTIMIDATING MANNER means:



      (1)   Blocking the path of a person who is the object of the
activity; or



      (2)   Following behind, ahead or alongside a person who walks
away from the solicitor after being solicited, approached, accosted or
offered a handbill, leaflet or any other item.



   (F)   A person commits an offense if the person solicits edible
merchandise without keeping all articles for sale to the public as well as
the wagons, vehicles or other conveyances used in the transportation of such
merchandise in a clean and sanitary condition.



   (G)   A person commits an offense if that person sells or offers to
sell any unsound or unwholesome merchandise or give a false weight or measure
to such offered for sale.



(Prior Code, § 4.07.005)



§ 117.05  SOLICITATION FROM VEHICLE.



   (A)   A person commits an offense if the person conducts
solicitation activities from a vehicle and:



      (1)   The solicitation is conducted at a location within the
right-of-way of any street or highway in the city which is designated as an
arterial or collector on the city’s thoroughfare plan; or



      (2)   The person stops the vehicle within a roadway to conduct
business before the vehicle has been approached, called or waved down by a
prospective customer.



   (B)   A person commits an offense if the person operates a vehicle
from which solicitation activities are conducted upon any street or highway
within the city in a manner that blocks or impedes access to or from any
alley, street or driveway or impedes the flow of traffic on any public street
or highway.



(Prior Code, § 4.07.006)  Penalty, see § 117.99




REGISTRATION




§ 117.20  REQUIRED.



   (A)   A person commits an offense if the person engages in
solicitation activities in the city without first registering with the city
official and obtaining a registration certificate and city-issued
identification badge from the city.



   (B)   A registration certificate shall be valid for one year
following the date of its issuance, unless a shorter period is requested by
the applicant.



   (C)   An applicant for a registration certificate shall pay a
nonrefundable application fee at the time the application is submitted and,
if required, shall submit a bond.



   (D)   The amount of the nonrefundable application fee shall be as
established by the City Council and on file in the City Secretary’s office.
The nonrefundable application fee shall be used for the purpose of defraying
administrative expenses incident to the issuing of registration certificates
and identification badges.



   (E)   A nonprofit organization, a person conducting solicitation
activity on behalf of a nonprofit organization or a person engaged in
interstate commerce is exempt from payment of the application fee.



(Prior Code, § 4.07.031)  Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.21  APPLICATION.



   (A)   A person desiring to conduct solicitation activities within
the city shall make a written application on a form provided by the city
official for a registration certificate.



   (B)   The application shall contain or be submitted with the
following information:



      (1)   The full name, date of birth, phone number and address
of the applicant;



      (2)   A valid state driver’s license number or a
state-approved identification card number of the applicant (the city will
make a photocopy and attach it to the application);



      (3)   If a vehicle is used to conduct the solicitation
activity, a description of each vehicle, its license plate number and vehicle
identification number, and the name and license number of the driver who will
operate each vehicle;



      (4)   Copies of all such licenses and permits which, under
federal, state or local laws or regulations, the applicant is required to
have in order to conduct the proposed solicitation;



      (5)   If the applicant is acting as an employee, agent or
volunteer, the name and physical street address (not a post office box) and
telephone number of the employer, principal or organization, with credentials
in written form establishing the relationship and authority of the employee,
agent or volunteer to act for the employer, principal or organization;



      (6)   If applicable, the merchandise to be sold or offered for
sale or the nature of the services to be furnished;



      (7)   The approximate time period within which the
solicitation is to be made, stating the date of the beginning of the
solicitation activity, its projected conclusion and the proposed dates and
times of solicitation;



      (8)   Whether the applicant, upon any order obtained, will
demand, accept or receive payment or the deposit of money in advance of final
delivery and, if so, a copy of the bond required by § 117.22;



      (9)   If the applicant, the applicant’s employer or
principal or minor solicitor who is 17 years of age or older has plead
guilty, or nolo contendere to, or has been convicted of a felony or
misdemeanor involving fraud, deceit, misrepresentation, within five years
preceding the date of application, a description of each such conviction or
plea and the date of the offense;



      (10)   If the solicitation activity is to be conducted on
behalf of a nonprofit organization, proof of such status shall be attached to
the application; and



      (11)   If the applicant is an entity or organization that
sponsors or employs minors as solicitors and is submitting one application
for those minors, the information set forth in § 117.03(B).



(Prior Code, § 4.07.032)  Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.22  BOND.



   (A)   Solicitors who require cash deposits or advance payments for
future delivery of goods or for services to be performed in the future or who
require an agreement to finance the sale of goods for future delivery or for
services to be performed in the future shall furnish to the city a bond with
the application in the amount determined in division (C) below, signed by the
applicant and a surety company authorized to do business in the state:



      (1)   Conditioned upon the final delivery of goods or services
in accordance with the terms of any order obtained;



      (2)   To indemnify purchasers for defects in material or
workmanship that may exist in the goods sold and that are discovered within
30 days after delivery; and



      (3)   For the use and benefit of persons, firms or
corporations that may make a purchase or give an order to the principal of
the bond or to the agent or employee of the principal of the bond.



   (B)   If a person, firm or corporation is engaging in solicitation
activities through one or more agents, employees or volunteers, only one bond
is required for the activities of all the agents, employees or volunteers.



   (C)   The amount of the bond is determined by the number of
solicitors as follows:



 


(1)

 
1 to 3 solicitors
 

$500




(2)

 
4 to 6 solicitors
 

$750




(3)

 
7 or more solicitors
 

$1,000




 



(Prior Code, § 4.07.033)



§ 117.23  APPLICATION REVIEW AND ACCEPTANCE.



   (A)   Upon receipt of an application, the city official shall review
the application to ensure compliance with this chapter.



   (B)   The city official shall authorize the registration within 30
days of receipt of the application unless:



      (1)   An investigation reveals that the applicant or the
applicant’s employer, principal or organization falsified information on
the application;



      (2)   Within five years preceding the date of application, the
applicant or the applicant’s employer, principal or organization has plead
guilty or nolo contendere to, or has been convicted of, a felony or
misdemeanor involving fraud, deceit or misrepresentation;



      (3)   A judgment based upon fraud, deceit or misrepresentation
has been entered against the applicant or the applicant’s employer,
principal or organization within five years preceding the date of application;



      (4)   The applicant provided no proof of authority to act on
behalf of the employer, principal or organization;



      (5)   The type of solicitation activity requires a bond, and
the applicant or the applicant’s employer, principal or organization has
not complied with the bond requirements; or



      (6)   The application does not contain the information or
documents required by § 117.21.



   (C)   The denial and the reasons for the denial shall be noted on
the application, and the applicant shall be notified of the denial by notice
mailed to the applicant and the applicant’s employer, principal or
organization at the address shown on the application or the last known
address. The notice of denial shall be mailed within 30 days of the receipt
of the application.



(Prior Code, § 4.07.034)



§ 117.24  ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE AND IDENTIFICATION BADGE.



   (A)   Upon authorization of the registration, the city official
shall deliver a registration certificate and identification badge for each
solicitor, and shall forward a copy of the certificate to the Police Chief.



   (B)   The registration certificate shall show:



      (1)   The name and address of the solicitor;



      (2)   The solicitor’s employer, principal or organization,
if applicable;



      (3)   The kind of goods or services to be sold or offered for
sale, if applicable;



      (4)   A description and license plate number of any vehicle to
be used in carrying out the solicitation activities, if applicable;



      (5)   A registration number; and



      (6)   The dates of issuance and expiration of the certificate.



   (C)   The original or a copy of the registration certificate must be
carried by a solicitor while engaged in solicitation activities.



   (D)   The identification badge issued by the city shall be worn by a
solicitor while engaging in solicitation activities so that it may be easily
read by those being solicited. Lost or damaged badges may be replaced for a
nonrefundable fee per badge.



   (E)   A registration certificate and an identification badge shall
be used only by the solicitor to whom they were issued and may not be
transferred to another person.



(Prior Code, § 4.07.035)



§ 117.25  REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.



   A registration certificate issued pursuant to this subchapter may be
revoked or suspended by the city official, after notice and hearing, for any
of the following reasons:



   (A)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for registration;



   (B)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made by a
solicitor in the course of conducting solicitation activities;



   (C)   Plea or conviction of a crime described in § 117.23(B)(2);



   (D)   A judgment involving a matter described in § 117.23(B)(3); or



   (E)   A violation of the regulations described in § 117.04.



(Prior Code, § 4.07.036)



§ 117.26  APPEAL OF DENIAL, REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.



   (A)   A person who is denied a registration certificate or whose
registration is revoked or suspended by the city official may appeal the
decision to the City Council by filing notice of appeal with the city
official within 15 days after the notice of the decision is mailed to the
address indicated on the application or the last known address.



   (B)   Within ten days of the receipt of the notice of appeal, the
city official shall set a time and place for a hearing on the appeal which
shall be not later than 40 days from the date of receipt of the notice of
appeal.



   (C)   Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be delivered
to the person by mail, sent to the address indicated on the application or
the last known address of the appellant.



   (D)   The decision of the City Council on the appeal is final. No
other administrative procedures are provided by the city.



(Prior Code, § 4.07.037)



§ 117.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects
or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be fined as provided in § 10.99. Each day a
solicitor engages in solicitation activities without having obtained a
registration certificate or in which a continuing violation occurs shall be a
separate offense.



(Prior Code, § 4.07.003)



CHAPTER 118:  PRECIOUS METAL AND GEM DEALERS



Section



   118.01   Definitions



   118.02   Permit required



   118.03   Permit issuance



   118.04   Bond required



   118.05   Permit not transferable



   118.06   Records of purchases



   118.07   Holding period required



   118.08   Purchases at temporary locations



§ 118.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUSINESS.  An activity carried on by any person who buys from or
trades with the public for used jewelry, money, silverware or precious metal,
as defined in this section, for profit. The term BUSINESS shall not include
occasional purchases, sales or trades made by a hobbyist, nor shall it
include activities regulated by the Texas Pawnshop Act (Tex. Finance Code,
Ch. 371). Further, the term BUSINESS shall not include either banks or
dealers in gold or silver bullion, including minted bullion.



   DEALER.  Any person who buys or trades for used jewelry, money,
silverware or precious metal in the course of business.



   MONEY.  Money which has numismatic value.



   PERMITTEE.  A dealer who has been issued a permit hereunder.



   PRECIOUS GEMS.  Includes, but is not limited to, such gems as
diamonds, sapphires, rubies, emeralds and pearls.



   PRECIOUS METAL.  Gold, silver or platinum.



   SEMIPRECIOUS GEMS.  Includes, but is not limited to, such gems as
jade, tanzanite, tsavorite garnets and aquamarines.



   SILVERWARE.  Silver or silver-plated flatware, trays, goblets, dishes
or serving pieces.



   TEMPORARY LOCATION.  Any place or premises which has not been hired,
rented or leased for at least 30 days, in, upon and from which business is
conducted.



   USED JEWELRY.  Previously owned articles made from precious metals or
precious or semiprecious gems, or any combination thereof, and includes such
personal ornaments as watches, earrings, rings, pendants, chains, fobs,
broaches and necklaces.



(Prior Code, § 4.05.001)



Statutory reference:



   Sale of crafted precious metal to dealers, see Tex. Occupations Code,
§§ 1956.051 et seq.



§ 118.02  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   Any dealer who engages in the business of buying or trading
for used jewelry, money, silverware or precious metal shall possess a valid
permit issued in accordance with this chapter before engaging in such
business within the city. A dealer doing business at more than one location
within the city shall obtain a permit for each location. Additional permits
shall be issued with charge.



   (B)   Any person desiring such a permit shall make application in
writing to the Chief of Police on a form provided for that purpose. Such form
shall be sufficient if it includes the following information:



      (1)   Name, date of birth, address and business telephone
number of applicant and all employees;



      (2)   Business address of applicant;



      (3)   Normal business hours during which business will be
conducted;



      (4)   Location or locations where business will be conducted;



      (5)   Whether or not the applicant, or any co-principal or
employee has been found guilty of any criminal offense as defined in Tex.
Penal Code, Title 7, or its equivalent in another state, by any court of
competent jurisdiction and, if so, the place where convicted and the penalty
imposed;



      (6)   Whether or not the applicant has been or is currently a
party to any civil litigation arising out of sales or purchases of any goods
or services and, if so, the identity of other parties to the suit, the
location of the suit, and the status or outcome of the suit;



      (7)   Whether the applicant has ever before engaged in
business under an assumed name and, if so, the name assumed by such business;
and



      (8)   The place within the city where the jewelry, money,
silverware, precious metal or semiprecious gems are to be stored in
accordance with § 118.07.



   (C)   Any permittee who employs any person to engage in business and
whose name does not appear on such permittee’s current application on file
with the Police Department shall, within three business days of such
employment, amend such application in writing to reflect the addition of such
employee.



   (D)   In the event the permittee desires to operate outside of the
normal business hours specified in the permit, he or she shall notify the
Chief of Police in writing in advance of such operation.



   (E)   It shall be unlawful to knowingly give false information on an
application.



(Prior Code, § 4.05.002)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 118.03  PERMIT ISSUANCE.



   (A)   Upon receipt of the application, the Chief of Police shall
issue a permit upon the payment of a fee which is on file in the City
Secretary’s office. No permit shall be issued to any applicant if the
applicant has been found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction within
the preceding ten years of the violation of any provision of this chapter or
of a criminal offense against property as defined in Tex. Penal Code, Title
7, provided further that violation of any provision of this chapter shall be
grounds for denial of such permit. Permits issued hereunder shall be valid
for a period of one year from the date of issuance.



   (B)   A permit issued hereunder may be revoked, or suspended, for up
to six months by the Chief of Police for violation of any provision of this
chapter or if a permittee is found guilty of a criminal offense as defined in
Tex. Penal Code, Title 7, or its criminal equivalent in another state, by a
court of competent jurisdiction. A permit that has been revoked or suspended
shall not be reissued unless the applicant is currently qualified under the
terms of this chapter to receive a permit. A permit shall be revoked if the
permittee fails to meet any of the necessary qualifications to receive a
permit. Within ten days of such revocation or suspension by the Chief of
Police, the permittee shall have the right of appeal to the City Council
whose decision shall be final. A written statement setting forth the basis
for such appeal shall be filed with the City Secretary within the ten-day
time period.



   (C)   Upon receipt of an application, the Chief of Police may, upon
request, issue a temporary permit upon the payment of a fee which is on file
in the City Secretary’s office which shall be issued upon the same terms
and conditions as one-year permits, but which shall only be valid for 30 days
from the date of issuance.



   (D)   Any permit issued hereunder shall be prominently displayed at
the place of business so as to be plainly visible by persons transacting
business with a dealer.



(Prior Code, § 4.05.003)



§ 118.04  BOND REQUIRED.



   A bond in the sum of not less than $5,000 cash or a surety bond through
a solvent surety company authorized to do business in the state, executed by
the applicant for a permit or by his or her authorized representative,
conditioned that the principal and surety shall pay to any person all damages
caused by or arising out of the wrongful, fraudulent or illegal conduct of
the applicant or his or her agents or employees while conducting business
under this chapter, shall be required prior to the issuance of any permit
hereunder. Such bond shall remain in full force and effect during the permit
period. Failure to maintain a sufficient bond shall be grounds for the
revocation or suspension of any permit.



(Prior Code, § 4.05.004)



§ 118.05  PERMIT NOT TRANSFERABLE.



   A permit granted under this chapter shall not be transferable.



(Prior Code, § 4.05.005)



§ 118.06  RECORDS OF PURCHASES.



   (A)   Upon the purchase from or trade with any person of any goods
defined in this chapter, permittees shall record in a well-bound book kept
exclusively for such purpose the following information:



      (1)   The name, address, age, sex, race, height, weight, color
of hair and driver’s license number or personal identification certificate
issued by the State Department of Public Safety of the person selling or
trading any used jewelry, money, silverware or precious metal; and



      (2)   A description of the property purchased, including the
name of the maker and serial number, if available, and all other identifiable
characteristics, such as type, number and size of gems and type and color of
metal.



   (B)   No permittee shall purchase or trade for any used jewelry,
coins, silverware or precious metal from any person or persons under the age
of 17 years.



   (C)   The permittee purchasing used jewelry, coins, silverware or
precious metal shall obtain a signed warranty from the seller that the seller
has the right or authority to sell the property, which statement shall be
retained and recorded by the permittee.



   (D)   All books and records required to be kept under the terms
herein shall be open to inspection at all reasonable hours by any bona fide
peace officer.



   (E)   All books and records required to be kept under the terms
herein shall be maintained continuously at the permittee’s place of
business for a minimum of two years.



(Prior Code, § 4.05.006)



§ 118.07  HOLDING PERIOD REQUIRED.



   No dealer shall sell, trade, dispose of or alter the form of any
precious metal or jewelry unless at least ten working days have elapsed since
the purchase of such goods. For purposes of this section, WORKING DAYS shall
be defined as Monday through Friday, exclusive of such days recognized as
national holidays. A record shall be kept of all items sold, traded or
otherwise disposed of.



(Prior Code, § 4.05.007)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 118.08  PURCHASES AT TEMPORARY LOCATIONS.



   Any dealer who conducts business from a temporary location within the
city and who does not maintain a permanent location within the city shall
furnish a forwarding address and deliver the records of purchases to the
Chief of Police within 24 hours of terminating the temporary location.



(Prior Code, § 4.05.008)



CHAPTER 119:  WRECKER SERVICE



Section




General Provisions




   119.01   Definitions



   119.02   Power and duties of Chief of Police



   119.03   Obligation of Police Department and wrecker service to
customer



   119.04   Method of determining rotation services



   119.05   Dispatch procedures



   119.06   Impounded and abandoned vehicles



   119.07   Removal of debris at accident scene



   119.08   No wrecker at scene unless called by police or owner of
vehicle



   119.09   Solicitation of wrecker business prohibited



   119.10   City employees not to recommend wrecker service



   119.11   Applicability of provisions



   119.12   Rates posted with Chief of Police



   119.13   Authority in event of emergency




License




   119.25   Required for all rotation wrecker services



   119.26   Application; required information



   119.27   Required insurance



   119.28   Required equipment for police rotation



   119.29   Action on application



   119.30   Required fees; expiration



   119.31   Number displayed; sticker



   119.32   Denial or refusal



   119.33   Suspension for failure to provide insurance



   119.34   Suspension or revocation, generally



   119.35   Procedure; appeal



Cross-reference:



   General business provisions, see Chapter 110




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 119.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DISABLED VEHICLE.  A vehicle which has been rendered unsafe to be
driven as a result of some occurrence other than a wreck, including, but not
limited to, mechanical failures or breakdowns, fire, vandalism or a vehicle
which is in an unsafe driving condition, but the owner is not present or able
or permitted to drive so as to reasonably necessitate that the vehicle be
removed by a wrecker.



   FIT AND PROPER PERSON.  A person not convicted of a felony, any crime
of moral turpitude, or of a driving while intoxicated offense, as defined by
Tex. Penal Code, § 49.04.



   LICENSEE.  A person licensed to engage in the wrecker police rotation
service.



   OFFICE.  A building with the company name of the applicant affixed to
the front and with a telephone installed with the licensee’s telephone
number.



   VEHICLE.  Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a street except devices moved by human
power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.



   WRECKED VEHICLE.  A vehicle that has been damaged as a result of
overturning or colliding with another vehicle or object(s) so as to
reasonably necessitate that the vehicle be removed by a wrecker.



   WRECKER.  A vehicle designed to be used primarily for removing wrecked
or disabled vehicles.



   WRECKER SERVICE.  The business of towing, moving or removing wrecked
or disabled vehicles for compensation, regardless of whether the purpose for
removal is to repair, wreck, store, trade or purchase such wrecked or
disabled vehicles.



(Prior Code, § 4.11.001)



Statutory reference:



   Tow trucks, see Tex. Occupations Code, Ch. 2308



§ 119.02  POWER AND DUTIES OF CHIEF OF POLICE.



   The Chief of Police of the city shall:



   (A)   Adopt and enforce reasonable written rules and regulations for
wreckers where necessary to implement this chapter;



   (B)   Inspect the offices, storage lots and wrecker equipment of
each licensee as deemed necessary by the Chief of Police, in his or her sole
discretion, to administer and enforce all provisions of this chapter;



   (C)   Keep records of all license applications and wrecker licenses
denied, issued, suspended or revoked; and



   (D)   Administer and enforce this chapter and issue, suspend and
revoke licenses as required by this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 4.11.002)



§ 119.03  OBLIGATION OF POLICE DEPARTMENT AND WRECKER SERVICE TO CUSTOMER.



   (A)   Generally. Any vehicle owner or operator request for a
particular wrecker service must be adhered to by the Police Department and
wrecker service, so long as it does not violate this chapter or the state tow
truck regulations or rules promulgated by the state pursuant to such
regulations. Such request shall be adhered to as long as it does not create
or unreasonably extend the time of a public hazard such as a vehicle or an
abandoned vehicle in the roadway. It shall be the investigating officer’s
responsibility to determine if the requested wrecker service responds within
a reasonable time, depending upon the degree of hazard the public is
subjected to. In any event the response time shall not be more than 20
minutes from time of dispatch.



   (B)   Exception. Division (A) above shall not be construed to
prohibit the consented to transportation by any wrecker service company of a
wrecked or disabled vehicle from any point within the city to any point
inside or outside the city, nor shall it be construed to prohibit the
transportation of a wrecked or disabled vehicle from a point outside the city
to a point inside the city.



(Prior Code, § 4.11.003)



§ 119.04  METHOD OF DETERMINING ROTATION SERVICES.



   The Chief of Police shall see that a list of all licensed rotation
wrecker services is furnished to all police dispatchers for the purpose of
dispatching wreckers. The rotation device to be used as a means of
determining which wrecker service is called shall be designed by the Chief of
Police. This device will allow all calls to be divided equally among the
licensee wrecker services on rotation.



(Prior Code, § 4.11.004)



§ 119.05  DISPATCH PROCEDURES.



   (A)   When a police officer investigates an accident or disabled
vehicle in the city and determines that any vehicle involved should be
removed by a wrecker, the officer shall first determine whether the owner,
operator or his or her authorized representative has already made
arrangements for its removal.



   (B)   If no arrangements have been made, the investigating officer
will cause the following steps to be taken in sequence to expedite the
removal of the vehicle.



      (1)   The officer shall request that the operator or other
vehicle occupant designate the place to which he or she desires the vehicle
removed.



      (2)   The officer shall request that the operator of the
vehicle or other vehicle occupant designate which wrecker service he or she
desires to remove and transport the vehicle.



      (3)   The officer shall then immediately notify the police
dispatcher of the information contained in divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2) above,
and the dispatcher shall immediately notify the wrecker operator selected and
shall give him or her the necessary information and direct that he or she
immediately proceed to the scene of the accident; provided that the wrecker
service is licensed by the state.



      (4)   If for any reason no wrecker operator is selected, the
officer shall notify the police dispatcher and the dispatcher shall direct a
wrecker operator on the police rotation list to go to the scene and remove
the vehicle.



(Prior Code, § 4.11.005)



§ 119.06  IMPOUNDED AND ABANDONED VEHICLES.



   (A)   Vehicles that are impounded by the Police Department shall
have a vehicle inventory form completed on the same by the officer in charge
of the scene. If an investigative hold is placed on the vehicle by the Police
Department, it will be the responsibility of the officer filing the inventory
form to note this on the form and verbally inform the wrecker operator. The
wrecker operator, by signing the form, accepts the responsibility for all
property in and on the vehicle and in case of a “hold” on the vehicle,
the wrecker operator must contact or be contacted by the Police Department in
order to release the vehicle. Vehicles that are impounded by the Police
Department shall be stored with the wrecker service that responded to the
call. The wrecker operator is to be furnished from the Police Department a
release slip stating that the bearer of the slip may have the impounded
vehicle released to him or her after charges against the vehicle have been
paid by the bearer.



   (B)   Vehicles that have been towed by reason of being abandoned,
illegally parked or in an unsafe place shall be stored at the wrecker service
lot that responded to the call. At the end often days, the vehicle may be
declared an abandoned vehicle as described in the state abandoned motor
vehicle regulations, and such action as described in the regulations shall be
executed.



(Prior Code, § 4.11.006)



§ 119.07  REMOVAL OF DEBRIS AT ACCIDENT SCENE.



   Each wrecker company called to the scene of an accident shall
completely remove from the street all resulting wreckage and debris,
including all broken glass, before leaving the site.



(Prior Code, § 4.11.007)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.08  NO WRECKER AT SCENE UNLESS CALLED BY POLICE OR OWNER OF VEHICLE.



   No wreckers shall arrive at the scene of an accident within the city
unless such wrecker has been called to the scene by the owner or operator of
the vehicle or his or her authorized representative or by the City Police
Department.



(Prior Code, § 4.11.008)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.09  SOLICITATION OF WRECKER BUSINESS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall solicit any wrecker business in any manner, directly or
indirectly, on the streets of the city at the scene of a wrecked or disabled
vehicle, regardless of whether the solicitation is for the purpose of
soliciting the business of towing, repairing, wrecking, storing, trading or
purchasing the vehicle.



(Prior Code, § 4.11.009)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.10  CITY EMPLOYEES NOT TO RECOMMEND WRECKER SERVICE.



   No employee of the city shall recommend to any person, directly or
indirectly, either by word, gesture, sign or otherwise, any particular
wrecker service, but may, upon request, furnish a list of licensed police
rotation wrecker services.



(Prior Code, § 4.11.010)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.11  APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS.



   The prohibitions and requirements of this chapter shall apply to all
accidents and disabled vehicles regardless of whether the final resting place
of a disabled vehicle is upon a street or upon private property.



(Prior Code, § 4.11.011)



§ 119.12  RATES POSTED WITH CHIEF OF POLICE.



   (A)   Each wrecker company on rotation must post its rates for
towing services with the Chief of Police.



   (B)   All rates shall be comparable to the rates in surrounding
cities.



(Prior Code, § 4.11.012)



§ 119.13  AUTHORITY IN EVENT OF EMERGENCY.



   In the event of an emergency, in the sole discretion of the City
Manager, the City Manager may temporarily suspend any portion of this chapter
as may be necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the public.



(Prior Code, § 4.11.013)




LICENSE




§ 119.25  REQUIRED FOR ALL ROTATION WRECKER SERVICES.



   (A)   Any wrecker service that wishes to be on police rotation must
be licensed by the city and adhere to all requirements contained in this
chapter. In addition, rotation wrecker licensees must have an office and
storage lot inside the city limits. The storage lot shall be fenced and
lighted. Each licensee wrecker service shall provide 24-hour service 365 days
a year. All wrecker services on police rotation shall have a minimum of two
or more wreckers of at least 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight, as defined
by the manufacturer. When the city is being served with less than two wrecker
companies on rotation, the Police Chief may suspend this requirement to a
minimum of one wrecker per licensee until the Police Chief determines the
city is being adequately protected again.



   (B)   Only one police rotation wrecker license shall be required for
each licensed wrecker service company; each licensed wrecker company may add
to or delete equipment as its business dictates so long as it complies with
this chapter.



   (C)   Each wrecker used for police rotation must have its dispatch
point, both day and night, located within the city limits or within one mile
driving distance from the city limits, and the maximum response time shall
not be longer than 20 minutes from the time of dispatch by the Police
Department.



(Prior Code, § 4.11.041)



§ 119.26  APPLICATION; REQUIRED INFORMATION.



   (A)   Any person desiring a license to operate on police rotation as
set forth in this chapter shall file with the Chief of Police a written
application.



   (B)   The application shall be filled out on forms obtained from the
Chief of Police, verified by oath of the applicant and giving the following
information:



      (1)   The name, age and residence of the applicant. If the
applicant is a partnership, the name, age and residence of each partner. If
the applicant is a corporation, its name and place of incorporation; the
address of its principal place of business; a certified copy of its charter
and further, if the applicant is a foreign corporation, a duly certified copy
of its permit to do business in this state;



      (2)   The assumed or trade name, if any, under which the
applicant proposes to operate;



      (3)   The location of the business office and storage lot and
the telephone number(s) of the business office;



      (4)   An equipment list consisting of make, model, capacity
and condition of each wrecker to be permitted;



      (5)   Full disclosure pertaining to the extent of the wrecker
and related services the applicant proposes to render;



      (6)   A full and complete statement of the experience, if any,
that the applicant has had in rendering such wrecker service in the city or
elsewhere; and



      (7)   In order to obtain a license from the city, the
applicant, shall be required to execute the following agreement:



      “The undersigned covenants and agrees to, and by these
presents, does fully indemnify, hold harmless and defend the City of
Henderson, its officers, agents and employees, from and against any and all
claims, suits or causes of action for any injuries or damages to persons or
property, including death and loss of property, arising out of or incident to
the operation of this wrecker service and all other manner of operations
arising under, or otherwise incidental to the towing or storage of motor
vehicles.”



(Prior Code, § 4.11.042)



§ 119.27  REQUIRED INSURANCE.



   (A)   An applicant shall submit a certificate of insurance from an
insurance company that verifies the minimum requirement for liability
insurance as set forth in the rules promulgated by the state as authorized.
Any wrecker transporting hazardous material as defined by the U.S. Department
of Transportation shall furnish proof of the required insurance as required
by the U.S. Department of Transportation. The policy in this division (A)
above shall contain an endorsement providing for 30- days’ certified notice
to the Chief of Police in the event of any material change or cancellation of
the policy.



   (B)   Each wrecker service on police rotation shall provide a
certified copy of garage liability insurance in the amount of $100,000 or
more with extra legal care and custody.



(Prior Code, § 4.11.043)



§ 119.28  REQUIRED EQUIPMENT FOR POLICE ROTATION.



   The following shall be the minimum equipment requirement for each
licensee licensed for police rotation wrecker service.



   (A)   Each of the licensee’s wreckers shall:



      (1)   Be of at least 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight in
size;



      (2)   Be equipped with a mechanical or hydraulic powered wench
(electric wenches are not allowed) with factory-rated capacity of not less
than 10,000 pounds single-line capacity and a minimum cable size of
three-eighths inch;



      (3)   Carry as standard equipment: a tow bar; safety chain;
extra chains; a four-pound or larger fire extinguisher; pry bar; broom or
push broom; shovel; and a container to hold wreck debris (example: plastic
bag, plastic or metal bucket and the like);



      (4)   Have inscribed on each side thereof in letters not less
than two inches in height the name of the wrecker service company doing
business;



      (5)   Be maintained so that all of its equipment shall be in a
safe and good working condition;



      (6)   Carry roof-mounted emergency lights, amber in color; and



      (7)   Carry a form of commercial communication (no citizens
band allowed).



   (B)   Each licensee shall carry at least one set of dollies for
every three wrecker vehicles operated.



   (C)   No licensed wrecker company shall use equipment too small in
gross vehicle weight rating for the size of the recovery work or vehicle they
are to pull or tow or to remove from the scene of an accident in the city;
leaving to the discretion of the police officer at the scene to call a
wrecker service that is more capable and that can handle the situation in a
safer manner. A licensed wrecker company is not required to license every
wrecker that is owned by the company, but only the wreckers that are licensed
may be used to remove wrecked, abandoned or impounded vehicles for the police
rotation wrecker service within the city.



(Prior Code, § 4.11.044)



§ 119.29  ACTION ON APPLICATION.



   In the event the Chief of Police finds that the applicant meets the
required qualifications to give proper and adequate service to the public,
the Chief of Police shall issue a license for police rotation wrecker service
to the applicant. In the event the Chief of Police does not so find, the
applicant shall be rejected, and the applicant is precluded from filing a new
application for a period of one year, except that in the event one of the
current licensee wrecker services should lose its license for any reason, the
Chief of Police may consider a reapplication at any time.



(Prior Code, § 4.11.045)



§ 119.30  REQUIRED FEES; EXPIRATION.



   The license fee for each police rotation wrecker service license shall
be on file in the City Secretary’s office. All permits issued shall expire
on December 31 of the year in which it was issued, and no license shall be
transferable.



(Prior Code, § 4.11.046)



§ 119.31  NUMBER DISPLAYED; STICKER.



   Each licensed police rotation wrecker shall be issued a city permit
sticker, which shall be displayed on each wrecker operated within the city
for police rotation wrecker service.



(Prior Code, § 4.11.047)



§ 119.32  DENIAL OR REFUSAL.



   The Chief of Police may refuse the issuance or renewal of a wrecker
rotation license for one or more of the following reasons:



   (A)   The making of any false statement as to any material matter in
the application;



   (B)   The conviction of the licensee, applicant or any employee of
the licensee or applicant for any violation of the provisions of this chapter;



   (C)   The failure to comply with any of the requirements of this
chapter or the rules or regulations established by the Chief of Police; and/or



   (D)   Conviction of an offense of driving while intoxicated, as
defined by Tex. Penal Code, § 49.04, or any crime of moral turpitude, or of
any felony.



(Prior Code, § 4.11.048)



§ 119.33  SUSPENSION FOR FAILURE TO PROVIDE INSURANCE.



   Any license issued under the provisions of this subchapter shall be
automatically suspended when the insurance required by § 119.27 has been
changed so as to no longer comply with the requirements of § 119.27 or has
been canceled. Such license shall be reinstated only after the filing of
proof of a new insurance policy meeting the requirements of § 119.27.



(Prior Code, § 4.11.049)



§ 119.34  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION, GENERALLY.



   (A)   The Chief of Police may temporarily suspend or revoke the
license issued for any or all wreckers belonging to a licensee on any of the
following grounds:



      (1)   If a license was procured by fraudulent conduct or false
statement of material fact concerning the applicant not disclosed at the time
the application was made;



      (2)   If the licensee or any of his or her agents, servants or
employees arrives at the scene of an accident in violation of the provisions
of this chapter, with the exception of being at the scene when the accident
occurred;



      (3)   If a licensee or any of his or her agents, servants or
employees solicits any business in violation of the provisions of this
chapter;



      (4)   The licensee or an employee of the licensee has been
convicted for a violation of any of the requirements of this chapter or has
violated any of the rules or regulations established by the Chief of Police;
or



      (5)   Conviction of driving while intoxicated, as defined by
Tex. Penal Code, § 49.04.



   (B)   Such revocation of the license shall terminate all authority
and permission heretofore granted. Any person whose license has been revoked
shall not be eligible to again apply for a license for a period of one year
from the date of revocation.



(Prior Code, § 4.11.050)



§ 119.35  PROCEDURE; APPEAL.



   (A)   The Chief of Police may, at any time he or she finds a
licensee in violation of this chapter, give notice in writing to the
licensee, manager or other person in control of the operation and maintenance
of such license that the license for police wrecker rotation service has been
revoked.



   (B)   The Chief of Police shall notify the affected applicant or
licensee of any denial, suspension or revocation of a license by written
notice, mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested.



   (C)   Any denial, suspension or revocation of a license by the Chief
of Police shall become final after the expiration of three days from the date
of receipt of notice of the same, unless on or before the expiration of such
three days the licensee shall file with the City Manager a written notice of
appeal of such revocation.



   (D)   The appeal shall operate as a stay of suspension or revocation
of the license previously issued until such time as the City Manager shall
set a public hearing before the City Council.



   (E)   The appeal hearing shall be held within 30 days after the date
of filing of the appeal and any action and judgment of the City Council on
the suspension or revocation, after hearing all the evidence and facts, shall
be final and conclusive as to all parties, unless within 30 days the
aggrieved party shall file an appeal in the 4th District Court of the county.
The notice of revocation shall contain the appeal procedures stated herein.



(Prior Code, § 4.11.051)



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



   Chapter



      130.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      131.   FIREARMS AND WEAPONS



      132.   FIREWORKS



      133.   LITTER



      134.   ABANDONED AND JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES



      135.   NOISE



      136.   MINORS; CURFEW



CHAPTER 130:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   130.01   Graffiti



   130.02   Illegal storage



§ 130.01  GRAFFITI.



   (A)   GRAFFITI is defined as any marking, including, but not limited
to any inscription, slogan, drawing, painting, symbol, logo, name character
or figure that is made in any manner on tangible property.



   (B)   An owner of any tangible property in the city commits an
offense if he or she fails to remove all graffiti from the property that is
visible from any public property or right-of-way or from any private property
other than the property on which the graffiti exists. Once the owner becomes
aware of the graffiti on his or her property, it shall be removed by painting
the entire wall and area damaged by the graffiti, restoring it to the
condition prior to the graffiti.



(Prior Code, § 8.01.002)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory references:



   Authority of governing body to adopt ordinance, rule or police
regulation for the good government, peace or order of municipality, see Tex.
Local Gov’t Code, § 51.001



   Authority of home-rule municipality to define and prohibit nuisances,
see Tex. Local Gov’t Code, § 217.042



   Graffiti, see Tex. Penal Code, § 28.08



   Nuisances and general sanitation, see Tex. Health and Safety Code, §§
341.011 et seq.



§ 130.02  ILLEGAL STORAGE.



   Any item that is not customarily used or stored outside or is not made
of material that is resistant to damage or deterioration from the exposure to
the outdoors cannot be placed outside on property. This applies to items
stored on the front or rear yard of the property or on an open porch or
carport. Exceptions include motor vehicles on improved surface, lawn
furniture and landscaping items.



(Prior Code, § 8.01.003)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 131:  FIREARMS AND WEAPONS



Section




Generally




   131.01   Discharge of dangerous weapons




Carrying Weapon in City-Owned Building




   131.15   Prohibition



   131.16   Exemptions



 



   131.99   Penalty



Statutory references:



   Authority of municipality regarding firearms and explosives, see Tex.
Local Gov’t Code, § 229.001



   Disorderly conduct, see Tex. Penal Code, § 42.01



   License to carry concealed handgun, see Tex. Gov’t Code, §§ 411.171
et seq.



   Limitation of authority to prohibit discharge of firearms or other
weapons in extraterritorial jurisdiction, see Tex. Local Gov’t Code, §
229.002



   Weapons, see Tex. Penal Code, Ch. 46




GENERALLY




§ 131.01  DISCHARGE OF DANGEROUS WEAPONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any gun,
pistol or firearm of any kind, or to discharge an air rifle or air pistol of
any description, by whatever name known, that, by means of compressed air,
compressed gas, springs or any other means, is capable of discharging shots,
pellets or any solid object at a velocity in excess of 300 feet per second or
discharge any cannon cracker or torpedo on or across any public square,
street or alley of the city or within 100 yards of any residence or business
establishment. A CANNON CRACKER is any combustible package more than two
inches long and more than one inch through.



   (B)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that:



      (1)   The person was a peace officer acting in the performance
of his or her official duties;



      (2)   The person was firing in a lawfully operated target or
shooting range;



      (3)   The person was using blank cartridges for a show or
theatrical production, or for signal or ceremonial purposes in athletics or
sporting events, or by a military organization;



      (4)   The person was lawfully defending his or her person, the
person of another, or his or her property; or



      (5)   The person was an animal control officer acting in the
performance of his or her official duties.



(Prior Code, § 8.02.001)  Penalty, see § 131.99




CARRYING WEAPON IN CITY-OWNED BUILDING




§ 131.15  PROHIBITION.



   (A)   As used in this section, the following definitions shall apply:



      FIREARM.  The same as the definition stated in Tex. Penal Code,
§ 46.01(3).



      HANDGUN.  The same as the definition stated in Tex. Penal Code,
§ 46.01(5).



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to carry a handgun or
other firearm on his or her person inside any building owned or occupied by
the city.



   (C)   This prohibition shall apply unless:



      (1)   The person is licensed pursuant to Tex. Gov’t Code,
§§ 411.171 et seq., to carry a concealed weapon and regardless of whether:



         (a)   The person is employed by the city; or



         (b)   The handgun or firearm is concealed.



      (2)   However, it shall be unlawful to possess a handgun or
firearm in the Municipal Court and any pertinent facility and in the City
Council Chambers during any meeting of the City Council or during the conduct
of other city business.



(Prior Code, § 8.02.031)  (Ord. 95-12-20, passed 12-19-1995)  Penalty, see
§ 131.99



§ 131.16  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Licensed peace officers authorized to carry firearms pursuant
to the laws of the United States or of the state shall be exempt from the
prohibition contained herein.



   (B)   It shall not be unlawful hereunder for persons licensed
pursuant to Tex. Gov’t Code, §§ 411.171 et seq., to carry firearms in the
parking lot of any city-owned property.



(Prior Code, § 8.02.032)  (Ord. 95-12-20, passed 12-19-1995)  Penalty, see
§ 131.99



§ 131.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, corporation, agent or employee thereof who violates
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined an amount authorized for
convictions of Class C misdemeanors as stated in the penal laws of the state.



(Prior Code, § 8.02.033)  (Ord. 95-12-20, passed 12-19-1995)



CHAPTER 132:  FIREWORKS



Section



   132.01   Definitions



   132.02   Sale, use restricted



   132.03   Use on private property



   132.04   Parental responsibility



   132.05   Pyrotechnics sale, possession or use



   132.06   Small arms ammunition manufacture



   132.07   Exemptions



   132.08   Authorized displays



   132.09   Fireworks display by city



§ 132.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   FIREWORKS.  Firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles, aerial
salutes, American or Chinese bombs, sparklers, squibs, rockets, tablets or
other devices commonly used or sold as fireworks which contain nitrates,
chlorates, oxalates, sulfides of lead, barium, antimony, arsenic, mercury,
nitroglycerin, phosphorus or any compound containing any one of them and also
includes any explosive commonly known as FIREWORKS which contains explosives
or inflammable compounds.



   PYROTECHNICS. Fireworks, signal lights, railroad track torpedoes,
flashlight compositions or other devices or compositions used to obtain
visible or audible display, and includes also fire balloons having burning
material of any kind attached thereto.



   SMALL ARMS AMMUNITION.  Any shotgun, rifle, pistol or revolver
cartridge.



(Prior Code, § 8.03.001)



§ 132.02  SALE, USE RESTRICTED.



   Except as permitted in this chapter, no person shall sell, give away,
use, discharge or explode any fireworks within the corporate limits of the
city.



(Prior Code, § 8.03.002)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 132.03  USE ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   Except as permitted in this chapter, no person shall permit the
explosion of fireworks upon property owned or occupied by that person within
the corporate limits of the city.



(Prior Code, § 8.03.003)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 132.04  PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.



   No parent, guardian or person acting in place of a parent (in loco
parentis) shall permit his or her child or ward to discharge or explode
fireworks within the corporate limits of the city.



(Prior Code, § 8.03.004)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 132.05  PYROTECHNICS SALE, POSSESSION OR USE.



   Except as permitted in this chapter, no person shall have, keep, store,
use, manufacture, sell, handle, offer for sale or expose for sale
pyrotechnics within the corporate limits of the city.



(Prior Code, § 8.03.005)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 132.06  SMALL ARMS AMMUNITION MANUFACTURE.



   No person shall manufacture small arms ammunition within the corporate
limits of the city. This provision shall not be construed as prohibiting the
hand loading of small firearms ammunition for private use and not for sale.



(Prior Code, § 8.03.006)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 132.07  EXEMPTIONS.



   The following shall be exempted from the provisions of this chapter.



   (A)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the possession or use
of signaling devices for current daily consumption by railroads, motor
carriers and others required by law to have them.



   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the possession, sale or
use of normal stocks of flashlight compositions by photographers or dealers
in photographic supplies.



   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the use of blank
cartridges for signal purposes in athletic contests, sporting events,
theatrical productions, public parades and ceremonies, or by police or
military organizations, nor shall this chapter be held to prohibit the sale
of blank cartridges for such purpose.



(Prior Code, § 8.03.007)



§ 132.08  AUTHORIZED DISPLAYS.



   Any person desiring to put on a display of fireworks, which display the
general public may attend, may, upon petitioning and obtaining subsequent
approval of the City Council, discharge or explode fireworks within the
corporate limits of the city under such conditions and at such place as the
City Council may direct.



(Prior Code, § 8.03.008)



§ 132.09  FIREWORKS DISPLAY BY CITY.



   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the discharge and display of
fireworks put on by, or under the direction and authority of, the Fire
Department as part of the annual Fourth of July celebration within the city,
which is hereby authorized by the City Council without need for petitioning
the same for approval each year, or other city-sponsored display.



(Prior Code, § 8.03.009)



CHAPTER 133:  LITTER



Section



   133.01   Prohibited



   133.02   Duty of business owners, occupants



   133.03   Duty of customer



   133.04   Handbills, circulars and the like; distribution restricted



   133.05   Voluntary acceptance of handbills and the like required



   133.06   Distribution of handbills and the like on or in private
property



   133.07   Exclusions from chapter



   133.08   Posting of signs



Statutory reference:



   Texas Litter Abatement Act, see Tex. Health and Safety Code, Ch. 365



§ 133.01  PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, cast or
deposit upon any street, alley, sidewalk or any yard or premises, public or
private, any filth of any kind, or cans, paper, trash, paper containers,
rubbish, bottles or any other form of litter or waste matter.



   (B)   No person shall sweep into or deposit in any storm sewer,
gutter, street or other public place within the city the accumulation of
litter, as defined in Tex. Health and Safety Code, § 365.011, from any
building, lot, public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or
occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of
litter.



   (C)   No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep
into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city
the accumulation of LITTER, as defined in Tex. Health and Safety Code, §
365.011, from any building or lot, or from any public or private sidewalk or
driveway.



      (1)   Persons owning or occupying places of business within
the city shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business premises free of
litter.



      (2)   Any person owning or occupying a place of business shall
at all times maintain the premises free of litter and shall prevent any
litter from his or her premises from being carried or deposited by the
elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any private
property.



(Prior Code, § 8.04.001)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 133.02  DUTY OF BUSINESS OWNERS, OCCUPANTS.



   (A)   Generally. The owner or occupant of any store or other place
of business situated within the city shall exercise reasonable diligence at
all times to keep his or her premises clean of wastepaper, wrapping paper,
paper napkins, cartons, package containers and other used or waste materials
thrown or left on the premises by its customers, and to take reasonable
measures to prevent same drifting or blowing to adjoining premises.



   (B)   Receptacles. Receptacles of sufficient size and number shall
be placed on the premises accessible to the customers of such business where
the above referred to articles of waste may be disposed of.



   (C)   Signs. Each and every business establishment shall place upon
its premises in a conspicuous place or places in close proximity to the
receptacle or receptacles above referred to a sign or signs which shall, in
essence, convey to its customers a request that they use such receptacles for
the disposal of waste materials.



(Prior Code, § 8.04.002)



§ 133.03  DUTY OF CUSTOMER.



   It shall be unlawful for any customer going upon the premises of
another to in any manner dispose of wastepaper, wrapping paper, paper
napkins, cartons, package containers and other used or waste materials,
except in receptacles provided for such purposes.



(Prior Code, § 8.04.003)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 133.04  HANDBILLS, CIRCULARS AND THE LIKE; DISTRIBUTION RESTRICTED.



   (A)   The practice of throwing, casting, distributing, scattering
and depositing handbills, dodgers, circulars, booklets, posters, printed
matter, advertising literature, advertising samples and devices upon public
or privately owned properly within the city without a written permit from the
city designee therefor is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance.



   (B)   The city designee shall inspect a representative sample of
each handbill or circular to be distributed before issuing a permit for
distribution of that handbill or circular. Each applicant for a distribution
permit shall present a representative sample of each handbill or circular to
be distributed to the city designee at the time application is made therefor.
In addition, the applicant shall state in writing the proposed method of
distributing the handbill or circulars sought to be distributed. The city
designee is authorized to prepare an application form and require its use by
applicants for a distribution permit.



   (C)   The city designee shall not issue a permit for distribution of
any handbill or circular that, in his or her judgment, contains any obscene
material.



   (D)   The city designee may refuse or deny a permit for distribution
of handbills or circulars if the city designee finds that the method of
distribution would be likely to cause excessive litter or that the applicant
has caused excessive litter in the past.



   (E)   Any refusal or denial of a permit for distribution of
handbills or circulars shall be given to the applicant in writing by the city
designee.



   (F)   Any applicant aggrieved by the denial of an application for a
permit by the city designee may appeal such denial to the City Council by
giving a written notice of appeal to the City Manager within 20 days of any
such denial.



(Prior Code, § 8.04.004)



§ 133.05  VOLUNTARY ACCEPTANCE OF HANDBILLS AND THE LIKE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, cast, distribute,
scatter, deposit or place upon any public place within the city, including
streets, alleys, public parks and school grounds, any handbill, dodger,
circular, paper, booklet, poster or any other printed matter or literature,
except that the same may be personally delivered to those who are willing to
accept the same.



(Prior Code, § 8.04.005)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 133.06  DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS AND THE LIKE ON OR IN PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, cast, distribute,
deposit, scatter, pass out, give away, circulate or deliver any handbill,
dodger, circular, paper, booklet, poster or any printed matter or literature
in the yard or grounds of any house, building, structure, or on any porch or
doorstep or vestibule, or in any public hallway thereof, or upon any vacant
lot, or other private property, without having first obtained permission of
the owner, or of an adult resident or occupant thereof.



(Prior Code, § 8.04.006)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 133.07  EXCLUSIONS FROM CHAPTER.



   (A)   This chapter shall not be deemed to prohibit the distribution
of United States mail, nor the delivery of any newspaper to any subscriber
thereof or to any person who has requested the delivery of the same, nor to
the sale of separate copies thereof.



   (B)   The term NEWSPAPER as herein used shall be construed to mean a
newspaper of general circulation as the same is defined in state law.



(Prior Code, § 8.04.007)



§ 133.08  POSTING OF SIGNS.



   It shall be lawful for the owner or occupant of any property to place a
sign in a conspicuous place near the front door thereof, to the effect that
it is not desired that any literature, advertising sample or device be
delivered to such property. It shall be unlawful to deliver any literature or
advertising sample or device to such property.



(Prior Code, § 8.04.008)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 134:  ABANDONED AND JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES



Section




General Provisions




   134.01   Definitions



   134.02   Right of entry; enforcement



   134.03   Effect of chapter on other laws authorizing removal of
vehicles




Abandoned Motor Vehicles




   134.15   Authority to move and remove vehicles



   134.16   Notice of removal; storage fees



   134.17   Auction of unclaimed vehicles; transfer of title;
disposition of proceeds



   134.18   Disposition of vehicles abandoned at garage keeper’s
establishment



   134.19   Disposal of vehicles to demolishers



   134.20   Duties of demolishers




Junked Vehicles




   134.35   Public nuisance



   134.36   Procedure for abatement and removal by city



   134.37   Disposal



 



   134.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 134.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE.  A motor vehicle is abandoned if the motor
vehicle:



      (1)   Is inoperable, is more than five years old, and has been
left unattended on public property for more than 48 hours;



      (2)   Has remained illegally on public property for more than
48 hours;



      (3)   Has remained on private property without the consent of
the owner or person in charge of the property for more than 48 hours;



      (4)   Has been left unattended on the right-of-way of a
designated county, state or federal highway for more than 48 hours; or



      (5)   Has been left unattended for more than 24 hours on the
right-of-way of a turnpike project constructed and maintained by the state
turnpike authority or a controlled-access highway. For the purpose of this
division (5), CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY has the meaning assigned by Tex.
Transportation Code, § 541.302.



   ANTIQUE VEHICLE.  A passenger car or truck that is at least 25 years
old.



   DEPARTMENT.  The State Department of Transportation.



   GARAGE KEEPER.  An owner or operator of a storage facility.



   JUNKED VEHICLE.  A vehicle that is self-propelled and inoperable and:



      (1)   Does not lawfully have affixed to it:



         (a)   An unexpired license plate; or



         (b)   A valid motor vehicle inspection certificate.



      (2)   Is wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or
discarded;



      (3)   Has remained inoperable for more than 30 consecutive
days, if on private property; or



      (4)   Has remained inoperable for more than 72 consecutive
hours, if on public property.



   LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY.



      (1)   The Department of Public Safety;



      (2)   The Police Department of the city;



      (3)   A Police Department of an institution of higher
education; or



      (4)   The Sheriff’s Department or a constable of the county.



   MOTOR VEHICLE.  A vehicle that is subject to registration under Tex.
Transportation Code, Ch. 501, except that for purposes of §§ 134.15 through
134.17, MOTOR VEHICLE includes a motorboat, outboard motor, personal
watercraft or vessel subject to registration under Tex. Parks and Wildlife
Code, Ch. 31.



   MOTOR VEHICLE COLLECTOR.  A person who:



      (1)   Owns one or more antique or special interest vehicles;
and



      (2)   Acquires, collects or disposes of an antique or special
interest vehicle or part of an antique or special interest vehicle for
personal use to restore and preserve an antique or special interest vehicle
for historic interest.



   MOTOR VEHICLE DEMOLISHER.  A person in the business of:



      (1)   Converting motor vehicles into processed scrap or scrap
metal; or



      (2)   Wrecking or dismantling motor vehicles.



   POLICE DEPARTMENT.  The Police Department of the city.



   SPECIAL INTEREST VEHICLE.  A motor vehicle of any age that has not
been changed from original manufacturer’s specifications and, because of
its historic interest, is being preserved by a hobbyist.



   STORAGE FACILITY.  Includes a garage, parking lot or establishment for
the servicing, repairing or parking of motor vehicles.



(Prior Code, § 8.05.001)



Statutory reference:



   Regulation of abandoned and junked motor vehicles, see Tex.
Transportation Code, §§ 683.001 et seq.



§ 134.02  RIGHT OF ENTRY; ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Any person duly authorized by the city to administer the
procedures authorized by this chapter may enter private property for the
purposes specified in the procedures to examine a vehicle or vehicle part,
obtain information as to the identity of the vehicle, and remove or cause the
removal of a vehicle or vehicle part that constitutes a nuisance.



   (B)   The Municipal Court may issue orders necessary to enforce the
procedures.



(Prior Code, § 8.05.002)



§ 134.03  EFFECT OF CHAPTER ON OTHER LAWS AUTHORIZING REMOVAL OF VEHICLES.



   This chapter relating to junked and abandoned motor vehicles does not
affect any law or ordinance authorizing the immediate removal, as an
obstruction to traffic, of a vehicle left on public property.



(Prior Code, § 8.05.003)




ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES




§ 134.15  AUTHORITY TO MOVE AND REMOVE VEHICLES.



   (A)   Whenever a police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon a
street or highway in violation of any provisions of a statute or ordinance,
such police officer is authorized to move such vehicle or require the driver
or other person in charge of the vehicle to move the vehicle to a position
off the paved or main-traveled part of such highway or street.



   (B)   Any police officer is authorized to remove a vehicle from any
public or private property to the nearest garage, or other place of safety,
or to a storage place designated by the city, under the following
circumstances:



      (1)   When any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge or
causeway where such vehicle is an obstruction to traffic;



      (2)   When any vehicle is illegally parked so as to block the
entrance to any private driveway and it is impractical to move such vehicle
from in front of the driveway to another point along the highway;



      (3)   When any vehicle is found upon a highway and report has
previously been made that such vehicle has been stolen or complaint has been
filed and warrant thereon issued charging that such vehicle has been
embezzled;



      (4)   When any such police officer has reasonable grounds to
believe that any vehicle has been abandoned;



      (5)   After a vehicle that does not have lawfully affixed to
it either an unexpired license plate or a valid motor vehicle safety
inspection certificate, or is so disabled that its normal operation is
impossible or impractical, has been parked on any public highway and after
the owner has been given at least 48 hours’ notice either in person or in
writing attached to the windshield at the beginning of the 48-hour period
that the vehicle will be removed after the expiration of such period; and



      (6)   When an officer arrests any person driving or in control
of a vehicle for an alleged offense and such officer is authorized by this
code or other law to take the person arrested into custody or to take the
person immediately before a magistrate.



   (C)   Any vehicle standing unattended may be moved by any member of
the Police or Fire Department, and any police officer or firefighter may
require the moving of any such vehicle if it obstructs the free movements of
such persons in the actual discharge of their duties.



   (D)   Any member of the Police Department is hereby authorized to
remove any vehicle parked or standing in or on any portion of a highway when,
in the opinion of the member of the Police Department, the vehicle is a
hazard or interferes with a normal function of a governmental agency or
because of any catastrophe, emergency or unusual circumstance the safety of
the vehicle is imperiled.



   (E)   The Police Department may employ its own personnel, equipment
and facilities to remove, preserve and store such vehicles it takes into
custody.



(Prior Code, § 8.05.031)



§ 134.16  NOTICE OF REMOVAL; STORAGE FEES.



   (A)   The Police Department that takes into custody an abandoned
motor vehicle shall notify, no later than the tenth day after taking the
motor vehicle into custody, by certified mail, the last known registered
owner of the motor vehicle and all lien holders of record pursuant to the
Certificate of Title Act (Tex. Transportation Code, Ch. 501) or Tex. Parks
and Wildlife Code, Ch. 31, that the vehicle has been taken into custody. The
notice shall describe the year, make, model and vehicle identification number
of the abandoned motor vehicle; set forth the location of the facility where
the motor vehicle is being held; and inform the owner and any lien holders of
their right to reclaim the motor vehicle not later than the twentieth day
after the date of the notice, on payment of all towing, preservation and
storage charges resulting from placing the vehicle in custody or garage
keeper’s charges if notice is given under § 134.18. The notice shall also
state that the failure of the owner or lien holders to exercise his, her or
their right to reclaim the vehicle within the time provided constitutes a
waiver by the owner and lien holders of all right, title and interest in the
vehicle and their consent to the sale of the abandoned motor vehicle at a
public auction.



   (B)   If the identity of the last registered owner cannot be
determined, if the registration contains no address for the owner, or if it
is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity and address
of all lien holders, notice by one publication in one newspaper of general
circulation in the area where the motor vehicle was abandoned is sufficient
notice under this section. The notice by publication may contain multiple
listings of abandoned vehicles, shall be published with the same requirements
prescribed for notice by certified mail and shall have the same contents
required for a notice by certified mail.



   (C)   The consequences and effect of failure to reclaim an abandoned
motor vehicle are as set forth in a valid notice given under this section.



   (D)   The Police Department or agent of the Police Department that
takes custody of an abandoned motor vehicle is entitled to reasonable storage
fees for:



      (1)   A period of not more than ten days beginning on the day
the Department takes custody and continuing through the day the Department
mails notice as provided by this section; and



      (2)   A period beginning on the day after the day the
Department mails notice and continuing through the day any accrued charges
are paid and the vehicle is removed.



(Prior Code, § 8.05.032)



§ 134.17  AUCTION OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES; TRANSFER OF TITLE; DISPOSITION OF
PROCEEDS.



   If an abandoned motor vehicle has not been reclaimed as provided by §
134.16, the Police Department shall sell the abandoned motor vehicle at a
public auction. Proper notice of the public auction shall be given, and, in
the case of a garage keeper’s lien, the garage keeper shall be notified of
the time and place of the auction. The purchaser of the motor vehicle takes
title to the motor vehicle free and clear of all liens and claims of
ownership, shall receive a sales receipt from the Police Department, and is
entitled to register the purchased vehicle and receive a certificate of
title. From the proceeds of the sale of an abandoned motor vehicle, the
Police Department shall reimburse itself for the expenses of the auction; the
costs of towing, preserving and storing the vehicle that resulted from
placing the abandoned motor vehicle in custody; and all notice and
publication costs incurred under § 134.16. Any remainder from the proceeds
of a sale shall be held for the owner of the vehicle or entitled lien holder
for 90 days and then shall be deposited in a special fund that shall remain
available for the payment of auction, towing, preserving, storage and all
notice and publication costs that result from placing another abandoned
vehicle in custody, if the proceeds from a sale of another abandoned vehicle
are insufficient to meet these expenses and costs. The city may transfer
funds in excess of $1,000 from the account to the general revenue account to
be used by the Police Department.



(Prior Code, § 8.05.033)



§ 134.18  DISPOSITION OF VEHICLES ABANDONED AT GARAGE KEEPER’S
ESTABLISHMENT.



   (A)   A motor vehicle left for more than ten days in a storage
facility operated for commercial purposes after notice is given by registered
or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner and to any lien
holder of record under the Certificate of Title Act (Tex. Transportation
Code, Ch. 501) to pick up the vehicle, or for more than ten days after a
period when under a contract the vehicle was to remain on the premises of the
storage facility, or a motor vehicle left for more than ten days in a storage
facility by someone other than the registered owner or by a person authorized
to have possession of the motor vehicle under contract of use, service,
storage or repair is considered an abandoned vehicle and shall be reported by
the garage keeper to the Police Department. If the notice to the owner or a
lien holder is returned by the post office unclaimed, notice by one
publication in one newspaper of general circulation in the area in which the
vehicle was left in storage is sufficient notice.



   (B)   If a garage keeper or storage facility acquires possession of
a motor vehicle for a purpose other than repair, the garage keeper or storage
facility is entitled to towing, preservation and notification charges and to
reasonable storage fees, in addition to storage fees earned pursuant to
contract for each day, up to a maximum of five days only, until notification
is mailed to the last known registered owner and all lien holders of record
as provided by this section. After such notice is mailed, storage fees may
continue until the vehicle is removed and all accrued charges are paid. A
garage keeper who fails to report the possession of an abandoned vehicle to
the Police Department within seven days after it becomes abandoned may no
longer claim reimbursement for storage of the vehicle.



   (C)   The Police Department, upon receipt of a report from a garage
keeper of the possession of a vehicle considered abandoned under the
provisions of this section, shall follow the notification procedures provided
by § 134.16, except that custody of the vehicle shall remain with the garage
keeper until after compliance with the notification requirements. A fee as
provided in state law shall accompany the report of the garage keeper to the
Police Department. The fee shall be retained by the Police Department
receiving the report and used to defray the cost of notification or other
costs incurred in the disposition of an abandoned motor vehicle.



   (D)   An abandoned vehicle left in a storage facility and not
reclaimed after notice is sent in the manner provided by § 134.16 shall be
taken into custody by the Police Department and sold in the manner provided
by § 134.17. The proceeds of sale under this section shall first be applied
to the garage keeper’s charges for servicing, storage and repair, but as
compensation for the expense incurred by the Police Department in placing the
vehicle in custody and the expense of auction, the Police Department shall
retain 2% of the gross proceeds of the sale of each vehicle auctioned, unless
the gross proceeds are less than $10. If the gross proceeds are less than
$10, the Department shall retain the $10 to defray expenses of custody and
auction. Surplus proceeds remaining from an auction shall be distributed in
accordance with § 134.17. An abandoned vehicle left in a storage facility
and not reclaimed after notice is sent in the manner provided by this chapter
may be taken into custody by the Police Department and used for Police
Department purposes.



   (E)   Except for the termination or limitation of a claim for
storage for failure to report an abandoned motor vehicle, nothing in this
section may be construed to impair a lien of a garage keeper under the laws
of this state.



   (F)   A person charging fees under this section commits an offense
if the person charges a storage fee for a period of time not authorized under
this section. Such offense is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine as provided
in § 10.99.



(Prior Code, § 8.05.034)



§ 134.19  DISPOSAL OF VEHICLES TO DEMOLISHERS.



   (A)   A person, firm, corporation or unit of government on whose
property or in whose possession is found any abandoned motor vehicle or a
person who is the owner of a motor vehicle whose title certificate is faulty,
lost or destroyed may apply to the state department of transportation for
authority to sell, give away or dispose of the vehicle to a demolisher.



   (B)   A person, firm, corporation or unit of government may dispose
of a motor vehicle to a demolisher if:



      (1)   The abandoned motor vehicle is eight years of age or
older;



      (2)   The abandoned motor vehicle either has no motor or is
otherwise totally inoperable; or



      (3)   The abandoned motor vehicle does not comply with
applicable air pollution emissions control related requirements required by
state law;



      (4)   The abandoned motor vehicle was authorized to be towed
by a law enforcement agency; and



      (5)   The law enforcement agency approves the application; and



      (6)   The person submits a fee as provided in state law,
unless the application is submitted by a unit of government.



(Prior Code, § 8.05.035)



§ 134.20  DUTIES OF DEMOLISHERS.



   (A)   A demolisher who purchases or otherwise acquires a motor
vehicle to wreck, dismantle or demolish shall obtain a valid certificate of
title, sales receipt or transfer document under §§ 134.17 and 134.37,
respectively, or certificate of authority from the person delivering the
vehicle for demolition, but the demolisher is not required to obtain a
certificate of title for the motor vehicle in the demolisher’s name. On
demand of the Department of Transportation, the demolisher shall surrender
for cancellation the certificate of title or authority. The Department of
Transportation shall issue such forms and rules governing the surrender of
auction sales receipts and certificates of title as are appropriate. The
Certificate of Title Act (Tex. Transportation Code, Ch. 501) governs the
cancellation of title of the motor vehicle.



   (B)   A demolisher commits an offense if the demolisher fails to
keep an accurate and complete record of a motor vehicle purchased or received
in the course of business in the manner provided by this section. These
records must contain the name and address of the person from whom each motor
vehicle was purchased or received and the date of the purchase or receipt.
The records shall be open for inspection by the Department of Transportation
or any Police Department at any time during normal business hours. A record
required by this division (B) must be kept by the demolisher for at least one
year after the transaction to which it applies.



(Prior Code, § 8.05.036)  Penalty, see § 134.99




JUNKED VEHICLES




§ 134.35  PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   A junked vehicle, including a part of a junked vehicle, that is located
in a place where it is visible from a public place or right-of way:



   (A)   Is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the public;



   (B)   Tends to reduce the value of private property;



   (C)   Invites vandalism;



   (D)   Creates a fire hazard;



   (E)   Constitutes an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the
health and safety of others;



   (F)   Produces urban blight adverse to the maintenance and
continuing development of the city; and



   (G)   Is a public nuisance.



(Prior Code, § 8.05.061)



§ 134.36  PROCEDURE FOR ABATEMENT AND REMOVAL BY CITY.



   (A)   The city hereby adopts procedures for the abatement and
removal of a junked vehicle, or a part of a junked vehicle, as a public
nuisance, from public or private property or a public right-of-way. Such
vehicle or part of a junked vehicle will not be reconstructed or made
operable after removal of the public nuisance.



   (B)   For a nuisance on private property, the city shall give not
less than ten days’ notice stating the nature of the public nuisance on
private property, that the nuisance must be abated or removed not later than
the tenth day after the date on which the notice was personally delivered or
mailed, and, if a hearing is desired, a written request for hearing must be
made before the ten-day period expires. The notice must be personally
delivered or sent by certified mail, five-day return receipt requested, to:



      (1)   The last known registered owner of the nuisance;



      (2)   Each lien holder of record of the nuisance; and



      (3)   The owner or occupant of:



         (a)   The property on which the nuisance is located; or



         (b)   If the nuisance is located on the public
right-of-way, the property adjacent to the right-of-way.



   (C)   If the notice is returned undelivered, official action to
abate the nuisance shall be continued to not earlier than the eleventh day
after the date of the return. If the post office address of the last known
registered owner of the nuisance is unknown, notice may be placed on the
nuisance or, if the owner is located, personally delivered.



   (D)   For a nuisance on public property, the city shall give not
less than ten days’ notice, stating the nature of the public nuisance on
public property or on a public right-of-way, that the nuisance must be
removed and abated within ten days, and, if a hearing is desired, a written
request for hearing must be made before expiration of the ten-day period. The
notice must be personally delivered or mailed by certified mail, with a
five-day return receipt requested, to the last known registered owner of the
public nuisance, each lien holder of record of the nuisance, and the owner or
occupant of the private property or, if the nuisance is located on the public
right-of-way, the property adjacent to the right-of-way. If the notice is
returned undelivered, official action to abate the nuisance shall be
continued to not earlier than the eleventh day after the date of return.



   (E)   Upon request for a hearing as provided herein, a public
hearing shall be held before the municipal court of the city for
determination of the existence of a junked vehicle as a public nuisance and
for the purpose of entering an order requiring removal of the junked vehicle
or junked vehicle part as a public nuisance. Where a request for a hearing
has not been made, the Judge of the Municipal Court, if shown a public
nuisance exists, may enter an order requiring the removal of the vehicle or
vehicle part as a public nuisance. The order requiring the removal of the
vehicle or vehicle part must include a description of the vehicle and the
vehicle identification number and license number of the vehicle if the
information is available at the site.



   (F)   Notice shall also be given to the State Department of
Transportation not later than the fifth day after removal. The notice must
identify the vehicle or vehicle part. The Department shall immediately cancel
the certificate of title to the vehicle pursuant to the Certificate of Title
Act (Tex. Transportation Code, Ch. 501).



   (G)   Where the vehicle is declared a public nuisance by the
Municipal Court Judge and is ordered to be removed, it shall not thereafter
be reconstructed or made operable.



   (H)   This section does not apply to a vehicle or vehicle part that
is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not
visible from the street or other public or private property; a vehicle or
vehicle part that is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property
in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard; or
an unlicensed, operable or inoperable antique or special interest vehicle
stored by a collector on the collector’s properly, if the vehicle and the
outdoor storage area are maintained in a manner so that they do not
constitute a health hazard and are screened from ordinary public view by
means of a fence, rapidly growing trees, shrubbery or other approved means.



   (I)   This section shall be administered by regularly salaried,
full-time employees of the city, except that removal of a vehicle or part
thereof from public or private property or the public right-of-way may be by
any other duly authorized person under the direction of the city.



   (J)   The person designated by the city and authorized to administer
the procedures of this chapter may enter upon private property for the
purposes specified in these procedures to examine a vehicle or vehicle part,
obtain information as to the identity of the vehicle and remove or cause the
removal of a vehicle or vehicle part that constitutes a public nuisance. The
Judge of the Municipal Court may issue orders necessary to enforce these
procedures.



   (K)   The relocation of a junked vehicle that is a public nuisance
to another location within the corporate limits of the city after a
proceeding for the abatement or removal of the public nuisance has commenced
has no effect on the proceedings if the junked vehicle constitutes a public
nuisance at the new location.



(Prior Code, § 8.05.063)



§ 134.37  DISPOSAL.



   A junked vehicle or vehicle part may be disposed of by removal to a
scrapyard, demolisher or any suitable site operated by the city for
processing as scrap or salvage. The process of disposal must comply with the
provisions of § 134.36. Upon proper authorization by the City Council, the
city may operate a disposal site if the City Council determines that
commercial channels of disposition are not available or are inadequate, and
it may make final disposition of the vehicles or vehicle parts, or the city
may transfer the vehicle or vehicle parts to another disposal site if the
disposal is only as scrap or salvage.



(Prior Code, § 8.05.064)



§ 134.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   A demolisher who commits an offense under § 134.20 is, on
conviction, subject to a fine of not less than $100 or more than $1,000, a
term of no less than ten days or more than six months in county jail, or both
fine and confinement.



(Prior Code, § 8.05.036)



   (C)   A person commits an offense if the person maintains a public
nuisance described by § 134.35 and fails to abate such public nuisance and
to remove the vehicle or vehicle part after being directed to do so by the
Judge of the Municipal Court, and shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine as provided in § 10.99, and each and every day such
offense shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. The court, upon
conviction of the person maintaining a public nuisance, will order abatement
and removal of the public nuisance.



(Prior Code, § 8.05.062)



CHAPTER 135:  NOISE



Section



   135.01   Unreasonable noise prohibited



   135.02   Enumeration of specific noises



   135.03   Jukeboxes



   135.04   Loudspeakers, amplifiers



§ 135.01  UNREASONABLE NOISE PROHIBITED.



   The creation of any unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary
noises in the city is hereby prohibited. Noises of such character, intensity
and duration as are reasonably calculated to be detrimental to the life or
health of any ordinarily reasonable person are hereby prohibited.



(Prior Code, § 8.06.001)



§ 135.02  ENUMERATION OF SPECIFIC NOISES.



   (A)   It is unlawful to make or cause to be made any unreasonable,
loud or raucous noise which:



      (1)   Is offensive to persons in the vicinity thereof;



      (2)   Substantially impairs the peaceable enjoyment of public
or private property;



      (3)   Causes material distress, discomfort or injury to
persons of ordinary sensibilities in the area; or



      (4)   Unreasonably disturbs or interferes with the peace,
comfort and repose of neighboring persons of ordinary sensibilities.



   (B)   The following acts, among others, are unreasonable, loud and
raucous noises, and are unlawful:



      (1)   The playing of any radio, stereo, CD player, phonograph,
musical instrument or similar device within a residential or business
district, or within 1,000 feet of such district, residence, business, hotel
or a public park, in such manner or with such volume so as to be heard at
least 50 feet away from such radio, stereo, CD player, phonograph, musical
instrument or similar device, or which would disturb a person of ordinary
sensibilities in the area;



      (2)   The discharge into open air of the exhaust of any steam
or internal combustion engine, or mechanical device operated by compressed
air except pneumatic drills, whether movable or stationary, except through a
muffler or other device which will effectively prevent the emission of
offensive noises therefrom;



      (3)   The erection, excavation, demolition, alteration or
repair of any building or structure in or adjacent to a residential area or
hotel between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and between
6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekends after receiving a complaint and warning
to stop the noisy activity, except in situations involving the interests of
public safety, official government business or the protection of the subject
property;



      (4)   The creation of any noise in a public place adjacent to
a church, school, hospital, cemetery, court of law or other public building
which, by its nature, is reasonably calculated to disrupt, interfere with or
disturb the proceedings conducted therein;



      (5)   The outdoor use of a drum, musical instrument,
mechanical loud speaker, or other sound amplification devices for the purpose
of attracting attention by the creation of noise to any performance, show,
sales event or display of merchandise so as to attract customers to any place
of business;



      (6)   The outdoor use of a mechanical loudspeaker, calliope,
mechanically operated piano, organ, musical instrument or other sound
amplification or broadcasting equipment, whether stationary or mobile,
emitting sound capable of being heard within 100 feet of a private home,
apartment building, hotel or other place of residence;



      (7)   The demolition, repair or alteration of a motor vehicle
or part thereof in connection with which there is produced any noise which is
offensive to inhabitants in the vicinity or which substantially impairs the
use or enjoyment of adjacent property;



      (8)   The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out
of repair, so loaded or operated in such manner as to create loud or
unnecessary noises such as spinning or squealing tires, grating, grinding,
rattling or other noise; and



      (9)   The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection
with the loading or unloading of any vehicle or the opening and destruction
of bales, boxes, crates or containers.



   (C)   This section shall not apply to:



      (1)   An official of federal, state or local government or
members of the United States armed forces engaged in the performance of
official duties;



      (2)   Persons engaged in the present performance or rendition
of emergency medical services;



      (3)   Special events conducted in park or recreation areas
pursuant to a special event permit authorized by the person directed by the
City Manager;



      (4)   Public parades duly permitted;



      (5)   The use of outdoor sound amplification for outdoor
public speeches, ceremonies, political assemblages or paging purposes
conducted at a fixed location at least 100 feet from a residential district
and where the sound is not audible beyond the property line of the premises
on which it was located;



      (6)   The use of sound amplification, intercom or paging
devices within the interior of a church, school, auditorium, convention
center, government building or similar public meeting place; or



      (7)   Persons engaged in school sponsored activities, such as,
but not limited to, athletic events and band performances.



(Prior Code, § 8.06.002)  (Ord. 10-08-14, passed 8-10-2010)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 135.03  JUKEBOXES.



   (A)   Operation restricted. It shall be unlawful for any person,
owner or employee or agent of an owner of an establishment which has on its
premises a music box, jukebox or record player whereby the same is permitted
to be played in such a manner as to emit music or musical monologues in such
a loud volume as to disturb the peace and serenity of the people residing
within a distance of 100 feet.



   (B)   Hours of operation. The playing of any music box, jukebox or
record player by the owner or employees of the owner, wherein its music or
recording can be heard outside the place, building or site of its origin
shall be unlawful between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. and when so
played shall be deemed a public nuisance.



(Prior Code, § 8.06.003)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 135.04  LOUDSPEAKERS, AMPLIFIERS.



   (A)   Use restricted. It shall be unlawful for any person to use or
permit the use of a loudspeaker used for amplification of sound, attached to
any building or vehicle in possession or control of such person, at any time
within the corporate limits of the city if the volume of sound is such as to
produce a noise which would, and is calculated to, unreasonably disturb or
interfere with the peace, comfort and repose of any neighboring persons of
ordinary sensibilities in the vicinity where such loudspeaker is being used.



   (B)   Hours of operation. The use of any loudspeaker or sound
amplifier attached to any building or vehicle which permits the production of
such sound or noise outside of any such building or vehicle within 1,000 feet
of any house or residence or place where one or more people normally sleep at
some time during the nighttime, after the hour of 10:00 p.m. and before the
hour of 7:00 a.m., shall be deemed to be unreasonable and is declared to be a
public nuisance, and any such operation between such hours shall be deemed a
misdemeanor.



   (C)   Exceptions. On special occasions, such as public celebrations,
public gatherings, public announcements, speeches and in special instances of
advertising where the general public may be benefitted thereby, loudspeakers
or amplifiers may be used; provided, however, that in any such instance the
person desiring to so use any such loudspeaker shall first secure a permit
from the city, and such permit may be issued if it appears that the
application made therefor shows on its face that such loudspeaker is to be
used for the purposes herein above designated, but in such cases the use of
such loudspeaker without a permit shall be unlawful.



(Prior Code, § 8.06.004)  (Ord. 07-04-02, passed 4-3-2007)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



CHAPTER 136:  MINORS; CURFEW



Section



   136.01   Definitions



   136.02   Curfew established



   136.03   Exceptions



   136.04   Parental responsibility



   136.05   Establishment owner’s responsibility



   136.06   Enforcement procedures



 



   136.99   Penalty



Statutory references:



   Review of juvenile curfew order or ordinance, see Tex. Local Gov’t
Code, § 370.002



   Children taken into custody for violation of juvenile curfew or order,
see Tex. Code of Criminal Proc, Art. 45.059



§ 136.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ESTABLISHMENT.  Any privately owned place of business carried on for a
profit or any place of amusement or entertainment to which the public is
invited.



   JUVENILE.  Any person under the age of 17 years of age or, in
equivalent phrasing, any person of the age 16 years old or younger.



   OPERATOR.  Any individual, firm, association, partnership or
corporation operating, managing or conducting any establishment; and whenever
used in any clause prescribing a penalty, the term as applied to associations
or partnerships shall include the members or partners thereof and as applied
to corporations shall include the officers thereof.



   PARENT.  Any natural parent of a juvenile, a legal guardian or any
adult person, 18 years or older, in whose care the juvenile has been placed
by the natural parent or legal guardian.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  Any public street, highway, road, alley, park,
playground, public building, parkway or vacant lot.



   REMAIN.  To stay behind, to tarry and stay unnecessarily upon a public
place, including congregating in groups totaling four or more juveniles in
which any minor included would not be using the public place for an ordinary
or serious purpose, such as passage or going home. To implement this
definition with more precision and precaution, numerous exceptions will be
provided hereinafter to indicate that this is not a mere prohibitory or
presence type curfew ordinance. More exceptions become available to juveniles
with increasing years and advancing maturity as appropriate in the interest
of reasonable regulation.



   TIME OF DAY.  The prevailing local standard time at the date in
question, whether standard time or daylight saving time, as observed by the
public. The time maintained by the Police Department shall be the prima facie
evidence of the TIME OF DAY for continued implementation of this chapter.



   YEARS OF AGE.  The time from one birthday, such as sixteenth, to the
next, but not including the day of the next birthday. Thus, upon a person’s
seventeenth birthday, he or she will cease to be a juvenile regulated by this
chapter.



(Prior Code, § 8.07.031)



§ 136.02  CURFEW ESTABLISHED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person 16 or less years of age to be or
remain in or upon any public place or in or upon any establishment within the
city between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 5:30 a.m. of the following day,
official city time, except that on Fridays and Saturdays and nights next
preceding school holidays (not including summer vacation) the hours shall be
from 1:00 a.m. to 5:30 a.m.



(Prior Code, § 8.07.032)  Penalty, see § 136.99



§ 136.03  EXCEPTIONS.



   In the following exceptional cases, a juvenile in or upon any public
place or in and upon an establishment shall not be deemed in violation of
this chapter; this section is intended as a clear guide for juvenile, their
parents, and law enforcement officials:



   (A)   When the juvenile is accompanied by his or her parent, legal
guardian or authorized adult supervisor;



   (B)   When exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United
States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech
and the rights of assembly. It shall be deemed a bona fide exercise of such
rights if the assembly, whether parade or demonstration, has been permitted
by the city or other bona fide religious, social or school activities
involving the right to assemble;



   (C)   When engaged in performing an errand or other legitimate
business at the direction of a parent, guardian or supervisory adult,
including travel to and from such location by a direct route;



   (D)   When the juvenile is on the sidewalks at the place where such
juvenile reside, or on the sidewalk of either next door neighbor, when said
neighbors do not object to such presence;



   (E)   When the juvenile is engaged in employment activities, such as
but not restricted to, newspaper delivery;



   (F)   All of the above cited exceptions to this chapter include
travel to and from such activity by a direct route, and this chapter is in no
way to be construed as a limitation upon normal travel by a juvenile engaged
in interstate movement; or



   (G)   Each of the foregoing exceptions are severable, and in
addition, other possible exceptions may be added hereto in the future, as
warranted by experience, as illuminated by the views of students, school
personnel, citizens, neighborhood spokespersons, parents, officers and
persons in authority concerned positively with minors, as well as juvenile
delinquency.



(Prior Code, § 8.07.033)



§ 136.04  PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.



   It shall be unlawful for a parent knowingly to permit or by
insufficient control to allow a juvenile in his or her care to be or remain
in any public place or to be or remain in any establishment other than for
excepted activities during the curfew hours established by this chapter. The
term KNOWINGLY includes knowledge which a parent should reasonably be
expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a juvenile in such parent’s
custody. It shall be prima facie evidence of violation of this section if a
responsible parent has no knowledge of a juvenile’s whereabouts during the
hours of curfew established by this chapter. The purpose of this section is
to require neglectful or careless parents to meet the community standard of
parental responsibility.



(Prior Code, § 8.07.034)  Penalty, see § 136.99



§ 136.05  ESTABLISHMENT OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY.



   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a business
establishment to allow a juvenile to remain upon such business premises
during the hours of curfew established in this chapter beyond the time
necessary to conduct an excepted activity. It shall be no defense to this
section that juvenile made a purchase, if the juvenile did not immediately
make such purchase upon arrival and depart immediately thereafter. It shall
be a defense to prosecution under this section that the owner or operator of
such business establishment has promptly notified the Police Department that
juveniles present on the premises after hours have refused to depart.



(Prior Code, § 8.07.035)  Penalty, see § 136.99



§ 136.06  ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES.



   (A)   A law enforcement officer, upon finding or having his or her
attention called to any juvenile in or on a public place or in or on the
premises of a business establishment in a prima facie violation of this
chapter, may take the juvenile into custody. Such juvenile may be transported
to the police Department. Upon arrival at the Police Department, a parent,
legal guardian or other responsible adult shall be immediately notified to
pick up such juvenile. An officer taking a juvenile into custody shall also
have discretion to release such juvenile to a parent, legal guardian or other
responsible adult under circumstance deemed appropriate by the officer. An
officer may also issue a warning notice to the juvenile in accordance with
Tex. Family Code, § 52.01 and order such juvenile to go directly and
promptly to his or her home. Delinquent conduct or conduct indicating a need
for supervision under Tex. Family Code, §§ 51.03 and 52.01 shall be handled
in accordance with applicable provisions of the Family Code.



   (B)   Upon picking up a juvenile in custody, said parent, legal
guardian or other responsible adult may be questioned about the circumstance
of the juvenile’s activities. This is intended to permit ascertainment,
under constitutional safeguards, or relevant facts, and to centralize
responsibility for accurate, effective, fair, impartial and uniform
environment and recording, thus making available experienced supervisory
personnel, the best of facilities, and, if required, referral to social
agencies equipped to handle family problems that may be disclosed by
investigation. In the absence of convincing identification, an officer on the
street may use his or her best judgment in determining age. Procedures shall
be constantly refined in the light of experience, and changes herein may be
made on the basis of such experience.



   (C)   In any event, an officer shall, within 24 hours, file a
written report on the juvenile incident or shall participate to the extent
possible in the preparation and filing of such a report by his or her
supervisor.



   (D)   When a parent, legal guardian or other responsible adult has
come to take charge of a juvenile and the appropriate information has been
received, the juvenile shall be released to the custody of the parent, legal
guardian or other responsible adult. If a parent, legal guardian or other
responsible adult cannot be located or fails to take charge of the juvenile,
then the juvenile shall be released to appropriated authorities; however, the
Police Department shall have the discretion to refuse to release a juvenile
to an adult other than the parent or legal guardian of the juvenile.



   (E)   A juvenile may not be held at the Police Department for more
than six hours. During such time, the following procedures shall be observed:



      (1)   The office must be an unlocked, multipurpose area that
is not designated, set aside or used as a secure detention area or part of a
secure detention area;



      (2)   The juvenile may not be secured physically to a cuffing
rail, chair, desk or stationary object;



      (3)   The juvenile may not be held longer than necessary to
accomplish the proposes of identification, investigation, processing, release
to parent, guardians or custodians, and arrangement of transportation to
school or court; and



      (4)   The office may not be designated or intended for
residential purposes.



(Prior Code, § 8.07.036)



§ 136.99  PENALTY.



   Prevailing community standards as reflected by this chapter require the
availability of criminal penalties in order for this chapter to be a viable
instrument for the maintenance of such standards. Consequently, violation of
this chapter by a juvenile, parent or business establishment owner or
operator shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not
exceeding $500. Each day any violation continues constitutes a separate
offense.



(Prior Code, § 8.07.037)



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



   Chapter



      150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS



      151.   FLOOD PREVENTION AND PROTECTION



      152.   SUBDIVISIONS



      153.   ZONING CODE



CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING REGULATIONS



Section




General Provisions




   150.001   Fee for inspection of irrigation systems and swimming pools



   150.002   Compliance with state accessibility standards



   150.003   Fences



   150.004   Storage buildings and outbuildings



   150.005   Open and vacant structures



   150.006   Asbestos inspections



   150.007   Building and Code service



   150.008   Swimming Pool and Spa Code



   150.009   Property Maintenance Code




Building and Residential Codes




   150.020   Building Code



   150.021   Residential Code



   150.022   Existing Building Code



   150.023   Definitions



   150.024   Charges for building permits



   150.025   Adoption of foundation specifications



   150.026   Restrictions on usage of wood roofing shingles



   150.027   Smoke detection systems




Electricity




   150.040   Generally



   150.041   Electrical Inspector



   150.042   Standards; Code adopted



   150.043   Permits and inspections



   150.044   Electricians’ certificates




Plumbing and Gas




   150.055   Plumbing Code



   150.056   Fuel Gas Code



   150.057   Responsible official



   150.058   General additions



   150.059   Plastic pipe; lead content of solder or flux



   150.060   State-required customer service inspections




Mechanical Code




   150.075   Title



   150.076   Purpose



   150.077   Adoption of Code



   150.078   Responsible official



   150.079   Permit and inspection fees



   150.080   License required



   150.081   Application for license



   150.082   Examination



   150.083   Fees



   150.084   Bond of licensee



   150.085   Revocation




Energy Conservation Code




   150.100   Adoption of Energy Conservation Code



   150.101   Provisions



   150.102   Designated official



   150.103   Continuation of rights




House Movers




   150.130   Generally



   150.131   Permit



 



   150.999   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 150.001  FEE FOR INSPECTION OF IRRIGATION SYSTEMS AND SWIMMING POOLS.



   There shall be a fee for inspection of irrigation systems and swimming
pools that are constructed within the city. The amount of the fee for such
inspections shall be determined by the City Manager or his or her designee,
and the same shall be on file in the offices of the City Secretary and the
city designee.



(Prior Code, § 3.01.002)  (Ord. 98-9-12, passed 10-13-1998)



§ 150.002  COMPLIANCE WITH STATE ACCESSIBILITY STANDARDS.



   (A)   The city designee may not issue a construction permit for new
construction or for renovation of existing structures until the applicant
therefor provides evidence acceptable to the city designee that the building
or structure has been registered with the State Department of Licensing and
Regulation for compliance with the state accessibility standards.



   (B)   The requirements of this section shall not apply to a
construction permit where the total cost of same does not exceed $50,000.



(Prior Code, § 3.01.003)  (Ord. 01-10-24, passed 10-23-2001)



Statutory reference:



   Elimination of architectural barriers, see Tex. Gov’t Code, Ch. 469



§ 150.003  FENCES.



   (A)   Fences shall be constructed of conventional fencing materials,
including, but not limited to, chain link fencing, masonry fencing or solid
wood fences constructed of treated pine, cedar or redwood. Unacceptable
fencing materials include, but are not limited to, plywood, railroad ties and
corrugated steel sheets. Cattle panels and hog wire are unacceptable.
Existing fences shall be in compliance with this requirement within six
months of the adoption of the code of ordinances. They shall be maintained,
upright and repaired so that those made of a metal that has rusted or those
that are bent will be painted or repaired to the appearance of the rest of
the fence or replace those pieces that are rusted or damaged. In the case of
wooden or other type of material, pieces becoming damaged will be replaced
with like type of fencing and adequately braced.



   (B)   It is unlawful to erect or maintain a fence on any corner lot
in such a manner as to create a traffic hazard. Failure of the owner, agent
or occupant to remove such obstruction within ten days after receipt of
notice is a violation of this chapter.



   (C)   The owner of a fence shall be responsible for the design,
construction and maintenance of the fence and the fence shall be so as not to
interfere with utility lines or normal drainage.



   (D)   Any commercial property used for the storage of farm
implements, building materials, vehicles, motor vehicles, excluding licensed
auto dealers for the expressed use of the sales of new or used motor vehicles
and the like, is required to have a fence approved by the city official
designated by the City Manager. The fence will be along any side of the
property to prevent view by the public. The fences must be maintained and in
good repair.



(Prior Code, § 3.01.004)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.004  STORAGE BUILDINGS AND OUTBUILDINGS.



   (A)   All storage buildings or outbuildings must be in good repair
and have all doors and all windows working properly to prevent visibility of
items stored inside.



   (B)   The storage building shall also be maintained and in good
repair and appearance.



(Prior Code, § 3.01.005)



§ 150.005  OPEN AND VACANT STRUCTURES.



   An owner must keep the doors and windows of a vacant structure or
vacant portion of a structure securely closed to prevent unauthorized entry.
Notice will be posted near the front door of the structure, should the
property be found unsecured. The city may secure the structure at the
owner’s expense, if the owner does not secure the structure. The owner will
be billed for the cost of securing any unsecured structures plus any
administrative fees up to $150.



(Prior Code, § 3.01.006)



§ 150.006  ASBESTOS INSPECTIONS.



   The City Building Official may not issue a construction permit to an
applicant therefor until the applicant provides:



   (A)   Evidence acceptable to the Building Official that an asbestos
survey, as required by the Texas Asbestos Health Protection Act (the Act),
being Tex. Occupations Code, §§ 1954.001 et seq., as amended, of all parts
of the building affected by the planned renovation or demolition has been
completed by a person licensed under the Act to perform such a survey; or



   (B)   A certification from a licensed engineer or architect, stating
that:



      (1)   The engineer or architect has reviewed the material
safety data sheets for the materials used in the original construction, the
subsequent renovations or alterations of all parts of the building affected
by the planned renovation or demolition, and any asbestos surveys of the
building previously conducted in accordance with the Act; and



      (2)   In the engineer’s or architect’s professional
opinion, all parts of the building affected by the planned renovation or
demolition do not contain asbestos.



(Prior Code, § 3.01.007)  (Ord. 01-09-14, passed 9-11-2001)



§ 150.007  BUILDING AND CODE SERVICE.



   As authorized by Art. IV, § 4 of the Charter of the city, building and
code services are moved from the Police Department to the Public Service
Department. The Supervisor of the Building and Code Services shall report
directly to the Director of the Public Service Department.



(Ord. 14-06-01, passed 6-23-2014)



§ 150.008  SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE.



   (A)   A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office
of the City Secretary, being marked and designated as the International
Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2012 Edition, as published by the International
Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Pool and Spa Code of the city
regulating and governing the design, construction, alteration, movement,
renovation, replacement, repair and maintenance of swimming pools, spas, hot
tubs, aquatic facilities and related equipment as herein provided; providing
for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and
all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said
Pool and Spa Code on file in the office of the City Secretary are hereby
referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this
section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in division (B) of this section.



   (B)   The following sections are hereby revised:



      Section 101.1. Insert: City of Henderson.



      Section 105.6.2. Insert: The fees for all work shall be as
adopted by the City Council of the City of Henderson and on file in the
office of the City Secretary and the City Building Official.



      Section 105.6.3. Remove: Text of 105.6.3(1), (2), and (3).
Insert/Replace with: The code official shall authorize refunds prescribed in
the refund policy on file in the office of the City Building Official.



      Section 107.4. Insert: “Class C Misdemeanor” for [SPECIFY
OFFENSE]. Remove: “or by imprisonment not exceeding [NUMBER OF DAYS], or
both such fine and imprisonment.”



      Section 107.4. Insert: “$2,000.00” for [AMOUNT]. Remove:
“or by imprisonment not exceeding [NUMBER OF DAYS], or both such fine and
imprisonment.”



      Section 107.4. Remove: “or by imprisonment not exceeding
[NUMBER OF DAYS], or both such fine and imprisonment.”



      Section 107.5. Insert: “$1.00” for [AMOUNT 1]. Insert:
“$2,000.00” for [AMOUNT 2].



   (C)   Nothing in this section or in the Pool and Spa Code hereby
adopted shall be construed to be affect any suit or proceeding impending in
any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or
causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby
repealed; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be
lost, impaired or affected by this section.



(Ord. 15-04-02, passed 4-14-2015)



§ 150.009  PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.



   (A)   A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office
of the City Secretary, being marked and designated as the International
Property Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition, as published by the International
Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of
the city regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all
property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied
utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential
to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use;
and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy
and use, and the demotion of such existing structures as herein provided;
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and
each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms
of said Property Maintenance Code on file in the office of the City Secretary
are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out
in this legislation, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes,
if any, prescribed in division (B) of this section.



   (B)   The following sections are hereby revised:



      Section 101.1. Insert: City of Henderson.



      Section 103.5. Insert: Nothing to be inserted in place of
“[JURISDICTION TO INSERT APPROPRIATE SCHEDULE]”. No fee schedule being
established.



      Section 108.5. Prohibited Occupancy shall be amended to read: 
“Any occupied structure condemned and placarded by the Code Official shall
be vacated as ordered by the code official. Any person who shall occupy
placarded premises or shall operate placarded equipment, and any owner or any
person responsible for the premises who shall let anyone occupy a placarded
premises or operate placarded equipment shall be liable for the penalties
provided by this code.



      Exception: Owners of record shall not be required to vacate a
condemned and placarded structure.”



      Section 112.4. Failure to Comply shall be amended to read: “Any
person who shall continue work after having been served with a stop work
order, except such work that the person is directed to perform to remove a
violation or unsafe condition is subject to a fine of not less than one
dollar ($1.00) and no more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), and each
day work continues in violation of this section shall be a separate
offense.”



      Section 302.4. Insert: 12 inches.



      Section 302.10. Entitled section “Care of Premises” shall be
amended and read: “It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of a
building, structure, or property to utilize the premises of such property for
the open storage of the following items, including but not limited to ice
box, refrigerator, stove, glass, carpet, furniture intended for indoor use,
tires, auto-parts, building material, rubbish, building rubbish, or other
similar items. It shall be the duty and responsibility of every such owner or
occupant to keep the premises of such property clean and in compliance with
this section.”



      Section 304.3. Shall remain unchanged except to add the following
to the end: “Addresses on the curb shall not be construed as compliance for
all purposes.”



      Section 304.14. Entitled section “Insect Screens” shall be
deleted/repealed.



      Section 602.3. Entitled section “Heat Supply” shall be
amended and read: “Every owner and operator of any building who rents,
leases, or lets one or more dwelling unit, rooming unit, dormitory, or
guestroom on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the
occupants thereof shall supply heat to maintain a temperature of not less
than 68 degrees Fahrenheit in all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and toilet
rooms.” Exceptions as stated in Section 602.3 to remain unchanged.



      Section 602.4. Entitled section “Occupiable Work Spaces”
shall be amended and read: “Indoor occupiable workspace shall be supplied
with heat to maintain a temperature of not less than 65 degrees Fahrenheit
(18 degrees Celsius) during the period the space are occupied.” Exceptions
as stated in Section 602.4 to remain unchanged.



   (C)   Nothing in this section or in the Property Maintenance Code
hereby adopted shall be construed to be affect any suit or proceeding
impending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any
cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance
hereby repealed; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character
be lost, impaired or affected by this section.



(Ord. 15-04-03, passed 4-14-2015)




BUILDING AND RESIDENTIAL CODES




§ 150.020  BUILDING CODE.



   (A)   Adoption of 2012 International Building Code. A certain
document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the City
Secretary, being marked and designated as the International Building Code,
2012 edition, including Appendices C, E, I and J, together with all
supplements, amendments and errata thereto, as published by the International
Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Building Code of the city, for
regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property,
buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities
and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure
that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the
condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use
and the demolition of such structures as herein provided; providing for the
issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Building
Code on file in the office of the city are hereby referred to, adopted and
made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in division (B) below,
save and except §§ 101.4.1 and 112; however, adoption of such code shall
not repeal §§ 150.023 through 150.027 and 150.999, which unrepealed
sections shall prevail in case of conflict with any provisions of said
Building Code.



   (B)   Revisions. The following sections of the International
Building Code are hereby revised:



      (1)   Section 101.1: Insert: City of Henderson;



      (2)   Section 1612.3: Insert: City of Henderson;



      (3)   Section 1612.3: September 27, 1991; and



      (4)   Section 3412.2: Insert: November 6, 1914.



   (C)   Designated official. Within said Building Code, when reference
is made to some official or the duties of some official named in said code,
the designated official of the city who has duties corresponding to those of
the named official in said code shall be deemed to be the responsible
official insofar as enforcing the provisions of said code are concerned.



   (D)   Continuation of rights. Nothing in this section or in the
Building Code hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or
proceeding pending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability
incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under any
act or ordinance hereby repealed.



(Prior Code, § 3.02.001)  (Ord. 13-12-02, passed 12-10-2013)



§ 150.021  RESIDENTIAL CODE.



   (A)   Adoption of 2012 International Residential Code. A certain
document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the City
Secretary, being marked and designated as the International Residential Code,
2012 edition, including Appendices A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, J and K, together
with all supplements, amendments and errata thereto, as published by the
International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Residential Code
of the city, for regulating and governing the construction, alteration,
movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, location, removal and
demolition of detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple
single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories in height
with separate means of egress as herein provided; providing for the issuance
of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Residential
Code on file in the office of the city are hereby referred to, adopted and
made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in division (B) below;
however, adoption of such code shall not repeal §§ 150.023 through 150.027
and 150.999, which unrepealed sections shall prevail in case of conflict with
any provisions of said Residential Code.



   (B)   Revisions. The following sections of the International
Residential Code are hereby revised:



      (1)   Section R101.1: Insert: City of Henderson;



      (2)   Table R301.2. (1): Insert:  Wind speed: 90 mph.;
Seismic design category: D1; Weathering: Negligible; Frost line depth: 12
inches; Termite: Very heavy; Decay: Slight to moderate; Winter design
temperature: 26 degrees; Ice shield underlayment required: No; Flood hazards:
September 27, 1991; Air freezing Index: 50 degrees; Mean annual temperature:
63.1;



      (3)   Section P2603.6.1: Insert: 12 inches and seven inches;
and



      (4)   Section R313.2: Deleted.



   (C)   Designated official. Within said Residential Code, when
reference is made to some official or the duties of some official named in
said code, the designated official of the city who has duties corresponding
to those of the named official in said code shall be deemed to be the
responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of said code are
concerned.



   (D)   Continuation of rights. Nothing in this section or in the
Residential Code hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or
proceeding pending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability
incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under any
act or ordinance hereby repealed.



(Prior Code, § 3.02.002)  (Ord. 13-12-03, passed 12-10-2013)



§ 150.022  EXISTING BUILDING CODE.



   (A)   Adoption of 2012 International Existing Building Code. A
certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the City
Secretary, being marked and designated as the International Existing Building
Code, 2012 edition, including Appendix B, together with all supplements,
amendments and errata thereto, as published by the International Code
Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Existing Building Code of the city,
for regulating and governing the repair, alteration, change of occupancy,
addition and relocation of existing buildings, including historic buildings,
as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of
fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said Existing Building Code on file in the office of
the city are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully
set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes, if any, prescribed in division (B) below; however, adoption of such
code shall not repeal §§ 150.023 through 150.027 and 150.999, which
unrepealed sections shall prevail in cast of conflict with any provisions
said Existing Building Code.



   (B)   Revisions. The following section of the International Existing
Building Code is hereby revised: Section 101.1: Insert: City of Henderson.



   (C)   Designated official. Within said Existing Building Code, when
reference is made to some official or the duties of some official named in
said code, the designated official of the city who has duties corresponding
to those of the named official in said code shall be deemed to be the
responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of said code are
concerned.



   (D)   Continuation of rights. Nothing in this section or in the
Existing Building Code hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit
or proceeding pending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability
incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under any
act or ordinance hereby repealed.



(Ord. 13-12-04, passed 12-10-2013)



§ 150.023  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CORPORATION COUNSEL.  The City Attorney.



   MUNICIPALITY.  The City of Henderson, Texas.



(Prior Code, § 3.02.005)



§ 150.024  CHARGES FOR BUILDING PERMITS.



   The charges for building permits issued by the city shall be as follows.



   (A)   Permit fees. The fee schedule for building permits issued by
the city designee pursuant to the authority contained herein shall be
determined by the City Manager or his or her designee, and the same shall be
on file in the offices of the City Secretary and the city designee.



   (B)   Moving of buildings or structures. The fee for a permit to
move any building or structure shall be in an amount set by the City Manager
or his or her designee, and the same shall be on file in the offices of the
City Secretary and the city designee.



   (C)   Demolition of buildings or structures. The fee for a permit to
demolish any building or structure shall be in an amount set by the City
Manager or his or her designee, and the same shall be on file in the offices
of the City Secretary and the city designee.



   (D)   Double fee. Where work for which a permit is required by this
code is started or proceeded with prior to obtaining said permit, the fees
herein specified shall be doubled, but the payment of such double fee shall
not relieve any persons from fully complying with the requirements of this
code in the execution of the work nor from any other penalties prescribed
herein.



   (E)   Plan-checking fees. When the valuation of the proposed
construction exceeds $1,000 and a plan is required to be submitted by the
Building Code, a plan-checking fee shall be paid to the city designee at the
time of submitting plans and specifications for checking. Said plan-checking
fee shall be equal to one-half of the building permit fee for the equivalent
dollar amount.



(Prior Code, § 3.02.006)  (Ord. 98-9-12, passed 10-13-1998)



§ 150.025  ADOPTION OF FOUNDATION SPECIFICATIONS.



   There is hereby adopted for recommended and approved minimum foundation
slab construction specifications in the city that certain design
specification plan referred to as “minimum standards”, copies of which
are available upon request from the city designee’s office.



(Prior Code, § 3.02.007)



§ 150.026  RESTRICTIONS ON USAGE OF WOOD ROOFING SHINGLES.



   Wood shingle roofing material on any building within the city is
expressly prohibited, except when such roofing material has been pressure
treated for fire resistance or when installed on a building roof where there
exists a permanent 30 feet clear, open space between such building and any
adjoining property line.



(Prior Code, § 3.02.008)



§ 150.027  SMOKE DETECTION SYSTEMS.



   On any new construction erected after November 10, 1983, including
every dwelling, private residence and every dwelling unit within an apartment
house, condominium, townhouse and every guest room in a motel or hotel, every
sleeping room in dormitories and every basement or cellar within such
structures, and in other businesses that offer sleeping accommodations to the
general public, there shall be provided an approved listed smoke detector,
installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendation and listing.
When activated, the detector shall provide an audible alarm. The smoke
detectors shall be tested in accordance with and meet the requirements of UL
217, Single and Multiple Station Smoke Detectors.



(Prior Code, § 3.02.009)



Statutory reference:



   Smoke detectors in rental homes, apartments, dwellings and the like,
see Tex. Property Code, §§ 92.251 et seq.




ELECTRICITY




§ 150.040  GENERALLY.




(A)   Title. The provisions of this subchapter shall be known as the
Electrical Code of the city.




(Prior Code, § 3.03.001)



   (B)   Object. The object of the provisions of this subchapter is to
reduce the personal hazard and the fire hazard from electrical causes. To
accomplish this, the requirements set forth herein are intended to provide a
minimum standard for electrical installation in the city.



(Prior Code, § 3.03.002)



   (C)   Application of provisions. The provisions of this subchapter
shall not apply to installations in railway cars, automotive equipment,
electrical railway companies, radio transmission stations, in the generation,
transmission or in distribution of electricity or for the operation of
signals or the transmission of intelligence, in the exercise of their
function as such agencies and located outdoors or in buildings used
exclusively for that purpose; provided, however, that these provisions,
except as to permits, shall apply to all such wiring and equipment installed
in or on the consumer’s premises.



(Prior Code, § 3.03.003)



   (D)   Liability for damages. The provisions of this subchapter shall
not be construed to affect the responsibility or liability of any party
owning, operating, controlling or installing any electrical equipment for
damages to persons or to property caused by any defect therein; nor shall the
city, or any officer or employee of such city, be held as assuming such
liability by reason of the inspection or reinspection authorized herein or
the certificate of approval issued as herein provided or by reason of the
approval or disapproval of any equipment authorized herein.



(Prior Code, § 3.03.004)



§ 150.041  ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR.



   (A)   Office created. The Office of Electrical Inspector is hereby
created in and for the city.



(Prior Code, § 3.03.031)



   (B)   Qualifications. The person chosen to fill the Office of
Electrical Inspector shall be possessed of such executive ability as is
requisite for the performance of his or her duties. He or she shall have a
thorough knowledge of the standards, materials and methods used in the
installation of electrical equipment. He or she shall be well versed in
approved methods of construction for safety to persons and property, the
statutes of the state relating to electrical work, and any order, rules and
regulations issued by authority thereof, and the Electrical Code adopted in
§ 150.042(A). He or she shall have had at least five years’ experience as
an Electrical Inspector or in the installation of electrical equipment, or in
lieu of such experience shall be a graduate in electrical or mechanical
engineering of a recognized college or university and shall have had two
years’ practical electrical experience.



(Prior Code, § 3.03.032)



   (C)   Appointment. The Electrical Inspector shall be appointed by
the City Manager.



(Prior Code, § 3.03.033)



   (D)   Removal from office. The person appointed Electrical Inspector
shall be subject to removal from office at all times and for any reason.



(Prior Code, § 3.03.034)



   (E)   Duties.



      (1)   It shall be the duty of the Electrical Inspector to
enforce the provisions of this subchapter. He or she shall make inspections
of electrical installations as provided in this subchapter. He or she shall
keep complete records of all permits issued, inspections and reinspections
made, and other official work performed in accordance with the provisions of
this subchapter.



      (2)   He or she shall also keep on file a list of inspected
electrical equipment issued by or for Underwriters’ Laboratories, Inc.,
which list shall be accessible for public reference during regular office
hours.



(Prior Code, § 3.03.035)



   (F)   Conflict of interest. It shall be unlawful for the Electrical
Inspector or for any of his or her assistants to engage in the business of
the sale, installation or maintenance of electrical equipment, either
directly or indirectly. They shall have no financial interest in any concern
engaged in such business in the city at any time while holding such office.



(Prior Code, § 3.03.036)



   (G)   Right of entry. The Electrical Inspector shall have the right
during reasonable hours to enter any building or premises in the discharge of
his or her official duties, for the purpose of making any inspection,
reinspection or test of the electrical equipment contained therein or its
installation.



(Prior Code, § 3.03.037)



   (H)   Condemnation of existing installations.



      (1)   When any electrical installation or equipment is found
by the Electrical Inspector to be dangerous to persons or to property because
it is defective, or defectively installed, the person responsible for the
electrical installation or equipment shall be notified in writing, and shall
make any change or repairs required in the judgment of the Electrical
Inspector to place such equipment in safe condition.



      (2)   If such work is not completed within 15 days or any
longer period that may be specified by the Electrical Inspector in such
notice, the Electrical Inspector shall have authority to disconnect or order
the discontinuance of electrical service to such electrical installation or
equipment. In case of emergency, where necessary for safety of persons or of
property, or where electrical installation or equipment may interfere with
the work of the Fire Department, the Electrical Inspector shall have the
authority to immediately disconnect or cause the disconnection of any
electrical equipment.



(Prior Code, § 3.03.038)



   (I)   Removal of obstructions to inspection. The Electrical
Inspector shall have the right to remove or compel the removal of any
obstruction, such as lath, plastering, ceiling or flooring, which may hinder
a full and complete investigation of such wires and apparatus. He or she may
remove or compel the removal of any conductors which are enclosed in conduit
or otherwise inaccessible for complete inspection. When such conductors or
appliances are not in accordance with the requirements of this subchapter, or
found to be unsafe to life or property, he or she shall have the right to
condemn such conductors or appliances as hereinafter provided.



(Prior Code, § 3.03.039)



   (J)   Suspension of work. The Electrical Inspector shall have power
to compel the suspension of any electrical work being done in a manner
prohibited by this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 3.03.040)



   (K)   Obstruction of inspector prohibited. It shall be unlawful for
any person to hinder, obstruct or interfere with the Electrical Inspector or
any of his or her deputies in the discharge of their duties under this
subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 3.03.041)



Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.042  STANDARDS; CODE ADOPTED.



   (A)   Code adopted.



      (1)   The National Electric Code, 2011 edition, with all
amendments and appendices thereto, as recommended and published by the
National Fire Protection Association, is hereby adopted as the official
Electric Code of the city, and incorporated herein by reference as though
fully copied herein, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling as the
minimum standard for the installation and construction of all electrical
wiring, devices and equipment within the limits of the city; save and except,
however, such portions of such code inconsistent with the other provisions of
this chapter.



      (2)   Within such code, when reference is made to the duties
of certain officials named therein, the designated official of the city who
has duties corresponding to those of the named officials in such code shall
be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions
of such code is concerned.



      (3)   In the event of any conflict between the provisions of
this subchapter or state law and the provisions of the National Electrical
Code herein adopted, the provisions of this subchapter or state law shall
prevail or be controlling.



(Prior Code, § 3.03.071)



   (B)   Conformity of work. All electrical work or installations shall
be in strict conformity with the provisions of this subchapter, state law and
rules and regulations issued thereunder, and shall be in conformity with
approved standards of construction for safety to life and property. In every
case where no specific type or class of material or no specific standard of
construction is prescribed by this subchapter or state law, conformity with
the National Electrical Code, and other installation and safety regulations
approved by the American Standards Association shall be prima facie evidence
of conformity with approved standards of construction for safety to life and
property.



(Prior Code, § 3.03.072)



   (C)   Conformity of material. All electrical equipment installed or
used in the city shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter,
state law and rules and regulations issued thereunder, and with approved
electrical standards for safety to persons and property. Unless by this
subchapter, state law and rules and regulations issued thereunder a specific
type or class of material is disapproved for installation and use, conformity
with the standards approved by the American Standards Association shall be
prima facie evidence of conformity with approved standards for safety to
persons and property; provided, however, that the provisions of this section
shall not apply to equipment owned and used by an electrical supply or
communication agency in the generation, transmission or distribution of
electricity or for the operation of signals or for the transmission of
intelligence.



(Prior Code, § 3.03.073)



   (D)   Approval of fittings, materials. No electrical apparatus,
fitting or material shall be used or placed on sale unless such apparatus,
fitting or material is approved by the Electrical Inspector as complying with
safety requirements of this chapter; provided, however, that all such
apparatus, fittings or material which bears the label of Underwriters’
Laboratories, Inc., shall be deemed prima facie evidence to satisfy the
requirements of this subchapter, and the Electrical Inspector is authorized
to approve such apparatus, fittings or material without requiring further
tests thereof to be made.



(Prior Code, § 3.03.074)



   (E)   Manner of work. All electrical work shall be executed in a
neat and workmanlike manner. Slipshod work or work not in keeping with good
electrical practice shall be classed as defective and shall be immediately
corrected by persons causing same.



(Prior Code, § 3.03.075)



(Ord. 11-09-13, passed 9-13-2011)



Statutory reference:



   National Electrical Code adopted as municipal residential and
commercial electrical code, see Tex. Local Gov’t Code, § 214.214



§ 150.043  PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Permits required. It shall be unlawful for any person to do,
perform or construct any electrical work or installation within the city
without having first obtained a permit therefor.



(Prior Code, § 3.03.101)



   (B)   When permit not required. No permit will be required under the
provisions of this section to execute or perform any of the following classes
of electrical work:



      (1)   The replacement of lamps or the connection of portable
electrical equipment to suitable permanently installed receptacles;



      (2)   The installation, alteration or repair of electrical
equipment for the operation of signals or for the transmission of
intelligence by wire by a communication agency;



      (3)   The installation, alteration or repair of electrical
equipment installed by or for an electrical supply agency for the use of such
agency in the generation, transmission distribution of electricity; or



      (4)   Minor repairs or alterations where material and labor
does not exceed $25.



(Prior Code, § 3.03.102)



   (C)   Application for permit. Before proceeding with the
installation, alteration of or the addition to any electrical wiring or
equipment within or on any building, structure or premises, publicly or
privately owned in the city, the master electrician or electrical sign
manufacturer in charge of such proposed work shall first file with the
Electrical Inspector an application requesting inspection and secure a permit
therefor. Such application shall be made in writing, shall describe the work
to be done, shall give the exact street number of the premises on which work
is to be done, approximate date the inspection is desired, name of the owner
or occupant, name of the electrician doing the work and class of wiring.



(Prior Code, § 3.03.103)



   (D)   Plans and specifications. On all applications for permits
required under the provisions of this section where plans and specifications
require installation above the minimum standards as set forth in this
chapter, the plans and specifications for such work shall accompany the
application for the permit. No deviation may be made from the installation
described in such plans and specifications without the written approval of
the owner or architect.



(Prior Code, § 3.03.104)




(E)   Fees.




      (1)   The application for a permit required by the provisions
of this division shall be accompanied by the fees on file in the City
Secretary’s and the city designee’s offices.



      (2)   A minimum charge which is on file in the City Secretary
and city designee’s offices shall be made for any permit and inspection.
Whenever a second trip is necessary to be made by the Electrical Inspector
because of incorrect address or defective workmanship which would require a
second inspection, an additional charge which is on file in the City
Secretary’s and city designee’s offices will be made for each trip.



(Prior Code, § 3.03.105)



   (F)   Inspections.



      (1)   The master electrician in charge of any work being
performed under a permit required by this section shall at all times keep the
Electrical Inspector notified of the progress of the work and shall request
inspections as the work progresses. Upon receipt of an application requesting
inspection, the Electrical Inspector shall inspect or cause to be inspected
such work within 48 hours after receiving the application, Sundays and
holidays not included in this time. After inspecting the electrical wiring
covered by any application, the Electrical Inspector shall leave a tag, which
tag shall state that the work has been inspected and approved or that it is
not approved and must be held open for correction or the master electrician
notified, and if the wiring is to be held open for inspection, no person
shall lath, ceil or in any other manner conceal any wiring until they are
informed that such wiring has been approved by the Electrical Inspector.



      (2)   The master electrician shall have all electrical work
installed by them inspected before such work is covered or concealed. All
cabinet and panel board covers or trims shall be left off for final
inspection, any fitting or cover that conceals any wiring which may hinder
the proper inspection of electrical work shall be removed by the master
electrician at the request of the Electrical Inspector.



(Prior Code, § 3.03.106)



   (G)   Work on existing systems. Any master electrician making
extensions or additions to existing electrical systems shall, before
proceeding with such work, ascertain from the Electrical Inspector whether
any of the old work must be changed or must be brought up to the requirements
of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 3.03.107)



   (H)   Final inspection; certificate.



      (1)   Upon completion and receipt of final inspection papers
covering electrical work, the Electrical Inspector shall make a final
inspection. If such work is found to comply with this subchapter, a
certificate of inspection shall be issued, stating that the work has been
done according to the provisions of this subchapter and the rules governing
the respective class to which it belongs.



      (2)   This certificate shall not relieve the master
electrician of his or her responsibility for any defective work that may have
been concealed or escaped the notice of the Inspector.



(Prior Code, § 3.03.108)



   (I)   Connection of electrical service. It shall be unlawful for any
public service company operating in the city to furnish current to any new
building, tent, structure or outdoor wiring of any kind, nature or
description, without first obtaining a clearance from the Electrical
Inspector, stating that such wiring is approved and a permit has been issued
for the use of current. Whenever any service is discontinued to any building
structure for any cause whatever, excepting nonpayment of a bill, a clearance
will be necessary before such building or structure can be reconnected. Any
time a building is vacated, the Electrical Inspector shall make certain that
there have not been any unauthorized additions made to wiring of such
building that might cause a fire hazard, or that the wiring has not become in
such a condition that is hazardous.



(Prior Code, § 3.03.109)



Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.044  ELECTRICIANS’ CERTIFICATES.



   (A)   Required. Every person, before engaging in the business of
installing, repairing or removing of electrical wiring and equipment, shall
first obtain a certificate as a licensed electrician through the State
Department of Licensing and Regulation, Title 8, Texas Electrical Safety and
Licensing Act, Tex. Occupations Code, Ch. 1305.



(Prior Code, § 3.03.141)



   (B)   Application. Any person desiring to permit and perform
electrical work shall make application to the Community Development Director.
He or she shall provide a copy of the state-required electrical
contractor’s license, state-required master electrical license and a copy
of his or her current insurance.



(Prior Code, § 3.03.142)



   (C)   Existing city licenses. Any person desiring to continue using
an active city license shall renew their license yearly. The license shall be
renewed by January 1 of each year. Any license that expires shall require the
person who performs electrical contracting to adhere to the State Electrical
Safety and Licensing Act.



(Prior Code, § 3.03.143)




PLUMBING AND GAS




§ 150.055  PLUMBING CODE.



   (A)   Adoption of 2012 International Plumbing Code. A certain
document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the City
Secretary, being marked and designated as the International Plumbing Code,
2012 edition, including Appendix Chapters A and B, together with all
supplements, amendments and errata thereto, as published by the International
Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Plumbing Code of the city, for
regulating and governing the design, construction, quality of materials,
erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation,
replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing systems as herein
provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefor, and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said Plumbing Code on file in the office of the city
are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out
in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if
any, prescribed in division (B) below; however, adoption of such code shall
not repeal §§ 150.058 through 150.060, which unrepealed sections shall
prevail in ease of conflict with any provisions of said Plumbing Code.



   (B)   Revisions. The following sections of the International
Plumbing Code are hereby revised:



      (1)   Section 101.1: Insert: City of Henderson;



      (2)   Section 106.6.2: Insert: Fee schedules in the City
Secretary’s and Building Official’s offices;



      (3)   Section 106.6.3: Insert 50% and 50%;



      (4)   Section 108.4: Insert: Class C Misdemeanor, $2,000; and
0;



      (5)   Section 108.5; Insert: $100 and $2,000;



      (6)   Section 305.4.1: Insert: 12 inches and 12 inches; and



      (7)   Section 903.1: Insert: 12 inches.



   (C)   Continuation of rights. Nothing in this section or in the
Plumbing Code hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or
proceeding pending in any court, or any rights acquired or liability
incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under any
act or ordinance hereby repealed.



(Prior Code, § 3.04.001)  (Ord. 13-12-05, passed 12-10-2013)



§ 150.056  FUEL GAS CODE.



   (A)   Adoption of 2012 International Fuel Gas Code. A certain
document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the City
Secretary, being marked and designated as the International Fuel Gas Code,
2012 edition, including Appendices A, B, C and D, together with all
supplements, amendments and errata thereof, as published by the International
Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Fuel Gas Code of the city, for
regulating and governing fuel gas systems and gas-fired appliances as herein
provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said Fuel Gas Code on file in the office of the city
are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out
in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if
any, prescribed in division (B) below; however, adoption of such code shall
not repeal §§ 150.057 through 150.060, which unrepealed sections shall
prevail in case of conflict with any provisions of said Fuel Gas Code.



   (B)   Revisions. The following sections of the International Fuel
Case Code are hereby revised:



      (1)   Section 101.1  Insert: City of Henderson;



      (2)   Section 106.5.2:  Insert: As provided in Ord. 98-9-12
of the city;



      (3)   Section 106.6.2: Insert 50% and 50%;



      (4)   Section 108.4: Insert: Class C misdemeanor, $2,000; and
0; and



      (5)   Section 108.5. Insert: $100 and $2,000.



   (C)   Continuation of rights. Nothing in this section or in the Fuel
Gas Code hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding
pending in any court, or any rights acquired or liability incurred, or any
cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance
hereby repealed.



(Prior Code, § 3.04.002)  (Ord. 13-12-06, passed 12-10-2013)



§ 150.057  RESPONSIBLE OFFICIAL.



   Within such code, when reference is made to the duties of certain
officials named therein, the designated official of the city who has duties
corresponding to those of the named officials in such code shall be deemed to
be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of such code
is concerned.



(Prior Code, § 3.04.003)



§ 150.058  GENERAL ADDITIONS.



   (A)   Plumbing license required. All persons who engage in the
business of or work at the actual installation, alteration, repair and
renovating of plumbing shall possess either a master or journeyman
plumber’s license in accordance with the provisions of the Plumbing License
Law of 1947, Tex. Occupations Code, Ch. 1301.



   (B)   Permits required.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful to construct, install or cause to
be installed any plumbing as defined herein without securing a plumbing
permit therefor; except, no plumbing permit is required to do “minor
repairs” such as the maintenance, repair or replacement in kind of the
following:



         (a)   Yard hydrants and sill cocks;



         (b)   Flush valves and floatballs in water closet tanks;



         (c)   Accessible traps on lavatories or sinks; or



         (d)   Replacing of plumbing fixtures where no change on
“roughing-in” is involved.



      (2)   The above examples are representative only and should
not be considered as a limitation on the term “minor repairs”.



   (C)   Permit and inspection fees. The fees for each category of
plumbing, gas and mechanical permits and inspections shall be set by the City
Manager or his or her designee, and the same shall be on file in the offices
of the City Secretary and the city designee. Any time a second inspection
trip is made by the designee due to an incorrect address or defective
workmanship which would require a second inspection, there shall be an
additional charge in an amount to be set by the City Manager or his or her
designee, and the same shall be on file in the offices of the City Secretary
and the city designee.



(Prior Code, § 3.04.004)  (Ord. 98-9-12, passed 10-13-1998)  Penalty, see
§ 150.999



§ 150.059  PLASTIC PIPE; LEAD CONTENT OF SOLDER OR FLUX.



   (A)   Plastic pipe shall not be permitted in the city, except as
hereinafter provided:



      (1)   For drains, wastes and vents in residential and
commercial buildings, PVC schedule 40 pipe, identified by proper markings as
designated No. D2665-77 of the American Society of Testing Materials;



      (2)   For residential use for water service lines, to within
three feet of any building or structure served thereby, PVC identified by
proper markings as designated No. D1527-77 or D-2282-77 of the American
Society of Testing Materials; and



      (3)   For gas lines, thermoplastic pipe identified by proper
markings as designated No. D2513 of the American Society of Testing Materials
or a similar number designating an equivalent quality pipe; provided,
however, that where plastic pipe is used, a locator wire shall be installed
with the plastic pipe, such wire being a No. 14 gauge T&W copper wire or No.
14 gauge Formwear copper wire, or any No. 14 gauge copper wire of equivalent
quality.



   (B)   The use of solder or flux exceeding 0.2% lead content is
prohibited in new installations and repairs of public water supply systems or
in any plumbing in residential or nonresidential facilities providing water
for human consumption which is connected to a public water system in the city.



(Prior Code, § 3.04.005)



§ 150.060  STATE-REQUIRED CUSTOMER SERVICE INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Unacceptable practices prohibited. Cross-connections or other
similar unacceptable plumbing practices which could cause contamination of
the city’s water supply are prohibited. Inspections for such unacceptable
practices in accordance with state requirements are hereby authorized.



   (B)   Customer service inspections required. From and after the
effective date of this section (ordinance adopted March 24, 1998), a customer
service inspection certification shall be completed by those persons
authorized in this section to conduct same under the following circumstances:



      (1)   Prior to providing continuous water service to new
construction;



      (2)   On any existing service when the city designee, in his
or her sole discretion and opinion, has reason to believe that
cross-connections or other unacceptable plumbing practices exist; and



      (3)   For any material improvement, correction or addition to
private plumbing facilities as determined by the city designee.



   (C)   Qualified inspectors. The following individuals shall be and
are hereby authorized to conduct customer service inspection certifications
within the city, in accordance with the terms and provisions hereof:



      (1)   Plumbing inspectors and water supply protection
specialists licensed by the State Board of Plumbing Examiners;



      (2)   Licensed master plumbers, who have received all
necessary state-required certifications, endorsements and licenses, upon
specific written authorization of the city designee, and only for such
inspections on single-family residential services; and



      (3)   Certified waterworks operators and members of other
water-related professional groups who have completed a training course,
passed an examination administered by the Commission or its designated agent,
and hold an endorsement granted by the Commission or its designated agent.



   (D)   Elimination of unacceptable practices. When unacceptable
plumbing practices are discovered, they shall be promptly eliminated to
prevent possible contamination of the city water system. The existence of a
serious threat to the integrity of the public water supply shall be
considered sufficient grounds for immediate termination of water service.
Service can be restored only when the source of potential contamination no
longer exists, or until sufficient additional safeguards have been taken.



   (E)   Required certifications.



      (1)   Copies of properly completed inspection certifications
shall be kept on file by the city designee. All such certifications shall be
maintained for a minimum of ten years. The city designee shall prepare
appropriate certification forms. All such forms shall include as a minimum
the name and registration number of the inspector performing the inspection,
the type of registration, the date of the inspection and the signature of the
Inspector.



      (2)   As a minimum, each such form shall include the following
certifications and information, as applicable.



         (a)   No direct connection between the public drinking
water supply and a potential source of contamination exists. Potential
sources of contamination are isolated from the public water system by an air
gap or appropriate backflow prevention assembly in accordance with state
plumbing regulations. Additionally, all pressure relief valves and thermal
expansion devices are in compliance with state plumbing codes.



         (b)   No cross-connection between the city drinking
water supply and a private water source exists. Where an actual air gap is
not maintained between the public water supply and a private water supply, an
approved reduced pressure-zone backflow prevention assembly is properly
installed and a service agreement exists for annual inspection and testing by
a recognized backflow prevention assembly tester.



         (c)   No connection exists which would allow the return
of water used for condensing, cooling or industrial processes back to the
public water supply.



         (d)   No pipe or pipe fitting which contains more than
8% lead exists in private plumbing facilities which have been installed on or
after July 1, 1988.



         (e)   No solder or flux which contains more than 0.2%
lead exists in private plumbing facilities installed on or after July 1, 1988.



         (f)   No plumbing fixture is installed which is not in
compliance with the state-approved plumbing code.



(Prior Code, § 3.04.006)  (Ord. 98-3-2, passed 3-24-1998)




MECHANICAL CODE




§ 150.075  TITLE.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall be known as the Mechanical Code
of the city.



(Prior Code, § 3.05.001)



§ 150.076  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of the provisions of this subchapter is to establish rules
and regulations for the installation and maintenance of cooling, heating and
ventilating equipment and systems within the city, as well as for the
regulation of the issuance or refusal of permits and providing for penalties
relating to offenses contrary to this Mechanical Code.



(Prior Code, § 3.05.002)



§ 150.077  ADOPTION OF CODE.



   (A)   Adoption of 2012 International Mechanical Code. A certain
document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the City
Secretary, being marked and designated as the International Mechanical Code,
2012 edition, including Appendix A, together with all supplements, amendments
and errata thereto, as published by the International Code Council, be and is
hereby adopted as the Mechanical Code of the city, for regulating and
governing the design, construction, quality of materials, erection,
installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition
to, use or maintenance or mechanical systems as herein provided; providing
for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all
of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said
Mechanical Code on file in the office of the city are hereby referred to,
adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, withe
the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in
division (B) below; however, adoption of such code shall not repeal §§
150.075, 150.076, 150.078 through 150.085, which unrepealed sections shall
prevail in case of conflict with any provisions of said Mechanical Code.



   (B)   Revisions. The following sections are hereby revised:



      (1)   Section 101.1: Insert: City of Henderson;



      (2)   Section 106.5.2: Insert: As provided in Ord. 98-9-12 of
the City of Henderson;



      (3)   Section 106.5.3: Insert: 50% and 50%;



      (4)   Section 108.4: Insert: Class A Misdemeanor, $2,000; and
0; and



      (5)   Section 108.5: Insert $100 and $2,000.



   (C)   Continuation of rights. Nothing in this section, or in the
Mechanical Code hereby adopted, shall be construed to affect any suit or
proceeding pending in any court, or any rights acquired or liability
incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under any
act or ordinance hereby repealed.



(Prior Code, § 3.05.031)  (Ord. 13-12-07, passed 12-10-2013)



§ 150.078  RESPONSIBLE OFFICIAL.



   Within such code, when reference is made to the duties of certain
officials named therein, the designated official of the city who has duties
corresponding to those of the named officials in such code shall be deemed to
be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of such code
is concerned.



(Prior Code, § 3.05.032)



§ 150.079  PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEES.



   (A)   The fees for each category of plumbing, gas and mechanical
permits and inspections shall be set by the City Manager or his or her
designee, and the same shall be on file in the offices of the City Secretary
and the city designee.



   (B)   Any time a second inspection trip is made by the Inspector due
to an incorrect address or defective workmanship which would require a second
inspection, there shall be an additional charge in an amount to be set by the
City Manager or his or her designee, and the same shall be on file in the
offices of the City Secretary and the city designee.



(Prior Code, § 3.05.033)  (Ord. 98-9-12, passed 10-13-1998)



§ 150.080  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall engage in the business of installing, repairing,
removing or otherwise working on heating, cooling, air conditioning and
ventilation systems in any structure in the city without having been first
duly licensed under this subchapter in accordance with the provisions hereof.



(Prior Code, § 3.05.061)  Penalty, see § 150.999



Statutory reference:



   Air Conditioning and Refrigeration Contractor License Law, see Tex.
Occupations Code, Ch. 1302



§ 150.081  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   All persons desiring to engage in the business of installing,
repairing, removing or otherwise working on heating, cooling, air
conditioning and ventilation systems in any structure in the city shall file
a written application with the city designee furnishing the information
required on the form to be prepared by the city designee and furnished each
applicant.



(Prior Code, § 3.05.062)



§ 150.082  EXAMINATION.



   Before any person shall be licensed to engage in the business of
installing, repairing, removing or otherwise working on heating, cooling, air
conditioning and ventilation systems in any structure in the city, he or she
shall successfully complete an examination to demonstrate his or her
competence. The examination shall consist of written questions and/or an oral
examination propounded or conducted by a board of examiners consisting of the
city designee, as the Chairperson, and not more than three other persons duly
licensed under this subchapter. If the applicant fails to successfully
complete the examination or satisfy the Board of his or her competence to
engage in such business, he or she may nevertheless be reexamined on his or
her application after the expiration of 60 days from the date of his or her
last examination. Every person actively engaged in the installation of such
heating, cooling, air conditioning and ventilation systems in the city on the
effective date of the adoption of this subchapter shall not be required to
submit to such examination, but shall be licensed by the city designee upon
the payment of the annual license fee as provided in § 150.083.



(Prior Code, § 3.05.063)



§ 150.083  FEES.



   (A)   Each applicant for a license under the provisions of §§
150.080 through 150.085 shall submit his or her written application therefor
and pay the examination fee which is on file in the City Secretary’s office
for each examination conducted under the provisions of this subchapter.



   (B)   An annual license fee which is on file in the City
Secretary’s office for each calendar year or portion thereof during which
the licensee shall engage in such business within the city shall be paid to
the city by each licensee. Such licensee shall thereafter be entitled to
engage in such business from January first to December 31 of each calendar
year the fee is paid.



(Prior Code, § 3.05.064)



§ 150.084  BOND OF LICENSEE.



   No license shall be issued to any person to engage in the business
covered by this subchapter until and unless such person shall furnish to the
city a good and sufficient surety bond in the penal sum of $1,000 executed by
such person as principal and a corporate surety authorized to write such
bonds under the laws of the state as surety, conditioned that such person
shall perform all work covered by the mechanical code of the city in
conformity therewith and that such principal will pay all damages accruing to
the city or to the person for whom such work is done by reason of the failure
of such person to perform such work and install such equipment and systems in
conformity with the Mechanical Code of the city. Proper proof of the payment
of premiums due on such bonds shall be furnished the city designee upon his
or her request.



(Prior Code, § 3.05.065)



§ 150.085  REVOCATION.



   The license of any person under the terms of this subchapter may be
revoked by the city designee if the licensee fails to keep the bond required
in §§ 150.080 through 150.085 in force or such person willfully violates
any of the applicable provisions of the Mechanical Code or of this
subchapter, or if such person shall become incompetent by reason of physical
or mental disability of a permanent nature.



(Prior Code, § 3.05.066)




ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE




§ 150.100  ADOPTION OF ENERGY CONSERVATIVE CODE.



   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of
the City Secretary, being marked and designated as the International Energy
Conservation Code, 2012 edition, including the Appendix as published by the
International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Energy
Conservation Code of the city, for regulating and governing energy efficient
building envelopes and installation of energy efficient mechanical, lighting
and power systems as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits
and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Energy Conservation Code
on file in the office of the city are hereby referred to, adopted and make a
part hereof, as if fully set out in this subchapter, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 150.101; however,
adoption of such code shall not repeal § 150.102, which unrepealed sections
shall prevail in case of conflict with any provisions of said Energy
Conservation Code.



(Prior Code, § 3.06.001)  (Ord. 13-12-08, passed 12-10-2013)



§ 150.101  PROVISIONS.



   The following sections ore hereby revised: Section 101.1: Insert: City
of Henderson.



(Prior Code, § 3.06.002)  (Ord. 13-12-08, passed 12-10-2013)



§ 150.102  DESIGNATED OFFICIAL.



   Within said Energy Conservation Code, when reference is made to some
official or the duties of some official named in said code, the designated
official of the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named
official in said code shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar
as enforcing the provisions of said code as concerned.



(Prior Code, § 3.06.003)  (Ord. 13-12-08, passed 12-10-2013)



§ 150.103  CONTINUATION OF RIGHTS.



   Nothing in this subchapter, or in the Energy Conservation Code hereby
adopted, shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding pending in any
court, or any rights acquired or liability incurred or any cause or causes of
action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed.



(Ord. 13-12-08, passed 12-10-2013)




HOUSE MOVERS




§ 150.130  GENERALLY.



   (A)   Notice to utilities and Police and Fire Departments. No person
shall move any house, building or other structure over any street, alley or
other way without first notifying all public utilities and the Police and
Fire Departments of the proposed route to be taken and the proposed time of
such moving.



(Prior Code, § 3.08.001)



   (B)   Change of route upon request of city. The route proposed to be
used by any person in moving any building, house or other structure shall be
changed, if requested by the Police or Fire Department or the Superintendent
of Utilities.



(Prior Code, § 3.08.002)



   (C)   To be accompanied by police officer if required. No building,
house or other structure shall be moved unless accompanied by a police
officer, if required by the city designee.



(Prior Code, § 3.08.003)



   (D)   Flagmen; flares and lights; leaving building on public
property. When any moving of a house, building or other structure is
commenced, flagmen must be posted ahead of and behind such moving to give
proper warning. In the event it becomes necessary to leave the building or
structure on public property, there shall be placed around the same, and all
equipment used therefor, red lights, flares or other warning devices;
provided that no building or structure shall be allowed to remain stationary
on and in the streets and ways; provided further, however, in cases of
emergency, such building or structure may remain stationary for not more than
six hours. Any moving at night must be accompanied by sufficient lights and
flares continually burning for the protection of the public.



(Prior Code, § 3.08.004)



   (E)   Requirements for buildings relocated within city; permit
required. Any person desiring to relocate an existing house, building or
other structure to property inside the city shall obtain the necessary
permits required by this chapter from the city designee. Such permits are in
addition to the permit required by § 150.131.



(Prior Code, § 3.08.005)



   (F)   Prerequisites. No person shall move any house, building or
other structure and relocate the same within the city, unless the following
conditions exist:



      (1)   The existing structure is structurally sound and all
windows, doors and trim are in place or will be replaced before occupancy and
use;



      (2)   Any structure intended for residential occupancy has or
will have interior sanitary toilet facilities (flush toilet, lavatory,
bathtub or shower), hot and cold water facilities, and kitchen sink with hot
and cold water with all sewage and waste discharge connected to the sanitary
sewer system of the city, or if a sanitary sewer main is not accessible to
the property or within 150 feet, then to an approved septic tank;



      (3)   The building, plumbing, electrical, heating and air
conditioning in or to be constructed in the relocated structure complies with
all applicable provisions of this code, state law and city ordinances, rules
and regulations;



      (4)   The structure shall not be deemed to be substandard or
dilapidated within the meaning, intent or purpose of the housing code of the
city; and



      (5)   Underpinning is required.



(Prior Code, § 3.08.006)



   (G)   Compliance. It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy and
use any existing house, building or structure that has been moved and
relocated on property inside the city, unless the provisions of this
subchapter have been fully complied with and final approval has been issued
by the city designee. No utilities may be connected to any such house,
building or structure until and unless the provisions of this chapter have
been complied with.



(Prior Code, § 3.08.007)



Penalty, see § 150.999



Statutory reference:



   Authority of home-rule municipality to regulate movement of building on
streets, see Tex. Transportation Code, § 311.005



§ 150.131  PERMIT.



   (A)   Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to move or cause
to be moved a house, building or other structure from one location to another
within the city limits, or to move a house, building or other structure from
without the city limits to a location within the city, or to move a house,
building or other structure within the city to a point without the city,
without first securing a permit therefor from the city designee.



(Prior Code, § 3.08.031)



   (B)   Application. Application for a permit required by this section
shall be filed with the city designee on a form provided for that purpose.



(Prior Code, § 3.08.032)



   (C)   Insurance. The permittee shall provide proof of current
insurance for motor carriers in the amount of $500,000 per incident.
Permittee shall also be required to furnish a surety bond in the amount of
$5,000 with the power of attorney to use bond for damages if necessary.



(Prior Code, § 3.08.033)



   (D)   Issuance. The city designee shall issue the permit applied for
under the provisions of this section upon payment of the required fee and
filing of the required insurance, if the city designee finds that the moving
contemplated by the application can be accomplished in accordance with this
subchapter, and that the building, when relocated, will meet the requirements
of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 3.08.034)



   (E)   Form and conditions. A permit issued under the provisions of
this section shall be in such form and contain such conditions as the City
Council may, from time to time prescribe and require; provided that each such
permit, whether expressly stated therein or not, shall be issued on the
condition that the permit holder will pay all damage done to any city street,
alley or way or any other public or private property, directly or indirectly.



(Prior Code, § 3.08.035)



   (F)   Term. A permit issued under the provisions of this section
shall be valid for the time stated therein only.



(Prior Code, § 3.08.036)



   (G)   Transfer prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person
securing a permit under the provisions of this division to lend, rent or
transfer such permit, or for any other person to make use of such permit.



(Prior Code, § 3.08.037)



(Ord. 08-03-01, passed 2-26-2008)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   (1)   Any person found guilty of negligently, willfully or
maliciously violating the rules and regulations in this chapter shall be,
upon conviction, punished pursuant to § 10.99.



      (2)   In addition to proceeding under authority of division
(A)(1) above, the city is entitled to pursue all other criminal and civil
remedies to which it is entitled under authority of statutes or other
ordinances against a person continuing violation.



(Prior Code, § 3.01.001)



   (B)   Any person, including, but not limited to, the owner of a
building or structure, who violates or assists in the violation of any
provision of §§ 150.001 through 150.007 or codes adopted therein, or who
shall erect, construct, alter or repair, or has erected, constructed, altered
or repaired a building or structure or portion thereof, in violation of a
detailed statement or plan submitted and approved hereunder, or of a permit
or certificate issued thereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon
conviction, shall be punished as provided for in § 10.99, as said section
shall currently be applied or shall hereafter be amended.



(Prior Code, § 3.02.004)



CHAPTER 151:  FLOOD PREVENTION AND PROTECTION



Section




General Provisions




   151.01   Statutory authorization



   151.02   Findings of fact



   151.03   Statement of purpose



   151.04   Methods of reducing flood losses



   151.05   Definitions



   151.06   Lands to which this chapter applies



   151.07   Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard



   151.08   Establishment of development permit



   151.09   Compliance



   151.10   Abrogation and greater restrictions



   151.11   Interpretation



   151.12   Warning and disclaimer of liability




Administration




   151.25   Designation of the Floodplain Administrator



   151.26   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator



   151.27   Permit procedures



   151.28   Variance procedures




Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction




   151.40   General standards



   151.41   Specific standards



   151.42   Standards for subdivision proposals



   151.43   Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH Zones)



   151.44   Floodways



 



   151.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 151.01  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.



   The legislature of the state has in the Flood Control Insurance Act,
Tex. Water Code, § 16.315, delegated the responsibility of local
governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses.
Therefore, the city does ordain as follows.



(Prior Code, § 3.09.001)



§ 151.02  FINDINGS OF FACT.



   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic
inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely
affect the public health, safety and general welfare.



   (B)   These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and
velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to
floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated,
floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage.



(Prior Code, § 3.09.002)



§ 151.03  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety
and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:



   (A)   Protect human life and health;



   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;



   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated
with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;



   (D)   Minimize the prolonged business interruptions;



   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as
water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges
located in floodplains;



   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use
and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize future
flood blight areas; and



   (G)   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in
a flood area.



(Prior Code, § 3.09.003)



§ 151.04  METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.



   In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following
methods:



   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety
or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights
or velocities;



   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction;



   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels
and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of
flood waters;



   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which
may increase flood damage; and



   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which
will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to
other lands.



(Prior Code, § 3.09.004)



Statutory references:



   Flood Control and Insurance Act, see Tex. Water Code, §§ 16.311 et
seq.



   Governing body shall adopt ordinances or orders necessary to
participate in National Flood Insurance Program, see Tex. Water Code, §
16.3145



   Responsibility to establish flood hazard regulations, see Tex. Water
Code, § 16.315



   Emergency management, see Tex. Gov’t Code, Ch. 418



§ 151.05  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALLUVIAL FAN FLOODING.  Flooding occurring on the surface of an
alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is
characterized by high-velocity flows; active process of erosion, sediment
transport and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths.



   APEX.  A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the
flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and
alluvial fan flooding can occur.



   APPURTENANT STRUCTURE.  A structure which is on the same parcel of
property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure.



   AREA OF FUTURE CONDITIONS FLOOD HAZARD.  The land area that would be
inundated by the 1% chance (100-year) flood based on future conditions
hydrology.



   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING.  A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH or VO
zone on a community’s flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a 1% or greater
annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a
clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.



   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.  The land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
The area may be designated a ZONE A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM).
After detailed rate making has been completed in preparation for publication
of the FIRM, ZONE A usually is refined into zones A, AO, AH, A1-A30, AE, A99,
AR, AR/A1-A30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-V30, VE or V.



   BASE FLOOD.  The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year.



   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE).  The elevation shown on the flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying flood insurance study
(FIS) for Zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the water
surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a 1% chance of equaling
or exceeding that level in any given year, also called the base flood.



   BASEMENT.  Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.



   BREAKAWAY WALL.  A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation systems.



   CRITICAL FEATURE.  An integral and readily identifiable part of a
flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the
entire system would be compromised.



   DEVELOPMENT.  Any human-made change to improved and unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment of materials.



   ELEVATED BUILDING.  For insurance purposes, a non-basement building,
which has its lowest elevated floor, raised above ground level by foundation
walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings or columns.



   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION.  For the purposes of determining rates,
structures for which the start of construction commenced before the effective
date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that
date. EXISTING CONSTRUCTION may also be referred to as EXISTING STRUCTURES.



   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  A manufactured home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of the utilities, the construction of the streets
and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed
before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by
a community.



   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).



   FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY. An examination, evaluation and determination of
flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or
an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow)
and/or flood-related erosion hazards.



   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, on
which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special
flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.



   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS).  See FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY.



   FLOOD or FLOODING.  A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:



      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or



      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source.



   FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM.  Those physical structural works for which
funds have been authorized, appropriated and expended and which have been
constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of
the area within a community subject to a special flood hazard and the extent
of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes
hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These
specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with
sound engineering standards.



   FLOODPLAIN or FLOODPRONE AREA.  Any land area susceptible to being
inundated by water from any source. See definition of FLOODING.



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT.  The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but
not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and
floodplain management regulations.



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS.  Zoning ordinances, subdivision
regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances
(such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control
ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such
state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide
standards for the purpose of flooding damage prevention and reduction.



   FLOODPROOFING.  Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.



   FLOODWAY.  See REGULATORY FLOODWAY.



   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE.  A use, which cannot perform its intended
purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The
term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for
the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship
repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related
manufacturing facilities.



   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE.  The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.



   HISTORIC STRUCTURE.  Any structure that is:



      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;



      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary
of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a
registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior to qualify as a registered historic district;



      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic
places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved
by the Secretary of the Interior; or



      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic
places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:



         (a)   By an approved state program as determined by the
Secretary of the Interior; or



         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in
states without approved programs.



   LEVEE.  A human-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, deigned
and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain,
control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from
temporary flooding.



   LEVEE SYSTEM.  A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or
levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices,
which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering
practices.



   LOWEST FLOOR.  The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR; provided that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirement of § 60.3 of the National Flood
Insurance Program regulations.



   MANUFACTURED HOME.  A structure transportable in one of more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without
a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a recreational vehicle.



   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  A parcel (or contiguous
parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or
sale.



   MEAN SEA LEVEL.  For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program,
the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which
base flood elevations show on a community’s flood insurance rate map are
referenced.



   NEW CONSTRUCTION.  For the purpose of determining insurance rates,
structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the
effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is
later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For
floodplain management purposes, NEW CONSTRUCTIONS means structures for which
the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a
floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures.



   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  A manufactured home park
or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or
after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.  A vehicle which is: built on a single chassis;
400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck;
and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.



   REGULATORY FLOODWAY.  The channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.



   RIVERINE.  Relating to, formed by or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook and the like.



   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA.  See AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.



   START OF CONSTRUCTION.  For other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. No. 97-348),
being 16 U.S.C. §§ 3501 et seq., includes substantial improvements and
means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement or
other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual START
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on
a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles,
the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or
the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction
does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or
not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.



   STRUCTURE.  For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed
building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, (that is principally above
ground) as well as a manufactured home.



   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE.  Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to it’s before damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred.



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.  Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition
or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50%
of the market value of the structure before start of construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial
damage, regardless of the actual repair work preformed. The term does not,
however, include either:



      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct
existing violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living
conditions; or



      (2)   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that
the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure.



   VARIANCE.  A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a
floodplain management regulation. (For full requirements, see § 60.0 of the
National Flood Insurance Program regulations.)



   VIOLATION.  The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications or other evidence of compliance required in § 60.2(b)(5),
(c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4) or (e)(5) of the National Flood
Insurance Program regulations is presumed to be in VIOLATION until such time
as that documentation is provided.



   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION.  The height, in relation to the North
American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of
floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or
riverine areas.



(Prior Code, § 3.09.031)



§ 151.06  LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.



   This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within
the jurisdiction of city.



(Prior Code, § 3.09.041)



§ 151.07  BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.



   The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in the current scientific and engineering report entitled,
“The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for the City of Henderson”, dated June
13, 1990, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps and/or flood
boundary-floodway maps (FIRM and/or FBFM) dated June 13, 1990, and any
revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part
of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 3.09.042)



§ 151.08  ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.



   A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance
with the provisions of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 3.09.043)



§ 151.09  COMPLIANCE.



   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered or have its
use changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other
applicable regulations.



(Prior Code, § 3.09.044)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.10  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions; however, where this chapter and
another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restrictions conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.



(Prior Code, § 3.09.045)



§ 151.11  INTERPRETATION.



   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions
shall be:



   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;



   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and



   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted
under state statutes.



(Prior Code, § 3.09.046)



§ 151.12  WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. On rare occasions, greater floods can and will occur and
flood heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes. This chapter
does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This
chapter shall not create liability on the part of the community or any
official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance
on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.



(Prior Code, § 3.09.047)




ADMINISTRATION




§ 151.25  DESIGNATION OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.



   The Building Official is hereby appointed the Floodplain Administrator
to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and other
appropriate sections of 44 C.F.R. (Emergency Management and Assistance -
National Flood Insurance Program regulations) pertaining to floodplain
management.



(Prior Code, § 3.09.061)



§ 151.26  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.



   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:



   (A)   Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records
pertaining to the provisions of this chapter;



   (B)   Reviews permit application to determine whether to ensure that
the proposed building site project, including the placement of manufactured
homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding;



   (C)   Review, approve or deny all applications for development
permits required by adoption of this chapter;



   (D)   Review permits for proposed development to assure that all
necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies (including § 404 of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1334) from which prior approval
is required;



   (E)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions) the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary
interpretation;



   (F)   Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the
state coordinating agency which is the Texas Water Development Board (TWDB)
and also the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency;



   (G)   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained;



   (H)   When base flood elevation data has not been provided in
accordance with § 151.07, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review
and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data
available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the
provisions of §§ 151.40 through 151.44;



   (I)   When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the
Floodplain Administrator must require that no new construction, substantial
improvements or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within
zones A1-30 and AE on the community’s FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that
the cumulative effect of the proposed development, will not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point
within the community; and



   (J)   Under the provisions of 44 C.F.R. Chapter 1, § 65.12, of the
National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain
development in zones A1-30, AE, AH on the community’s FIRM which increases
the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot, provided
that the community first completes all of the provisions required by § 65.12.



(Prior Code, § 3.09.062)



§ 151.27  PERMIT PROCEDURES.



   (A)   (1)   Application for a floodplain development permit shall
be presented to the Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him or
her, and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to
scale showing the location, dimensions and elevation of proposed landscape
alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of
manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of
special flood hazard.



      (2)   Additionally, the following information is required:



         (a)   Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the
lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved
structures;



         (b)   Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), to
which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed;



         (c)   A certificate from a registered professional
engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall
meet the floodproofing criteria of § 151.41(B);



         (d)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse
or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed
development; and



         (e)   Maintain a record of all such information in
accordance with § 151.26(A).



   (B)   Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the
Floodplain Administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this
chapter and the following relevant factors:



      (1)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or
erosion damage;



      (2)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its
contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;



      (3)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands
to the injury of others;



      (4)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;



      (5)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood
for ordinary and emergency vehicles;



      (6)   The cost of providing governmental services during and
after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and
bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical
and water systems;



      (7)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise
and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site;



      (8)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location,
where applicable; and



      (9)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject
to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use.



(Prior Code, § 3.09.063)



§ 151.28  VARIANCE PROCEDURES.



   (A)   The Appeal Board, as established by the community, shall hear
and render judgment on request for variances from the requirements of this
chapter.



   (B)   The Appeal Board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal
only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or
determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement of
administration of this chapter.



   (C)   Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal
Board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction.



   (D)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all
actions involving an appeal, and shall report variances to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency upon request.



   (E)   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation
or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic
Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the
procedures set forth in the remainder of this chapter.



   (F)   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size
contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed
below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in § 151.27(B)
have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half
acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.



   (G)   Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent
of this chapter, the Appeal Board may attach such conditions to the granting
of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of
this chapter (§ 151.03).



   (H)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway
if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.



   (I)   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of
historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the
historic character and design of the structure.



   (J)   Prerequisites for granting variances:



      (1)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that
the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to
afford relief;



      (2)   Variances shall only be issued upon:



         (a)   Showing a good and sufficient cause;



         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance
would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and



         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance
will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public
safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.



      (3)   Any application to which a variance is granted shall be
given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with
the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost
of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting
from the reduced lowest floor elevation.



   (K)   Variances may be issued by a community for new construction
and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the
conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:



      (1)   The criteria outlined in divisions (A) through (I) above
are met; and



      (2)   The structure or other development is protected by
methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no
additional threats to public safety.



(Prior Code, § 3.09.064)




PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION




§ 151.40  GENERAL STANDARDS.



   In all areas of special flood hazards, the following provisions are
required for all new construction and substantial improvements.



   (A)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse
or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.



   (B)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.



   (C)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials resistant to flood damage.



   (D)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.



   (E)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.



   (F)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and
discharge from the systems into flood waters.



   (G)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.



(Prior Code, § 3.09.091)



§ 151.41  SPECIFIC STANDARDS.



   In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data
has been provided as set forth in §§ 151.07, 151.26(H) or 151.42(C), the
following provisions are required.



   (A)   Residential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor
(including basement), elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A
registered professional engineer, architect or land surveyor shall submit a
certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standard of this
division (A) as proposed in § 151.27(A)(2)(a) is satisfied.



   (B)   Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above
the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is
water-tight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural loads and effects of buoyancy.



   (C)   Enclosures.



      (1)   New construction and substantial improvements, with
fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry
and exit of flood waters.



      (2)   Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or
exceed the following minimum criteria.



         (a)   A minimum of two openings on separate walls having
a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.



         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than
one foot above grade.



         (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of flood waters.



   (D)   Manufactured homes.



      (1)   Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within
zone A on a community’s FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and
practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement,
manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation,
collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not
limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.



      (2)   Require that manufactured homes that are placed or
substantially improved within zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community’s
FIRM on sites:



         (a)   Outside of a manufactured home park or
subdivisions;



         (b)   In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;



         (c)   In an expansion to an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision; or



         (d)   In an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a
result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest
floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood
elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.



      (3)   Require that manufactured homes be placed or
substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision with zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community’s FIRM that are
not subject to the provisions of division (D) be elevated so that either:



         (a)   The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or
above the base flood elevation; or



         (b)   The manufactured home chassis is supported by
reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength
that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse and lateral movement.



   (E)   Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles
placed on sites within zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community’s FIRM
either: be on the site for fewer that 180 consecutive days; be fully licensed
and ready for highway use; or meet the permit requirements of § 151.27(A),
and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in
division (D) above. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is
on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick
disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently
attached additions.



(Prior Code, § 3.09.092)



§ 151.42  STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.



   (A)   All subdivision proposals including the placement of
manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with §§
151.02, 151.03, 151.04.



   (B)   All proposals for the development of subdivisions including
the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet
floodplain development permit requirements of §§ 151.08, 151.27 and the
provisions of §§ 151.40 through 151.44.



   (C)   Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development including the placement of
manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than 50 lots or
five acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to §§
151.07 or 151.26(H).



   (D)   All subdivision proposals including the placement of
manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage
provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.



   (E)   All subdivision proposals including the placement of
manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.



(Prior Code, § 3.09.093)



§ 151.43  STANDARDS FOR AREAS OF SHALLOW FLOODING (AO/AH ZONES).



   (A)   Located within the areas of special flood hazard established
in § 151.07 are areas designated as shallow flooding.



   (B)   These areas have special flood hazards associated with flood
depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist,
where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be
evident.



   (C)   Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow;
therefore, the following provisions apply.



      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements of
residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to
or above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as
high as the depth number specified in feet on the community’s FIRM (at
least two feet if no depth number is specified).



      (2)   All new construction and substantial improvements of
nonresidential structures:



         (a)   Have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated to or above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade
at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community’s
FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified); or



         (b)   Together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, be designed so that below the base specified flood depth in the
AO zone, or below the base flood elevation in an AH zone, level the structure
is water-tight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water
and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy.



      (3)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall
submit a certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standards of
this section, as proposed in § 151.27 are satisfied.



      (4)   Require within zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths
around structures on slopes, to guide flood waters around and away from
proposed structures.



(Prior Code, § 3.09.094)



§ 151.44  FLOODWAYS.



   (A)   Floodways, located within areas of special flood hazard
established in § 151.07, are areas designated as floodways.



   (B)   Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the
velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles and
erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply.



      (1)   Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements and other development within the
adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analyses preformed in accordance with standard
engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any
increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge.



      (2)   If division (B)(1) above is satisfied, all new
construction, substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood
hazard reduction provisions of §§ 151.40 through 151.44.



      (3)   Under the provisions of 44 C.F.R. chapter 1, § 65.12,
of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may permit
encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an
increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first
completes all of the provisions required by § 65.12.



(Prior Code, § 3.09.095)



§ 151.99  PENALTY.



   No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined no
more than $500 for each violation, and in addition shall pay all cost and
expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the
city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or
remedy any violation.



(Prior Code, § 3.09.096)  (Ord. 09-03-03, passed 3-24-2009)



CHAPTER 152:  SUBDIVISIONS



Section



   152.01   Adoption



§ 152.01  ADOPTION.



   The subdivision regulations of the city are hereby adopted by reference
and included in the code as fully as if set out at length herein.



CHAPTER 153:  ZONING CODE



Section



   153.01   Adoption



§ 153.01  ADOPTION.



   The zoning ordinance of the city, and any amendments thereto, are
hereby adopted by reference and included in the code as fully as if set out
at length herein.



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



   Table



      I.   REINVESTMENT ZONES



      II.   REZONING



      III.   VACATIONS



TABLE I:  REINVESTMENT ZONES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section


13-01-02
 
1-22-2013
 
Designates a certain 0.279- acre tract of land beginning at a half-inch rod
found at the NEC of a 0.024-acre tract on the south right-of-way line of East
Main Street as a Reinvestment Zone


13-04-03
 
4-9-2013
 
Designates 6.38 acres as a Reinvestment Zone


14-08-02
 
9-9-2014
 
Designates 21.144 acres of land beginning at a half-inch steel rebar found in
the east right-of-way line at North Frisco Street as a Reinvestment Zone


17-03-17
 
4-11-2017
 
Designates 4.20 acres beginning at the northeast corner in the west
right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 259 as a Reinvestment Zone.


 
 
 
 
 



 



TABLE II:  REZONING



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




13-01-01
 
1-8-2013
 
Rezones lots from CBD (Central Business District) and rezones them as R-1
(Single-Family Detached, Low Density District)


14-04-01
 
4-22-2014
 
Rezones lots from I-1 (Light Industrial District) to R-2 (Single-Family,
Medium Density District)


14-08-01
 
9-9-2014
 
Rezones portion of the R-3 (Single-Family Detached, High Density District) to
C-3 (General Commercial District)


15-03-01
 
3-10-2015
 
Rezones a five-acre tract of land located along the west side of Highway 259
North of the Best Western Hotel from C-3 (General Commercial District) to
MF-3 (Multi- Family High Density)


16-09-13
 
---
 
Rezones certain lots on East Collins Street from C-2 (General Commercial
District) to R-2 (Single Family Detached Medium Density)


17-02-16
 
3-14-2017
 
Renumbers and reletters lots and blocks for a 10.654-acre planned unit
development located at 1580 Highway 79 South


17-09-23
 
10-10-2017
 
Rezones a 1.550-acre portion of a 53.60-acre lot in the 300 Block of Kilgore
Drive from M-2 (Medium Density Multiple Family District) to C-2 (General
Commercial District)


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE III:  VACATIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




12-06-06
 
6-12-2012
 
Park Avenue between Webster Drive and Peach Street be vacated


14-12-03
 
1-13-2015
 
Cherry Street between U.S. Highway 79 and Marie Street be vacated


15-06-04
 
6-9-2015
 
Closing of a 120-foot portion of South Calhoun Street


16-07-08
 
7--2016
 
Closing a portion of Industrial Drive


17-07-19
 
8-8-2017
 
Closing an alley located between Webb Street and Jones Street


17-10-24
 
11-14-2017
 
Closing and conveying a portion of Barlow Drive, a 0.093-acre tract between
Lot 1 and Lot 8 in the Andrus Addition


 
 
 
 
 




 



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Texas Codes





References to Prior Code





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO TEXAS CODES




AGRICULTURE CODE




 

Texas Statute Reference
 
Code Section


Ch. 142
 
Ch. 90


142.009
 
Ch. 90


143.101 et seq.
 
Ch. 90


 



 




ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CODE




 

Texas Statute Reference
 
Code Section




1.01 et seq.
 
Ch. 111


1.04
 
94.01


Ch. 11
 
111.19


11.38(d)
 
111.16


26.05
 
111.24


Ch. 61
 
111.19


71.10
 
111.24


105.03
 
111.23


105.04
 
111.23


105.05
 
111.23


109.31 et seq.
 
Ch. 111


109.32
 
111.23


109.33
 
111.21


 
 
 




 




BUSINESS AND COMMERCE CODE




 

Texas Statute Reference
 
Code Section


Ch. 71
 
114.06, 114.15


Ch. 102
 
Ch. 114


 
 
 



 



BUSINESS ORGANIZATIONS CODE



 

Texas Statute Reference
 
Code Section


Ch. 153
 
114.06


 
 
 



 




CIVIL PRACTICE AND REMEDIES CODE




 

Texas Statute Reference
 
Code Section


Ch. 101
 
30.55


101.023
 
30.55


101.055
 
30.55


101.101
 
30.55


 
 
 



 




CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE




 

Texas Statute Reference
 
Code Section


18.17
 
34.45, 34.46


45.059
 
135.04


47.06
 
34.45


102.017
 
33.02


102.0172
 
33.15, 33.16


 
 
 



 




ELECTION CODE




 

Texas Statute Reference
 
Code Section




1.002   
 
Charter Art. III § 2; 30.40


2.001 et seq.
 
Charter Art. III § 2


2.021 et seq.
 
Charter Art. III § 2


Ch. 41
 
Charter Art. III § 2


141.001 et seq.
 
Charter Art. III § 4


141.003
 
Charter Art. III § 3; Charter Art. III § 4


Ch. 143
 
Charter Art. III § 4


146.051 et seq.
 
30.41






 




FAMILY CODE




 

Texas Statute Reference
 
Code Section


51.03
 
136.06


52.01
 
136.06


 
 
 



 




FINANCE CODE




 

Texas Statute Reference
 
Code Section


Ch. 371
 
Ch. 110, 118.01


 
 
 



 




GOV’T CODE




 

Texas Statute Reference
 
Code Section




Title 9
 
Charter, Art. VI, § 11


29.001 et seq.
 
Ch. 33


411.171 et seq.
 
Ch. 131, 131.15, 131.16


418.001 et seq.
 
32.02


Ch. 418
 
151.04


Ch. 418.101
 
32.02


Ch. 469
 
150.002


Ch. 551
 
31.01


Ch. 604
 
34.02


Ch. 851 et seq.
 
34.15


Ch. 1201
 
Charter, Art. VI, § 2


Ch. 1251
 
Charter, Art. VI, § 4


1251.003
 
Charter, Art. VI, § 4


Ch. 1331
 
Charter, Art. VI, § 1; Charter, Art. VI, § 2


1331.052
 
Charter, Art. VI, § 1


 
 
 




 




HEALTH AND SAFETY CODE




 

Texas Statute Reference
 
Code Section




121.003
 
Ch. 93


122.006
 
Ch. 93


Ch. 341
 
Ch. 93


341.011 et seq.
 
130.01


341.011(7)
 
Ch. 93


341.034
 
Ch. 55


341.038
 
Ch. 93


Ch. 342
 
Ch. 93, 93.032


342.001
 
93.030


342.003
 
93.031


342.004 et seq.
 
93.032


342.005 et seq.
 
93.030, 93.031


342.006
 
93.038


342.007
 
93.038


342.008
 
93.038


Ch. 361
 
Ch. 53


Ch. 363
 
Ch. 53


Ch. 365
 
Ch. 133


365.011
 
133.01


Ch. 366
 
50.17


Ch. 382
 
Ch. 92


382.018
 
Ch. 92


382.113
 
Ch. 92


Chs. 433 through 438
 
Ch. 93


437.001 et seq.
 
Ch. 93


Ch. 481
 
94.01


483.001 et seq.
 
94.01


711.001 et seq.
 
Charter, Art. VI, § 10; Ch. 91


713.001 et seq.
 
Charter, Art. VI, § 10; Ch. 91


714.001 et seq.
 
Charter, Art. VI, § 10; Ch. 91


Ch. 821 et seq.
 
Ch. 90


826.015
 
Ch. 90


826.021 et seq.
 
90.035


826.033
 
Ch. 90


822.041
 
90.024, 90.036


822.041 et seq.
 
90.024


826.042
 
90.037


826.051 et seq.
 
90.037


Ch. 828
 
90.071


 
 
 




 




LOCAL GOV’T CODE




 

Texas Statute Reference
 
Code Section




9.001 et seq.
 
Charter, Art. II, § 1; Charter, Art. II, § 8; Charter, Art. II, § 14;
Charter, Art. II, § 22; Charter, Art. VII, § 8


26.021
 
Charter, Art. VII, § 8


26.041
 
Charter, Art. VII, § 8; 34.02


26.042
 
Charter, Art. III, § 2


Ch. 41 et seq.
 
Charter, Art. I, § 2; Charter, Art. I, § 4


Ch. 43
 
Charter, Art. I, § 4


43.001 et seq.
 
Charter, Art. I, § 3


43.021
 
Charter, Art. I, § 4; Charter, Art. VII, § 8


43.142
 
Charter, Art. VII, § 8


51.001
 
Charter, Art. II, § 2; Charter, Art. III, § 8; 130.01


§§ 51.071 et seq.
 
Charter, Art. II, § 1; Charter, Art. II, § 22


51.072
 
Charter, Art. II, § 1; Charter, Art. II, § 22; Charter, Art. VII, § 8


51.074 et seq.
 
Charter, Art. VII, § 8


51.076
 
Charter, Art. II, § 2; Charter, Art. II, § 5


52.013
 
Charter, Art. III, § 8


Ch. 53
 
10.01


54.001
 
10.99


54.012 and 54.016
 
111.99


101.021 et seq.
 
Charter, Art. VI


101.022
 
Charter, Art. V, § 12; Charter, Art. VII, § 8


102.009
 
Charter, Art. VI, § 6


Ch. 103
 
Charter, Art. VI, § 8


Ch. 105
 
Charter, Art. VI, § 9


141.004 et seq.
 
Charter, Art. VII, § 8


142.003
 
34.33


Ch. 201 et seq.
 
30.16


Ch. 211
 
Charter, Art. II, § 19


211.0035
 
Ch. 110


212.004
 
Charter, Art. I, § 3


214.191 et seq.
 
Ch. 112


214.214
 
150.042


215.004
 
Ch. 115


215.031
 
Ch. 117


Ch. 216
 
110.004


217.042
 
10.20, 130.01


229.001
 
Ch. 131


229.002
 
Ch. 131


233.095
 
Ch. 112


Ch. 243
 
Ch. 114


Ch. 251
 
Charter, Art. II, § 6


253.005
 
Ch. 116


282.003
 
Charter, Art. II, § 14


Ch. 331
 
Charter, Art. II, § 17


341.003
 
Ch. 34


341.015
 
Ch. 34


370.002
 
135.04


552.001 et seq.
 
Charter, Art. II, § 8; Ch. 50


552.002
 
Charter, Art. II, § 9; Ch. 50


552.017
 
Charter, Art. II, § 9


 
 
 




 




NATURAL RESOURCES CODE




 

Texas Statute Reference
 
Code Section


Ch. 52
 
Ch. 116


81 et seq.
 
Ch. 116


92.007
 
Ch. 116


 
 
 



 




OCCUPATIONS CODE




 

Texas Statute Reference
 
Code Section




1301.357
 
Ch. 55


1301.501
 
Ch. 55


Ch. 1301
 
150.058


Ch. 1302
 
150.080


Ch. 1305
 
150.044


Ch. 1702
 
Ch. 112


1954.001 et seq.
 
150.006


1956.051 et seq.
 
118.01


Ch. 2151
 
110.001


Ch. 2152
 
Ch. 113


Ch. 2308
 
119.01


 
 
 




 




PARKS AND WILDLIFE CODE




 

Texas Statute Reference
 
Code Section


Ch. 31
 
134.01, 134.16


 
 
 



 




PENAL CODE




 

Texas Statute Reference
 
Code Section




Title 7
 
118.02, 118.03


Ch. 21
 
114.07


Ch. 22
 
114.07


Ch. 25
 
114.07


28.08
 
130.01


Ch. 43
 
114.07


42.01
 
Ch. 131


42.09 through 42.092
 
Ch. 90


43.251
 
Ch. 114


Ch. 46
 
Ch. 131


46.01(3)
 
131.15


46.01(5)
 
131.15


48.01
 
93.050


49.04
 
119.01, 119.32, 119.34


 
 
 




 




PROPERTY CODE




 

Texas Statute Reference
 
Code Section


12.002
 
Charter, Art. I, § 3


Ch. 21
 
Charter, Art. II, § 6


92.251 et seq.
 
150.027


 
 
 



 




TAX CODE




 

Texas Statute Reference
 
Code Section




Ch. 1 et seq.
 
35.25


1.05
 
Charter, Art. V, § 12


11.13
 
35.25


11.253
 
35.25


156.001(1)
 
35.11


156.151
 
35.12


302.001
 
Charter, Art. V, § 1; 35.25


302.101
 
Charter, Art. V, § 17


302.102
 
Charter, Art. V, § 10


Ch. 351
 
Ch. 35


351.004
 
35.11


351.101
 
35.03


 
 
 




 




TRANSPORTATION CODE




 

Texas Statute Reference
 
Code Section




311.001
 
Charter, Art. II, § 11; Charter, Art. II, § 15


311.004
 
Charter, Art. II, § 12; Charter, Art. II, § 13


311.005
 
150.130


311.071 et seq.
 
Charter, Art. II, § 14


311.091
 
Charter, Art. II, § 11; Charter, Art. II, § 15


311.093
 
Charter, Art. II, § 12


Ch. 313
 
Charter, Art. II, § 11; Charter, Art. II, § 15; Ch. 95, 95.040


313.041 et seq.
 
Charter, Art. II, § 11; Charter, Art. II, § 15


Ch. 501
 
134.01, 134.16, 134.18, 134.20, 134.36


541.201(7)
 
75.15


541.201(21)
 
75.15


541.302
 
134.01


542.202
 
73.06, 73.07


542.202(a)(1)
 
73.04, 73.05


542.202(a)(2)
 
Ch. 74, 74.08


542.202(a)(12)
 
72.17


Ch. 544
 
73.04


544.001
 
73.01


544.003
 
73.06, 73.07


544.004(b)
 
73.03


545.059
 
73.09


545.301 et seq.
 
Ch. 74, 74.08


545.303
 
74.06


545.305
 
74.02


545.308
 
74.01


545.351 et seq.
 
72.17


545.356
 
72.15 , 72.17


545.365
 
72.17


545.404
 
74.02


545.414
 
70.06


Ch. 546
 
72.02


Ch. 601
 
115.074


683.001 et seq.
 
134.01


 
 
 




 




UTILITIES CODE




 

Texas Statute Reference
 
Code Section


Ch. 11 et seq.
 
Charter, Art. II, § 9; Ch. 50


Ch. 33
 
Charter, Art. II, § 9; Charter, Art. V, § 4


Ch. 103
 
Charter, Art. II, § 9; Charter, Art. V, § 4


 
 
 



 




WATER CODE




 

Texas Statute Reference
 
Code Section




11.1272
 
Ch. 54


13.042
 
Charter, Art. II, § 9; 50.34


16.311 et seq.
 
151.04


16.315
 
151.01, 151.04


16.3145
 
151.04


26.111
 
Ch. 52


26.176
 
Ch. 52


Ch. 37
 
Ch. 55


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE



 

Prior Code Section
 
Code Section




1.01.004
 
10.05


1.01.010
 
10.20


1.01.011
 
10.21


1.02.031
 
31.01


1.02.032
 
31.02


1.02.033
 
31.03


1.02.034
 
31.04


1.02.035
 
31.05


1.02.036
 
31.06


1.02.037
 
31.07


1.02.038
 
31.08


1.03.001
 
30.01


1.03.031
 
30.15


1.03.032
 
30.16


1.03.033
 
30.17


1.03.034
 
30.18


1.03.035
 
30.19


1.03.036
 
30.20


1.03.037
 
30.21


1.03.038
 
30.22


1.03.039
 
30.23


1.03.040
 
30.24


1.03.041
 
30.25


1.03.042
 
30.26


1.03.043
 
30.27


1.04.001
 
30.40


1.04.002
 
30.41


1.05.001
 
32.01


1.05.002
 
32.02


1.05.003
 
32.03


1.05.004
 
32.04


1.05.005
 
32.05


1.05.006
 
32.06


1.05.007
 
32.07


1.05.008
 
32.08


1.06.001
 
30.55


1.06.002
 
30.56


1.06.003
 
30.57


1.06.004
 
30.58


1.06.005
 
30.59


1.07.001
 
91.001


1.07.031
 
91.015


1.07.032
 
91.016


1.07.033
 
91.017


1.07.034
 
91.018


1.07.035
 
91.019


1.07.036
 
91.020


1.07.061
 
91.035


1.07.062
 
91.036


1.07.063
 
91.037


1.07.091
 
91.050


1.07.092
 
91.051


1.07.093
 
91.052


1.07.094
 
91.053


1.07.095
 
91.054


1.07.096
 
91.055


1.07.097
 
91.056


1.07.098
 
91.057


1.07.099
 
91.058


1.07.100
 
91.059


1.07.101
 
91.060


1.07.102
 
91.061


1.07.103
 
91.062


1.07.104
 
91.063


1.07.105
 
91.064


1.07.106
 
91.065


1.07.107
 
91.066


1.07.108
 
91.067


1.07.109
 
91.068


1.07.110
 
91.069


1.07.111
 
91.070


1.07.112
 
91.071


1.07.113
 
91.072


1.07.114
 
91.073


1.07.115
 
91.074


1.07.116
 
91.075


1.07.117
 
91.076


1.07.118
 
91.077


1.08.001
 
94.01


1.08.002
 
94.02


1.08.003
 
94.03


1.08.004
 
94.04


1.08.005
 
94.05


1.08.006
 
94.06


1.08.007
 
94.07


1.08.008
 
94.08


1.08.009
 
94.09


1.08.010
 
94.10


1.08.011
 
94.11


1.08.012
 
94.12


1.08.013
 
94.13


1.08.014
 
94.14


1.09.001
 
95.001


1.09.002
 
95.002


1.09.003
 
95.003


1.09.061
 
95.015


1.09.062
 
95.016


1.09.063
 
95.017


1.09.064
 
95.018


1.09.065
 
95.019


1.09.066
 
95.020


1.09.067
 
95.021


1.09.068
 
95.022


1.09.069
 
95.023


1.09.070
 
95.024


1.09.071
 
95.025


1.09.101
 
95.040


1.09.102
 
95.041


1.09.103
 
95.042


1.09.104
 
95.043


1.09.131
 
95.055


1.09.132
 
95.056


1.09.133
 
95.057


1.09.134
 
95.058


1.09.135
 
95.059


1.09.161
 
95.070


1.09.162
 
95.071


1.09.163
 
95.072


1.09.164
 
95.073


2.01.001
 
90.001


2.01.002
 
90.002


2.01.003
 
90.003


2.01.004
 
90.004


2.01.005
 
90.005


2.01.006
 
90.006


2.01.007
 
90.007


2.02.001
 
90.020


2.02.002
 
90.021


2.02.003
 
90.022


2.02.004
 
90.023


2.02.031
 
90.024


2.03.001
 
90.035


2.03.002
 
90.036


2.03.003
 
90.037


2.04.001
 
90.050


2.04.002
 
90.051


2.04.003
 
90.052


2.04.004
 
90.053


2.04.005
 
90.054


2.04.006
 
90.055


2.04.007
 
90.056


2.04.008
 
90.057


2.04.009
 
90.058


2.05.001
 
90.070


2.05.002
 
90.071


2.05.003
 
90.072


2.05.004
 
90.073


2.05.005
 
90.074


2.05.006
 
90.075


2.06.001
 
90.090


2.06.002
 
90.091


2.06.003
 
90.092


2.06.004
 
90.093


2.06.005
 
90.094


2.07.001
 
90.105


2.07.002
 
90.106


2.07.003
 
90.107


2.07.004
 
90.108


2.07.005
 
90.109


3.01.001
 
150.999


3.01.002
 
150.001


3.01.003
 
150.002


3.01.004
 
150.003


3.01.005
 
150.004


3.01.006
 
150.005


3.01.007
 
150.006


3.02.001
 
150.020


3.02.002
 
150.021


3.02.004
 
150.999


3.02.005
 
150.023


3.02.006
 
150.024


3.02.007
 
150.025


3.02.008
 
150.026


3.02.009
 
150.027


3.03.001
 
150.040


3.03.002
 
150.040


3.03.003
 
150.040


3.03.004
 
150.040


3.03.031
 
150.041


3.03.032
 
150.041


3.03.033
 
150.041


3.03.034
 
150.041


3.03.035
 
150.041


3.03.036
 
150.041


3.03.037
 
150.041


3.03.038
 
150.041


3.03.039
 
150.041


3.03.040
 
150.041


3.03.041
 
150.041


3.03.071
 
150.042


3.03.072
 
150.042


3.03.073
 
150.042


3.03.074
 
150.042


3.03.075
 
150.042


3.03.101
 
150.043


3.03.102
 
150.043


3.03.103
 
150.043


3.03.104
 
150.043


3.03.105
 
150.043


3.03.106
 
150.043


3.03.107
 
150.043


3.03.108
 
150.043


3.03.109
 
150.043


3.03.141
 
150.044


3.03.142
 
150.044


3.03.143
 
150.044


3.04.001
 
150.055


3.04.002
 
150.056


3.04.003
 
150.057


3.04.004
 
150.058


3.04.005
 
150.059


3.04.006
 
150.060


3.05.001
 
150.075


3.05.002
 
150.076


3.05.031
 
150.077


3.05.032
 
150.078


3.05.033
 
150.079


3.05.061
 
150.080


3.05.062
 
150.081


3.05.063
 
150.082


3.05.064
 
150.083


3.05.065
 
150.084


3.05.066
 
150.085


3.06.001
 
150.100


3.06.002
 
150.101


3.06.003
 
150.102


3.08.001
 
150.130


3.08.002
 
150.130


3.08.003
 
150.130


3.08.004
 
150.130


3.08.005
 
150.130


3.08.006
 
150.130


3.08.007
 
150.130


3.08.031
 
150.131


3.08.032
 
150.131


3.08.033
 
150.131


3.08.034
 
150.131


3.08.035
 
150.131


3.08.036
 
150.131


3.08.037
 
150.131


3.09.001
 
151.01


3.09.002
 
151.02


3.09.003
 
151.03


3.09.004
 
151.04


3.09.031
 
151.05


3.09.041
 
151.06


3.09.042
 
151.07


3.09.043
 
151.08


3.09.044
 
151.09


3.09.045
 
151.10


3.09.046
 
151.11


3.09.047
 
151.12


3.09.061
 
151.25


3.09.062
 
151.26


3.09.063
 
151.27


3.09.064
 
151.28


3.09.091
 
151.40


3.09.092
 
151.41


3.09.093
 
151.42


3.09.094
 
151.43


3.09.095
 
151.44


3.09.096
 
151.99


4.01.001
 
110.001


4.02.001
 
112.01


4.02.002
 
112.02


4.02.003
 
112.03


4.02.004
 
112.04


4.02.006
 
112.05


4.02.007
 
112.06


4.02.008
 
112.07


4.02.009
 
112.08


4.02.012
 
112.09


4.02.013
 
112.10


4.02.014
 
112.11


4.02.015
 
112.12


4.02.016
 
112.13


4.02.017
 
112.14


4.02.018
 
112.15


4.02.019
 
112.16


4.02.020
 
112.17


4.02.062
 
112.35


4.03.001
 
116.001


4.03.002
 
116.002


4.03.003
 
116.003


4.03.004
 
116.004


4.03.005
 
116.005


4.03.006
 
116.006


4.03.007
 
116.007


4.03.008
 
116.008


4.03.009
 
116.009


4.03.010
 
116.010


4.03.036
 
116.025


4.03.037
 
116.026


4.03.038
 
116.027


4.03.039
 
116.028


4.03.040
 
116.029


4.03.041
 
116.030


4.03.042
 
116.031


4.03.061
 
116.045


4.03.062
 
116.046


4.03.063
 
116.047


4.03.064
 
116.048


4.03.065
 
116.049


4.03.066
 
116.050


4.03.067
 
116.051


4.03.068
 
116.052


4.03.069
 
116.053


4.03.070
 
116.054


4.03.071
 
116.055


4.03.072
 
116.056


4.03.073
 
116.057


4.03.074
 
116.058


4.03.075
 
116.059


4.03.076
 
116.060


4.03.077
 
116.061


4.03.101
 
116.075


4.03.102
 
116.076


4.03.103
 
116.077


4.03.104
 
116.078


4.03.105
 
116.079


4.03.106
 
116.080


4.03.107
 
116.081


4.03.108
 
116.082


4.03.109
 
116.083


4.04.001
 
110.070


4.04.002
 
110.071


4.04.003
 
110.072


4.04.004
 
110.073


4.04.005
 
110.074


4.04.006
 
110.075


4.04.007
 
110.076


4.04.008
 
110.999


4.05.001
 
118.01


4.05.002
 
118.02


4.05.003
 
118.03


4.05.004
 
118.04


4.05.005
 
118.05


4.05.006
 
118.06


4.05.007
 
118.07


4.05.008
 
118.08


4.06.001
 
110.055


4.06.002
 
110.056


4.06.003
 
110.057


4.06.004
 
110.058


4.06.005
 
110.059


4.06.006
 
110.999


4.07.001
 
117.01


4.07.002
 
117.02


4.07.003
 
117.99


4.07.004
 
117.03


4.07.005
 
117.04


4.07.006
 
117.05


4.07.031
 
117.20


4.07.032
 
117.21


4.07.033
 
117.22


4.07.034
 
117.23


4.07.035
 
117.24


4.07.036
 
117.25


4.07.037
 
117.26


4.08.001
 
110.015


4.08.002
 
110.016


4.08.003
 
110.017


4.08.004
 
110.018


4.08.005
 
110.019


4.08.006
 
110.020


4.08.007
 
110.021


4.08.008
 
110.022


4.08.009
 
110.999


4.09.001
 
114.01


4.09.002
 
114.02


4.09.003
 
114.03


4.09.004
 
114.04


4.09.005
 
114.05


4.09.006
 
114.06


4.09.007
 
114.07


4.09.008
 
114.08


4.09.009
 
114.09


4.09.010
 
114.10


4.09.011
 
114.11


4.09.012
 
114.12


4.09.013
 
114.13


4.09.014
 
114.14


4.09.015
 
114.15


4.09.016
 
114.16


4.09.017
 
114.17


4.09.018
 
114.99


4.10.031
 
113.01


4.10.032
 
113.02


4.10.033
 
113.03


4.10.034
 
113.04


4.10.035
 
113.05


4.10.036
 
113.06


4.10.037
 
113.07


4.10.038
 
113.08


4.11.001
 
119.01


4.11.002
 
119.02


4.11.003
 
119.03


4.11.004
 
119.04


4.11.005
 
119.05


4.11.006
 
119.06


4.11.007
 
119.07


4.11.008
 
119.08


4.11.009
 
119.09


4.11.010
 
119.10


4.11.011
 
119.11


4.11.012
 
119.12


4.11.013
 
119.13


4.11.041
 
119.25


4.11.042
 
119.26


4.11.043
 
119.27


4.11.044
 
119.28


4.11.045
 
119.29


4.11.046
 
119.30


4.11.047
 
119.31


4.11.048
 
119.32


4.11.049
 
119.33


4.11.050
 
119.34


4.11.051
 
119.35


4.12.001
 
115.001


4.12.002
 
115.002


4.12.003
 
115.003


4.12.031
 
115.015


4.12.032
 
115.016


4.12.033
 
115.017


4.12.061
 
115.030


4.12.062
 
115.031


4.12.063
 
115.032


4.12.064
 
115.033


4.12.065
 
115.034


4.12.066
 
115.035


4.12.067
 
115.036


4.12.068
 
115.037


4.12.069
 
115.038


4.12.070
 
115.039


4.12.071
 
115.040


4.12.072
 
115.041


4.12.073
 
115.042


4.12.074
 
115.043


4.12.101
 
115.055


4.12.102
 
115.056


4.12.103
 
115.057


4.12.104
 
115.058


4.12.105
 
115.059


4.12.106
 
115.060


4.12.107
 
115.061


4.12.108
 
115.062


4.12.109
 
115.063


4.12.110
 
115.064


4.12.111
 
115.065


4.12.112
 
115.066


4.12.113
 
115.067


4.12.114
 
115.068


4.12.115
 
115.069


4.12.116
 
115.070


4.12.117
 
115.071


4.12.118
 
115.072


4.12.119
 
115.073


4.12.120
 
115.074


4.12.121
 
115.075


4.12.122
 
115.076


4.12.123
 
115.077


4.12.124
 
115.078


4.12.125
 
115.079


4.12.126
 
115.080


4.12.127
 
115.081


4.12.128
 
115.082


4.12.129
 
115.083


4.13.001
 
110.035


4.13.002
 
110.036


4.13.003
 
110.037


4.13.004
 
110.038


4.13.005
 
110.039


4.13.006
 
110.040


4.13.007
 
110.041


4.13.008
 
110.042


4.14.001
 
110.002


4.15.001
 
110.003


4.15.002
 
110.004


4.16.001
 
111.01


4.16.002
 
111.02


4.16.031
 
111.15


4.16.032
 
111.16


4.16.033
 
111.17


4.16.034
 
111.18


4.16.035
 
111.19


4.16.036
 
111.20


4.16.037
 
111.21


4.16.038
 
111.22


4.16.039
 
111.23, 111.99


4.16.040
 
111.24, 111.99


4.16.041
 
111.25, 111.99


4.16.042
 
111.26


4.16.043
 
111.99


5.02.001
 
92.01


5.02.002
 
92.02


5.02.003
 
92.03


5.02.004
 
92.04


5.02.005
 
92.05


5.02.006
 
92.06


5.02.007
 
92.07


5.02.008
 
92.08


5.02.009
 
92.09


5.02.010
 
92.10


5.02.011
 
92.11


5.02.012
 
92.12


5.03.001
 
92.25


5.03.002
 
92.26


5.03.003
 
92.27


5.03.004
 
92.28


5.03.005
 
92.29


5.03.006
 
92.30


5.03.007
 
92.31


5.03.008
 
92.32


5.03.009
 
92.33


5.04.001
 
92.45


5.05.031
 
92.60


5.05.032
 
92.61


5.05.033
 
92.62


5.05.034
 
92.63


6.02.001
 
93.001


6.02.031
 
93.015


6.02.032
 
93.999


6.02.033
 
93.016


6.02.061
 
93.017


6.02.062
 
93.017


6.02.063
 
93.017


6.02.064
 
93.017


6.02.065
 
93.017


6.02.066
 
93.017


6.02.067
 
93.017


6.02.068
 
93.017


6.02.069
 
93.017


6.02.101
 
93.018


6.02.102
 
93.018


6.02.103
 
93.018


6.02.104
 
93.018


6.02.105
 
93.018


6.02.106
 
93.018


6.02.107
 
93.018


6.02.108
 
93.018


6.02.110
 
93.018


6.02.141
 
93.019


6.03.001
 
93.030


6.03.002
 
93.031


6.03.003
 
93.032


6.03.004
 
93.033


6.03.005
 
93.034


6.03.006
 
93.035


6.03.007
 
93.036


6.03.008
 
93.037


6.03.009
 
93.038


6.04.001
 
93.050


6.04.002
 
93.051


6.04.004
 
93.999


6.05.001
 
93.065


6.05.002
 
93.066


6.05.003
 
93.067


6.05.004
 
93.068


6.05.005
 
93.069


6.05.006
 
93.070


6.06.001
 
93.085


6.06.002
 
93.086


6.06.003
 
93.087


6.06.004
 
93.088


6.06.005
 
93.089


6.06.006
 
93.090


6.06.007
 
93.091


6.06.008
 
93.092


6.06.009
 
93.093


6.06.010
 
93.094


6.06.011
 
93.095


6.06.012
 
93.096


6.07.001
 
93.110


6.07.002
 
93.111


6.07.003
 
93.112


6.07.004
 
93.113


6.07.005
 
93.999


7.02.001
 
33.01


7.02.002
 
33.02


7.03.001
 
33.15


7.03.002
 
33.16


8.01.002
 
130.01


8.01.003
 
130.02


8.02.001
 
131.01


8.02.031
 
131.15


8.02.032
 
131.16


8.02.033
 
131.99


8.03.001
 
132.01


8.03.002
 
132.02


8.03.003
 
132.03


8.03.004
 
132.04


8.03.005
 
132.05


8.03.006
 
132.06


8.03.007
 
132.07


8.03.008
 
132.08


8.03.009
 
132.09


8.04.001
 
133.01


8.04.002
 
133.02


8.04.003
 
133.03


8.04.004
 
133.04


8.04.005
 
133.05


8.04.006
 
133.06


8.04.007
 
133.07


8.04.008
 
133.08


8.05.001
 
134.01


8.05.002
 
134.02


8.05.003
 
134.03


8.05.031
 
134.15


8.05.032
 
134.16


8.05.033
 
134.17


8.05.034
 
134.18


8.05.035
 
134.19


8.05.036
 
134.20


8.05.061
 
134.35


8.05.062
 
134.99


8.05.063
 
134.36


8.05.064
 
134.37


8.06.001
 
135.01


8.06.002
 
135.02


8.06.003
 
135.03


8.06.004
 
135.04


8.07.031
 
136.01


8.07.032
 
136.02


8.07.033
 
136.03


8.07.034
 
136.04


8.07.035
 
136.05


8.07.036
 
136.06


8.07.037
 
136.99


9.01.001
 
34.01


9.01.002
 
34.02


9.02.001
 
34.15


9.03.031
 
34.30


9.03.032
 
34.31


9.03.033
 
34.32


9.03.034
 
34.33


9.03.035
 
34.34


9.03.061
 
34.45


9.03.062
 
34.46


9.03.063
 
34.47


11.02.001
 
35.01


11.02.002
 
35.02


11.02.003
 
35.03


11.02.004
 
35.04


11.02.005
 
35.05


11.02.006
 
35.06


11.02.007
 
35.07


11.02.008
 
35.08


11.02.009
 
35.09


11.02.010
 
35.10


11.02.011
 
35.11


11.03.001
 
35.25


11.03.002
 
35.26


12.01.001
 
70.01


12.01.002
 
70.02


12.01.003
 
70.03


12.01.004
 
70.04


12.01.005
 
70.05


12.01.006
 
70.06


12.01.007
 
70.07


12.01.008
 
70.08


12.01.009
 
70.09


12.01.010
 
70.10


12.01.011
 
70.11


12.01.012
 
70.12


12.01.013
 
70.13


12.02.001
 
71.01


12.02.002
 
71.02


12.02.003
 
71.03


12.02.004
 
71.04


12.02.005
 
71.05


12.02.006
 
71.06


12.03.001
 
72.01


12.03.002
 
72.02


12.04.001
 
73.01


12.04.002
 
73.02


12.04.003
 
73.03


12.04.004
 
73.04


12.04.005
 
73.05


12.04.006
 
73.06


12.04.007
 
73.07


12.04.008
 
73.08


12.04.009
 
73.09


12.04.010
 
73.10


12.04.011
 
73.11


12.04.012
 
73.12


12.05.002
 
72.15


12.05.003
 
72.16


12.05.004
 
72.17


12.06.001
 
74.01


12.06.002
 
74.02


12.06.003
 
74.03


12.06.004
 
74.04


12.06.005
 
74.05


12.06.006
 
74.06


12.06.007
 
74.07


12.06.008
 
74.08


12.06.009
 
74.09


12.06.010
 
74.10


12.06.011
 
74.11


12.06.012
 
74.12


12.06.013
 
74.13


12.06.014
 
74.14


12.06.015
 
74.15


12.06.016
 
74.16


12.06.017
 
74.17


12.06.018
 
74.18


12.07.001
 
75.01


12.07.031
 
75.15


12.07.032
 
75.16


12.07.033
 
75.17


12.07.034
 
75.18


12.07.035
 
75.19


12.08.001
 
75.30


12.08.002
 
75.31


12.08.003
 
75.32


12.08.004
 
75.33


12.09.001
 
75.45


12.09.002
 
75.46


12.09.003
 
75.47


12.09.004
 
75.48


12.09.005
 
75.49


12.09.006
 
75.50


12.09.007
 
75.51


12.09.008
 
75.52


12.09.009
 
75.53


13.01.001
 
50.01


13.01.002
 
50.02


13.02.001
 
50.15


13.02.002
 
50.16


13.02.003
 
50.17


13.03.001
 
50.30


13.03.002
 
50.31


13.03.003
 
50.32


13.03.004
 
50.33


13.03.005
 
50.34


13.03.006
 
50.35


13.03.007
 
50.36


13.03.008
 
50.37


13.03.009
 
50.38


13.03.010
 
50.39


13.03.011
 
50.40


13.03.012
 
50.41


13.03.013
 
50.42


13.03.014
 
50.43


13.04.001
 
52.01


13.04.002
 
52.02


13.04.003
 
52.03


13.04.004
 
52.04


13.04.005
 
52.05


13.04.006
 
52.06


13.04.007
 
52.07


13.04.008
 
52.08


13.04.009
 
52.09


13.04.010
 
52.10


13.04.011
 
52.11


13.04.012
 
52.12


13.04.013
 
52.13


13.04.014
 
52.14


13.04.015
 
52.15


13.04.016
 
52.16


13.04.017
 
52.17


13.04.018
 
52.18


13.04.019
 
52.19


13.04.020
 
52.20


13.04.021
 
52.21


13.04.022
 
52.22


13.04.023
 
52.99


13.04.024
 
52.23


13.04.025
 
52.24


13.04.026
 
52.25


13.04.027
 
52.26


13.04.028
 
52.27


13.04.029
 
52.28


13.05.001
 
53.01


13.05.002
 
53.02


13.05.003
 
53.03


13.05.004
 
53.04


13.05.005
 
53.05


13.05.006
 
53.06


13.05.008
 
53.07


13.05.009
 
53.08


13.05.010
 
53.09


13.05.011
 
53.10


13.05.012
 
53.11


13.05.013
 
53.12


13.05.014
 
53.13


13.05.015
 
53.14


13.06.031
 
54.01


13.06.032
 
54.02


13.06.033
 
54.03


13.06.034
 
54.04


13.06.035
 
54.05


13.06.036
 
54.06


13.06.037
 
54.07


13.06.038
 
54.08


13.06.039
 
54.09


13.06.040
 
54.10


13.06.041
 
54.11


13.06.042
 
54.12


13.06.071
 
54.25


13.06.072
 
54.26


13.06.073
 
54.27


13.06.074
 
54.28


13.06.075
 
54.29


13.06.076
 
54.30


13.06.077
 
54.31


13.06.078
 
54.32


13.06.079
 
54.33


13.06.080
 
54.34, 54.99


13.06.081
 
54.35


13.07.001
 
55.01


13.07.002
 
55.02


13.07.003
 
55.03


13.07.004
 
55.04, 55.05


13.07.005
 
55.06


Code, App. A
 
35.40


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




90-12-21
 
12-19-1990
 
30.16 - 30.27


93-8-4
 
8-24-1993
 
35.25


93-8-5
 
8-24-1993
 
35.05


94-8-9
 
8-16-1994
 
90.057


95-6-4
 
6-27-1995
 
50.35


95-6-5
 
6-27-1995
 
35.40


95-6-5
 
6-27-1995
 
114.01 - 114.17, 114.99


95-12-20
 
12-19-1995
 
131.15, 131.16, 131.99


97-8-10
 
8-26-1997
 
33.01, 33.02, 35.40


98-1-1
 
1-27-1998
 
75.15 - 75.18


98-3-2
 
3-24-1998
 
150.060


98-9-12
 
10-13-1998
 
150.001, 150.024, 150.058, 150.079


99-3-5
 
4-13-1999
 
93.019


99-8-18
 
8-24-1999
 
93.096


99-8-19
 
8-24-1999
 
33.15, 33.16, 35.40


01-09-14
 
9-11-2001
 
150.006


01-10-23
 
10-23-2001
 
93.032


01-10-24
 
10-23-2001
 
150.002


01-12-15
 
12-14-2001
 
52.28


02-05-14
 
5-14-2002
 
31.01, 31.03 - 31.08


02-07-09
 
7-9-2002
 
35.40


04-04-30
 
4-27-2004
 
31.02, 31.03


04-04-31
 
4-27-2004
 
55.01 - 55.06


04-08-24
 
8-24-2004
 
75.01


06-02-14
 
2-14-2006
 
92.25 - 92.27


07-04-02
 
4-3-2007
 
135.04


07-04-03
 
4-24-2007
 
116.009


07-11-19
 
11-13-2007
 
35.26


07-12-21
 
12-11-2007
 
110.003


07-12-22
 
12-19-2007
 
74.15, 74.17


07-12-23
 
12-19-2007
 
93.016, 93.018


08-03-01
 
2-26-2008
 
150.131


08-09-05
 
9-9-2008
 
35.40, 92.63


09-02-01
 
2-24-2009
 
54.35


09-03-03
 
3-24-2009
 
151.99


09-05-06
 
5-12-2009
 
116.027, 116.031


09-07-09
 
7-28-2009
 
90.109


09-10-17
 
10-13-2009
 
116.001 - 116.009, 116.025 - 116.031, 116.045 - 116.061, 116.075 - 116.083


10-05-08
 
5-11-2010
 
54.12


10-08-14
 
8-10-2010
 
135.02


10-11-22
 
11-23-2010
 
93.999


11-01-01
 
1-25-2011
 
74.18


11-05-06
 
5-10-2011
 
10.21


11-06-07
 
6-28-2011
 
35.40, 116.010, 116.029


11-07-08
 
7-26-2011
 
35.40


11-09-13
 
9-13-2011
 
150.042


11-09-14
 
9-13-2011
 
94.14


11-12-15
 
12-13-2011
 
111.99


12-02-02
 
2-28-2012
 
51.01 - 51.06, 51.99


12-04-03
 
4-17-2012
 
95.085 - 95.093


12-04-04
 
4-17-2012
 
93.017


12-06-06
 
6-12-2012
 
TSO Table III


12-06-07
 
6-12-2012
 
116.010, 116.031


12-09-09
 
9-11-2012
 
35.27


12-10-11
 
10-23-2012
 
50.03


13-01-01
 
1-8-2013
 
TSO Table II


13-01-02
 
1-22-2013
 
TSO Table I


13-04-03
 
4-9-2013
 
TSO Table I


13-09-02
 
9-24-2013
 
35.27


13-12-01
 
12-10-2013
 
92.25, 92.27


13-12-02
 
12-10-2013
 
150.020


13-12-03
 
12-10-2013
 
150.021


13-12-04
 
12-10-2013
 
150.022


13-12-05
 
12-10-2013
 
150.055


13-12-06
 
12-10-2013
 
150.056


13-12-07
 
12-10-2013
 
150.077


13-12-08
 
12-10-2013
 
150.100 - 150.103


14-04-01
 
4-22-2014
 
TSO Table II


14-06-01
 
6-23-2014
 
150.007


14-07-01
 
8-12-2014
 
31.01


14-08-01
 
9-9-2014
 
TSO Table II


14-08-02
 
9-9-2014
 
TSO Table I


14-09-02
 
9-23-2014
 
35.27


14-12-03
 
1-13-2015
 
TSO Table III


15-03-01
 
3-10-2015
 
TSO Table II


15-04-02
 
4-14-2015
 
150.008


15-04-03
 
4-14-2015
 
150.009


15-06-04
 
6-9-2015
 
TSO Table III


15-12-03
 
1-12-2016
 
96.01-96.07, 96.99


16-01-01
 
2-9-2016
 
Ch. 76, Sch. I


16-02-02
 
3-8-2016
 
Ch. 76, Sch. I


16-03-03
 
4--2016
 
31.01


16-05-06
 
6--2016
 
Adopting Ordinance


16-07-08
 
7--2016
 
TSO Table III


16-09-12
 
---
 
35.05, 35.09, 35.11, 35.12


16-09-13
 
---
 
TSO Table II


16-11-14
 
12-13-2016
 
93.050-93.059, 93.999


16-12-15
 
1-10-2017
 
36.01


17-02-16
 
3-14-2017
 
TSO Table II


17-03-17
 
4-11-2017
 
TSO Table I


17-07-19
 
8-8-2017
 
TSO Table III


17-09-23
 
10-10-2017
 
TSO Table II


17-10-24
 
11-14-2017
 
TSO Table III


© 2017, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
City of Henderson
Zoning Ordinance
Table of Contents
ii City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Table of Contents
Article 1: Ordinance Foundation
1.01 Basic Provisions............................................................................................................................................................ 1-2
1.02 Zoning Districts............................................................................................................................................................. 1-5
1.03 Official Zoning Map...................................................................................................................................................... 1-7
1.04 Planning and Zoning Commission Certification........................................................................................................... 1-8
1.05 City Council Adoption.................................................................................................................................................. 1-9
Article 2: Zoning Districts
2.01 Agriculture (AG) District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses........................................................... 2-2
2.02 Agriculture (AG) District Development Standards....................................................................................................... 2-3
2.03 Parks and Recreation (PR) District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses............................................ 2-4
2.04 Parks and Recreation (PR) District Development Standards........................................................................................ 2-5
2.05 Residential Estate (RE) District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses................................................. 2-6
2.06 Residential Estate (RE) District Development Standards............................................................................................. 2-7
2.07 Low Density Single-family Residential (R1) District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses............... 2-8
2.08 Low Density Single-family Residential (R1) District Development Standards........................................................... 2-9
2.09 Medium Density Single-family Residential (R2) District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses....... 2-10
2.10 Medium Density Single-family Residential (R2) District Development Standards................................................... 2-11
2.11 High Density Single-family Residential (R3) District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses............. 2-12
2.12 High Density Single-family Residential (R3) District Development Standards......................................................... 2-13
2.13 Manufactured Home (R4) District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses........................................... 2-14
2.14 Manufactured Home (R4) District Development Standards....................................................................................... 2-15
2.15 Low Density Multiple-family Residential (M1) District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses......... 2-16
2.16 Low Density Multiple-family Residential (M1) District Development Standards..................................................... 2-17
2.17 Medium Density Multiple-family Residential (M2) District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses... 2-18
2.18 Medium Density Multiple-family Residential (M2) District Development Standards............................................... 2-19
2.19 High Density Multiple-family Residential (M3) District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses........ 2-20
2.20 High Density Multiple-family Residential (M3) District Development Standards.................................................... 2-21
2.21 Institutional (IS) District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses.......................................................... 2-22
2.22 Institutional (IS) District Development Standards...................................................................................................... 2-23
2.23 Local Commercial (C1) District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses.............................................. 2-24
2.24 Local Commercial (C1) District Development Standards.......................................................................................... 2-25
2.25 General Commercial (C2) District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses........................................... 2-26
2.26 General Commercial (C2) District Development Standards....................................................................................... 2-27
2.27 Urban Commercial (UC) District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses............................................. 2-28
2.28 Urban Commercial (UC) District Development Standards........................................................................................ 2-29
2.29 Office Commercial (OC) District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses............................................. 2-30
2.30 Office Commercial (OC) District Development Standards........................................................................................ 2-31
2.31 Low Intensity Industrial (I1) District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses....................................... 2-32
2.32 Low Intensity Industrial (I1) District Development Standards................................................................................... 2-33
2.33 General Industrial (I2) District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses................................................. 2-34
2.34 General Industrial (I2) District Development Standards............................................................................................ 2-35
2.35 High Impact (HI) District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses......................................................... 2-36
2.36 High Impact (HI) District Development Standards.................................................................................................... 2-37
Table 2-A Appropriate Adjacent Districts................................................................................................................... 2-38
Article 3: Overlay Districts
3.01 Floodplain Overlay (FPO) District Intent, Effect on Uses, and Effect on Standards.................................................... 3-2
3.02 FPO District Applicability............................................................................................................................................. 3-3
3.03 FPO District Boundary.................................................................................................................................................. 3-3
3.04 FPO District Development Standards........................................................................................................................... 3-3
3.05 Historic District Overlay (HDO) District Intent, Effect on Uses, and Effect on Standards.......................................... 3-4
3.06 HDO District Applicability........................................................................................................................................... 3-5
3.07 HDO District Boundary................................................................................................................................................ 3-5
3.08 HDO Historic Landmark Designation.......................................................................................................................... 3-5
3.09 HDO Criteria For Historic Landmark Designation....................................................................................................... 3-5
3.10 HDO Establishment of Historic Landmark Preservation Committee........................................................................... 3-5
3.11 HDO Function of Historic Landmark Preservation Committee................................................................................... 3-6
Table of Contents iii
Table of Contents
3.12 HDO Action by Planning and Zoning Commission...................................................................................................... 3-6
3.13 HDO Action by City Council and Recording Designation........................................................................................... 3-6
3.14 HDO Certificate of Appropriateness Review................................................................................................................ 3-6
3.15 HDO Historic Landmark Demolition or Removal........................................................................................................ 3-7
3.16 HDO Provisions Herein Not to Affect the Present Uses............................................................................................... 3-8
3.17 HDO Penalties............................................................................................................................................................... 3-8
3.18 HDO District Development Standards.......................................................................................................................... 3-8
Article 4: Planned Development District
4.01 Planned Development (PD) District Intent, Regulations, and Prerequisites................................................................. 4-2
4.02 General Planned Development Standards..................................................................................................................... 4-3
4.03 Origination of Proposals............................................................................................................................................... 4-3
4.04 Rules of Procedure........................................................................................................................................................ 4-3
4.05 Limitation of Revisions to the Zoning Ordinance......................................................................................................... 4-3
4.06 Designation of Permanent Open Space......................................................................................................................... 4-4
Article 5: Development Standards
5.01 Icon Key........................................................................................................................................................................ 5-2
5.02 AS-01: General Accessory Structure Standards............................................................................................................ 5-3
5.03 AS-02: Parks and Recreation and Agricultural Accessory Structure Standards........................................................... 5-4
5.04 AS-03: Residential Estate Accessory Structure Standards............................................................................................ 5-5
5.05 AS-04: Single-family and Two-family Residential Accessory Structure Standards..................................................... 5-6
5.06 AS-05: Manufactured Home District Accessory Structure Standards.......................................................................... 5-7
5.07 AS-06: Multiple-family Residential Accessory Structure Standards............................................................................ 5-8
5.08 AS-07: Institutional Accessory Structure Standards..................................................................................................... 5-9
5.09 AS-08: Local Commercial Accessory Structure Standards........................................................................................ 5-10
5.10 AS-09: Urban Commercial Accessory Structure Standards........................................................................................ 5-11
5.11 AS-10: General Commercial Accessory Structure Standards..................................................................................... 5-12
5.12 AS-11: Industrial Accessory Structure Standards....................................................................................................... 5-13
5.13 AR-01: Residential Architectural Standards............................................................................................................... 5-14
5.14 AR-02: Manufactured Home District Architectural Standards................................................................................... 5-14
5.15 AR-03: Multiple-family Residential Architectural Standards.................................................................................... 5-15
5.16 AR-04: Commercial Architectural Standards............................................................................................................. 5-16
5.17 AR-05: Urban Commercial Architectural Standards.................................................................................................. 5-17
5.18 AR-06: Industrial Architectural Standards.................................................................................................................. 5-18
5.19 DI-01: Density and Intensity Standards...................................................................................................................... 5-19
5.20 EN-01: Environmental Standards............................................................................................................................... 5-20
5.21 FW-01: General Fence and Wall Standards................................................................................................................ 5-21
5.22 FW-02: Parks and Recreation Fence and Wall Standards........................................................................................... 5-22
5.23 FW-03: Agricultural Fence and Wall Standards.......................................................................................................... 5-22
5.24 FW-04: Residential Fence and Wall Standards........................................................................................................... 5-23
5.25 FW-05: Institutional and Commercial Fence and Wall Standards.............................................................................. 5-23
5.26 FW-06: Industrial and High Impact Fence and Wall Standards.................................................................................. 5-24
5.27 FA-01: Floor Area Standards....................................................................................................................................... 5-25
5.28 HT-01: Height Standards............................................................................................................................................. 5-26
5.29 HB-01: Type 1 Home Business Standards.................................................................................................................. 5-27
5.30 HB-02: Type 2 Home Business Standards.................................................................................................................. 5-28
5.31 HB-03: Type 3 Home Business Standards.................................................................................................................. 5-29
5.32 KA-01: Agricultural Keeping of Animals Standards.................................................................................................. 5-30
5.33 KA-02: Residential Estate Keeping of Animals Standards......................................................................................... 5-30
5.34 KA-03: Lower Density Single-Family Residential Keeping of Animals Standards................................................... 5-31
5.35 KA-04: Higher Density Single-Family Residential Keeping of Animals Standards.................................................. 5-31
5.36 LA-01: General Landscaping Standards..................................................................................................................... 5-32
5.37 LA-02: Residential Lot Planting Standards................................................................................................................ 5-33
5.38 LA-03: Non-Single-Family Residential Lot Planting Standards................................................................................ 5-34
5.39 LA-04: Parking Lot Planting Standards...................................................................................................................... 5-35
5.40 LA-05: Bufferyard Planting Standards....................................................................................................................... 5-36
5.41 LT-01: Lighting Standards........................................................................................................................................... 5-37
iv City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Table of Contents
5.42 LD-01: Loading Standards.......................................................................................................................................... 5-38
5.43 LO-01: Lot Standards.................................................................................................................................................. 5-39
5.44 OD-01: Outdoor Dining Standards............................................................................................................................. 5-40
5.45 SS-01: General Outdoor Storage and Sales Standards................................................................................................ 5-41
5.46 SS-02: Commercial Outdoor Storage Standards......................................................................................................... 5-41
5.47 SS-03: Industrial and High Impact Outdoor Storage Standards................................................................................. 5-42
5.48 PK-01: General Parking Standards............................................................................................................................. 5-43
5.49 PK-02: Single-family Residential Parking Standards................................................................................................. 5-44
5.50 PK-03: Manufactured Home District Parking Standards............................................................................................ 5-44
5.51 PK-04: Multiple-family Residential Parking Standards............................................................................................. 5-44
5.52 PK-05: Urban Commercial Parking Standards........................................................................................................... 5-44
5.53 PK-06: Non-residential Parking Standards................................................................................................................. 5-45
5.54 PF-01: General Performance Standards...................................................................................................................... 5-55
5.55 PI-01: General Public Improvement Standards........................................................................................................... 5-56
5.56 SB-01: Setback Standards........................................................................................................................................... 5-57
5.57 SW-01: Sewer and Water Standards............................................................................................................................ 5-59
5.58 SX-01: Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Standards.................................................................................... 5-60
5.59 SI-01: General Sign Standards................................................................................................................................... 5-61
5.60 SI-02: Agricultural Sign Standards............................................................................................................................. 5-66
5.61 SI-03: Single-family and Two-family Residential Sign Standards............................................................................. 5-68
5.62 SI-04: Multiple Family Residential Sign Standards.................................................................................................... 5-69
5.63 SI-05: Institutional Sign Standards............................................................................................................................. 5-71
5.64 SI-06: Urban Commercial Sign Standards.................................................................................................................. 5-74
5.65 SI-07: Moderate Intensity Commercial Sign Standards.............................................................................................. 5-77
5.66 SI-08: Office Commercial Sign Standards.................................................................................................................. 5-80
5.67 SI-09: Industrial Sign Standards................................................................................................................................. 5-83
5.68 SE-01: Special Exception Standards........................................................................................................................... 5-86
5.69 ST-01: Structure Standards.......................................................................................................................................... 5-87
5.70 TC-01: Telecommunication Facility Standards........................................................................................................... 5-88
5.71 TU-01: General Temporary Use and Structure Standards........................................................................................... 5-90
5.72 TU-02: Agricultural Temporary Use and Structure Standards.................................................................................... 5-90
5.73 TU-03: Residential Temporary Use and Structure Standards..................................................................................... 5-91
5.74 TU-04: Nonresidential Temporary Use and Structure Standards................................................................................ 5-91
5.75 TR-01: Trash Receptacle Standards............................................................................................................................ 5-92
5.76 VC-01: Vision Clearance Standards............................................................................................................................ 5-93
Article 6: Nonconformances
6.01 Intent of Nonconformance Rules.................................................................................................................................. 6-2
6.02 Distinction Between Conforming, Illegal Nonconforming, and Legal Nonconforming.............................................. 6-2
6.03 Illegal Nonconforming Structures, Lots, and Uses....................................................................................................... 6-2
6.04 Legal Nonconforming Structures.................................................................................................................................. 6-2
6.05 Legal Nonconforming Lots........................................................................................................................................... 6-4
6.06 Legal Nonconforming Use............................................................................................................................................ 6-5
Article 7: Processes
7.01 Introduction to Processes.............................................................................................................................................. 7-2
7.02 Improvement Location Permit...................................................................................................................................... 7-4
7.03 Temporary Improvement Location Permit.................................................................................................................... 7-9
7.04 Administrative Appeal................................................................................................................................................ 7-11
7.05 Development Plan....................................................................................................................................................... 7-12
7.06 Planned Development; General................................................................................................................................... 7-16
7.07 Planned Development: Step 1..................................................................................................................................... 7-17
7.08 Planned Development; Step 2..................................................................................................................................... 7-20
7.09 Public Hearing............................................................................................................................................................. 7-25
7.10 Special Exception Use................................................................................................................................................. 7-26
7.11 Variance....................................................................................................................................................................... 7-29
7.12 Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning)......................................................................................................................... 7-32
7.13 Zoning Ordinance Text Amendment........................................................................................................................... 7-34
Table of Contents v
Table of Contents
Article 8: Enforcement
8.01 Actionable Violations.................................................................................................................................................... 8-2
8.02 Enforcement Official..................................................................................................................................................... 8-2
8.03 Discovery of Violations................................................................................................................................................. 8-2
8.04 Inspection of Property or Structure............................................................................................................................... 8-2
8.05 Responsibility for Violations......................................................................................................................................... 8-2
8.06 New Permits at Location Where a Violation Exists...................................................................................................... 8-2
8.07 Enforcement Action Options......................................................................................................................................... 8-3
8.08 Request to Stop Work.................................................................................................................................................... 8-3
8.09 Stop Work Order........................................................................................................................................................... 8-4
8.10 Request to Remedy....................................................................................................................................................... 8-4
8.11 Invoke a Legal, Equitable, or Special Remedy............................................................................................................. 8-5
8.12 Enforce a Condition, Covenant, or Commitment.......................................................................................................... 8-5
8.13 Request a Prohibitory or Permanent Injunction to Restrain.......................................................................................... 8-6
8.14 Request a Mandatory Injunction to Remove a Structure.............................................................................................. 8-6
8.15 Impose a Fine for Violation........................................................................................................................................... 8-7
8.16 Invoke a Fine for Violation........................................................................................................................................... 8-7
8.17 Other Remedy............................................................................................................................................................... 8-8
Article 9: Definitions
9.01 General.......................................................................................................................................................................... 9-2
9.02 Defined Words............................................................................................................................................................... 9-2
Appendix A: Land Use Matrix
Appendix B: Index
Appendix C: Zoning Map
Appendix D: Amendment Tracking Table
vi City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Table of Contents


© 2017, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Article
City of Henderson
Zoning Ordinance
1
Ordinance Foundation
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
1-2
Basic Provisions 1
1.01 Basic Provisions
A. Title: This ordinance shall be formally known as the “City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance,” and may be cited and
referred to as the “Zoning Ordinance.”
B. Defined Words: Words used in a special sense in the Zoning Ordinance are defined in Article 9: Definitions.
C. Authority: The Zoning Ordinance is adopted by the City of Henderson pursuant to its authority under the laws of
the State of Texas.
D. Purpose: The Zoning Ordinance is intended to guide the growth and development of the City of Henderson and for
the following purposes:
1. Basic Rights: To secure adequate light, air, convenience of access, and safety from fire, flood, and other
dangers which may include providing adequate open spaces for light, air, and outdoor uses.
2. General Welfare: To promote the public health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience, and general welfare.
3. Development and Growth: To promote the orderly, responsible and beneficial development and growth of the
areas within the zoning jurisdiction.
4. Character: To protect the character and stability of agricultural, residential, institutional, commercial, industrial,
and natural areas.
5. Circulation: To minimize or avoid congestion on public streets and to ensure safe, convenient, and efficient
traffic circulation.
6. Environmental Integrity: To preserve and enhance the scenic beauty, natural aesthetics, and environmental
integrity of the zoning jurisdiction.
7. Compatibility: To assure compatibility between differing land uses and to protect the scale and character of
existing development from the encroachment of incompatible uses.
8. Intensity: To regulate and restrict the intensity use of structures and land for business, industry, residence, and
other uses as to not depreciate neighboring area’s property values or reduce quality of life of nearby areas.
9. Public Service: To define the powers and duties of administrative officers and bodies, and to establish procedures
for the implementation and enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance.
10. Compliance: To require ongoing compliance with the regulations and punitive recourse for noncompliance
regarding the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.
11. Light Pollution: To limit the amount of glare and light trespass caused by light fixtures.
12. Landscaping: To require the minimal amount of plant materials necessary to enhance the visual quality of
developments, maintain community character, define the edges of streets for vehicular and pedestrian safety
and flow, minimize stormwater runoff, improve quality of water runoff, and improve air quality.
13. Minimum Buildable Lot: To require a reasonable amount of land for each buildable lot.
E. Compliance:
1. Structure: No structure shall be located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, altered, converted,
enlarged or used, except when in full compliance with all provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and when the
permits and certificates required by the Zoning Ordinance have lawfully been issued.
2. Land: No piece of land (e.g. lot) shall be used except when in full compliance with all provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance and when the permits and certificates required by the Zoning Ordinance have lawfully been issued.
3. Existing Use: No existing use may be expanded except when in full compliance with all provisions of the
Zoning Ordinance and when the permits and certificates required by the Zoning Ordinance have lawfully been
issued.
F. Severability: If any provision or the application of any provision of the Zoning Ordinance is held unconstitutional
or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the Zoning Ordinance or the application of such
provision to other circumstances shall not be affected.
Article
Article 1: Ordinance Foundation 1-3
Basic Provisions 1
G. Interpretation:
1. Minimum Requirements: The provisions of the Zoning Ordinance are the minimum requirements necessary to
achieve this ordinance's purpose.
2. Conflict or Inconsistency:
a. Internal: Unless otherwise specifically stated within the Zoning Ordinance, if two (2) or more provisions
of the Zoning Ordinance are in conflict or are inconsistent with one another, then the most restrictive
provision shall apply.
b. Federal, State, and Local:
i. Whenever a provision of the Zoning Ordinance imposes a greater restriction or a higher standard
than is required by any State or Federal code or regulation, or other City ordinance or regulation, the
provision of the Zoning Ordinance shall apply, unless clearly and legally required otherwise.
ii. Whenever a provision of any State or Federal code or regulation, or other City ordinance or regulation
imposes a greater restriction or a higher standard than is required by the Zoning Ordinance, the
provision of the State or Federal code or regulation, or other City ordinance or regulation shall apply.
c. Other: Whenever a private covenant, contract, commitment, agreement, or other similar private land use
regulation imposes a greater restriction or a higher standard than is required by a provision of the Zoning
Ordinance, the stricter standard would apply, albeit by a non-governmental regulation. However, if a
project complies with the Zoning Ordinance, the City is still obligated to issue the permit or otherwise
approve the project.
3. Illustrations: If differences are found between the meaning or implication of any illustration or drawing, the
regulating text of the Zoning Ordinance shall apply.
4. Tables: If differences are found between the meaning or implication of the document text and a table’s text, the
stricter of the provisions shall apply.
5. Time Frames: Unless specifically noted otherwise, time frames stated within the Zoning Ordinance shall
be calculated to include weekdays, weekends, and holidays. If a time frame ends on a Saturday, Sunday, or
holiday that the City of Henderson offices are closed, the time frame will be extended to the end of the next
business day.
6. Delegation of Authority: If a provision in the Zoning Ordinance requires the Zoning Administrator or other
City officer to perform an act or duty, that provision shall also include any person working under the authority
and supervision of the Zoning Administrator unless specified otherwise.
7. Mandatory and Permissive Terms: The words “shall” or “must” are always mandatory. The words “may” or
“should” are always permissive.
8. Words Used: If words used in the Zoning Ordinance are not defined in Article 9: Definitions, they shall be
construed to be the common usage of the language. Any legal or technical words not defined in the Zoning
Ordinance shall be construed to be as defined by an appropriate lexicon or current and common dictionary.
9. Tense: If words are used in a specific tense (i.e. past, future or present) it shall be construed to include all
tenses, unless the context clearly indicates a specific tense.
10. Singular/Plural Form: If words are used in singular form, the plural form shall apply and vice versa, unless the
context clearly indicates the contrary.
11. Gender: If a feminine term is used, the masculine shall also apply and vice versa.
12. Conjunctions: The word “and” shall be construed to include all connected items, conditions, and provisions in
a series, unless the context clearly suggests the contrary. The word “or” shall be construed to include one or
more of the items, conditions, and provisions in a series, unless the context clearly suggests the contrary.
13. Rounding: If a regulatory formula is used within the Zoning Ordinance and results in a non-whole number
of an indivisible object or feature (i.e. a tree), the non-whole number shall be up rounded to the next highest
whole number.
H. Ordinance Jurisdictional Area: The Zoning Ordinance applies to all land within the City of Henderson's zoning
jurisdiction.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
1-4
Basic Provisions 1
I. Repealer: The following City of Henderson ordinances are hereby repealed and are replaced by this City of
Henderson Zoning Ordinance and Official Zoning Map:
1. Zoning Ordinance: City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance, Ord. #84-8-8 as amended, and its associated Zoning
Map.
J. Transition Rules
1. Planning and Zoning Commission: Any application filed with the Planning and Zoning Commission that is full
and complete prior to the effective date of the Zoning Ordinance shall be regulated by the terms and conditions
of the City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance that was in place at the time of filing.
2. Rezone: Any application for a Zone Map Amendment (i.e. Rezone) filed with the Planning and Zoning
Commission that is full and complete prior to the effective date of the City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
shall continue through the process to completion pursuant to the terms and conditions of the City of Henderson
Zoning Ordinance that was in place at the time of filing.
3. Board of Adjustments: Any appeal (e.g. Development Standards Variance, Administrative Appeal, and Special
Exception Use) filed with the Board of Adjustments that is full and complete prior to the effective date of the
Zoning Ordinance shall continue through the process to completion pursuant to the terms and conditions of the
Zoning Ordinance that was in place at the time of filing, provided that the appeal is still required by the terms
of the Zoning Ordinance.
4. Planned Unit Development: An application for a Planned Unit Development District filed with the Planning
and Zoning Commission that is full and complete prior to the adoption of an amendment to the Planned
Development District Ordinance and/or Concept Plan shall continue the process pursuant to the terms
and conditions of the Planned Development District Ordinance and/or Concept Plan in place prior to the
amendment.
5. Building Sites: All new building sites shall meet the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance unless:
a. Improvement Location Permit: A complete Improvement Location Permit application was filed prior to the
effective date of the Zoning Ordinance and is still valid; or
b. Buildable Lot: A parcel was approved as a buildable lot by the Planning and Zoning Commission (valid
Primary or Secondary Plat) or the Board of Adjustments (valid Development Standards Variance) prior to
the effective date of the Zoning Ordinance; or
c. Primary Plat: A complete and valid Primary Plat application has been filed with the Zoning Administrator
prior to the effective date of the Zoning Ordinance.
K. Administrative Officer: The Zoning Administrator shall have the primary responsibility for administration and
enforcement (or coordination of enforcement) of the Zoning Ordinance within the City of Henderson's zoning
jurisdiction.
L. Saving Provision: The Zoning Ordinance shall not be construed as eliminating or reducing any action now pending
under, or by virtue of, an existing law, previous zoning ordinance, or related ordinance. The Zoning Ordinance
shall not be construed as discontinuing, reducing, modifying, or altering any penalty accruing or about to accrue.
M. Effect of Annexation or Vacation on Zoning: The Planning and Zoning Commission shall be guided by the City
of Henderson Zoning Ordinance in making recommendations to the City of Henderson City Council regarding the
zoning district classifications for newly annexed areas.
N. Statutory Changes: Whenever the Texas Code cited in the Zoning Ordinance has been amended or superseded, the
Zoning Ordinance shall be deemed amended in reference to the new or revised code.
O. References: Whenever any agency, department, position, document, map, or publication referenced in the Zoning
Ordinance changes, the new or substitute agency, department, position, document, map, or publication shall be
deemed incorporated into the Zoning Ordinance.
Article
Article 1: Ordinance Foundation 1-5
Zoning Districts 1
1.02 Zoning Districts
A. Establishment of Standard Zoning Districts: Each of the standard zoning districts in the Zoning Ordinance stand
alone and is not a part of a hierarchy or pyramidal system of zoning. For example, what is permitted in one (1)
zoning district is not related to what is permitted in another zoning district. Only those uses and development
standards which are expressly permitted in the list for each zoning district apply to that zoning district.
For the purpose of this Zoning Ordinance, the City of Henderson has established the following standard zoning
districts:
Standard
District Code
Standard
District Name Standard District Purpose
AG Agriculture This district is established for existing low intensity agricultural uses remaining within city limits.
PR Parks and Recreation This district is established for active and passive recreational areas, parks, linear trails, nature
preserves, and other land in conservation.
RE Residential Estate This district is established for single-family detached dwellings on estate-sized lots.
R1 Low Density Singlefamily
Residential
This district is established for single-family detached dwellings on large sized lots.
R2 Medium Density
Single-family
Residential
This district is established for single-family detached dwellings on medium sized lots.
R3 High Density Singlefamily
Residential
This district is established for single-family detached dwellings on small sized lots.
R4 Manufactured Home This district is established for leased lot developments (mobile or Manufactured Home Parks) which
typically lease dwelling sites for single-wide and double-wide manufactured homes.
M1 Low Density Multiplefamily
Residential
This district is established for single-family “attached” dwellings in the form of duplexes and triplexes.
M2 Medium Density
Multiple-family
Residential
This district is established for medium density multiple-family dwellings in the form of apartment
buildings and quadplexes.
M3 High Density Multiplefamily
Residential
This district is established for high density multiple-family dwellings in the form of apartment
complexes.
IS Institutional This district is established for various institutional and office uses including governmental, hospital,
educational, and religious institutions.
C1 Local Commercial This district is established for a variety of retail, service, entertainment, and eating establishments
that are small to medium in scale, and that in aggregate create a low to moderate intensity district.
C2 General Commercial This district is established for a wide variety of retail, service, entertainment, and eating
establishments that are medium to large in scale, and that in aggregate create a high intensity
district.
UC Urban Commercial This district is established to accommodate the unique mix of retail, commercial, entertainment,
governmental, and professional uses with appropriate upper floor uses that occur in a downtown setting.
OC Office Commercial This district is established for office uses in a technology or business park setting.
I1 Low Intensity
Industrial
This district is established for low intensity industrial uses and light manufacturing facilities.
I2 General Industrial This district is established for moderate intensity industrial uses and manufacturing facilities.
HI High Impact This district is established for specific uses that may have a high impact to the community.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
1-6
Zoning Districts 1
B. Establishment of Overlay District: The overlay districts as noted below have been established to modify the
applicability of development standards and land uses which will help the City of Henderson accomplish its goals.
For the purpose of the Zoning Ordinance, the following overlay district has been established for the purpose as
stated:
Overlay
District Code
Overlay
District Name Overlay District Purpose
FPO Floodplain Overlay This district is established to prevent building and disturbances in the floodplain that are detrimental
to water quality, water storage, and natural aesthetic along waterways and lakes.
HDO Historic District
Overlay
This district is established to prevent historic amenities in the City of Henderson, particularly in the
downtown area, from being altered or demolished without review by a special committee.
See Article 3: Overlay Districts for regulations applicable to Overlay Districts.
C. Establishment of Planned Development District: A Planned Development District (i.e. Planned Unit Development)
is hereby established. However, only the following standard zoning districts may be rezoned to a Planned
Development District:
See Article 4: Planned Development District for regulations applicable to Planned Development Districts.
D. Zoning District Land Uses: The two‑page layout for each standard zoning district in Article 2: Zoning Districts
identifies land uses allowed in each respective district. Such land uses are of two (2) kinds: Permitted Uses and
Special Exception Uses. The City of Henderson's Permitted and Special Exception Uses for each district shall be
as noted in the "Permitted Use" and "Special Exception Use" columns on each two‑page layout for each particular
standard zoning district.
E. Unlisted Land Uses: Any land use not listed in either the Permitted Use or Special Exception Use column of a
particular standard zoning district shall be prohibited in that particular standard zoning district.
F. Administrative Interpretation: Any land use not listed in either the Permitted Use or Special Exception Use
column of a particular standard zoning district, but that is significantly similar or related to a use that is a Permitted
Use or a Special Exception Use in that particular standard zoning district may be deemed permitted through an
Administrative Interpretation Process as described in Article 7: Processes.
Article
Article 1: Ordinance Foundation 1-7
Official Zoning Map 1
1.03 Official Zoning Map
A. Description: The map labeled “Official Zoning Map” maintained by the Planning and Zoning Commission is
hereby included as part of the Zoning Ordinance and is to function as the means to apply a zoning district to each
parcel within the City of Henderson's zoning jurisdiction. The zoning map shall be formally known as the “Official
Zoning Map,” and it may be cited and referred to as the “City of Henderson Zoning Map” or the “Zoning Map.”
B. Location: The Official Zoning Map as approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission will be located in the
City Manager’s Office and maintained by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
C. Zoning District Boundaries:
1. Standard Zoning Districts: The standard zoning district boundaries shall be shown on the Official Zoning Map.
The two-digit abbreviations for the standard zoning districts appearing in the Zoning Ordinance or a specific
color noted on the map legend shall be used to identify the standard zoning districts on the map.
2. Overlay Districts: The overlay district boundaries shown on the Official Zoning Map shall be interpreted as
follows:
a. Labeling: An overlay district shall be noted on the Official Zoning Map with a hatch or textured pattern
and be noted as such on the map legend.
b. Fully Covered: A lot that is fully covered (bounded) by an overlay district shall be interpreted to be subject
to the overlay district standards found in Article 3: Overlay Districts.
c. Partially Covered: A lot that is partially covered (i.e. transected) by an overlay district boundary shall
be interpreted to be subject to the overlay district standards where the lot area is covered by the overlay
district.
3. Additional Standards: Zoning district boundaries on the Official Zoning Map shall be interpreted as follows:
a. Streets: Zoning district boundaries shown within or parallel to the lines of streets, easements, and
transportation rights-of-way shall be deemed to follow the centerline of the affected street, easement, or
right‑of‑way.
b. Section Lines: Zoning district boundaries indicated as following or being parallel to section lines, fractional
sectional lines, or platted lot lines shall be construed as following or paralleling such lines.
c. Water: Zoning district boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline of streams, rivers or
other moving bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
d. Vacated: Whenever any street, alley, public way, railroad right‑of‑way, waterway, or other similar area
is vacated by proper authority, the zoning districts adjoining each side of vacated areas shall be extended
automatically to the center of the vacated area. All areas included in the vacation shall thereafter be subject
to all regulations of the extended zoning districts. In the event of a partial vacation, the adjoining zoning
district, or zoning district nearest the portion vacated, shall be extended automatically to include all of
the vacated area.
4. Disputes: Any dispute about an exact zoning district boundary shall be determined by the Zoning
Administrator. The Zoning Administrator may refuse to make a determination when he/she cannot definitely
determine the location of a zoning district boundary. The Planning and Zoning Commission may then interpret
the location of the zoning district boundary with reference to the scale of the Official Zoning Map and the
purposes set forth in all relevant provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.
D. Regular Revisions: The Official Zoning Map shall be formally revised by the Zoning Administrator as time
permits. During the time it takes for each revision to be made electronically, hand drawn lines and text on a
printout of the previous Official Zoning Map will be appropriate to note official changes. Revisions may be made
at any time to correct drafting errors, clerical errors or omissions in the Official Zoning Map.
E. Copies: Print copies of the Official Zoning Map may be distributed. Each copy of the Official Zoning Map shall be
accurate only to the date on which it was last updated. The date of the latest revision shall be printed on copies of
the Official Zoning Map.
F. Damage, Destruction, or Loss: In the event the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost, or difficult
to interpret, the Planning and Zoning Commission may prepare a new map which shall depict the Official Zoning
Map as best as possible, and shall thereafter supersede the damaged, destroyed, lost, or difficult to interpret map.
The new map shall be adopted by resolution of the Planning and Zoning Commission and shall thereafter be the
Official Zoning Map.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
1-8
Planning and Zoning Commission Certification 1
1.04 Planning and Zoning Commission Certification
The Zoning Ordinance was certified with a favorable recommendation for adoption on the <DATE>, by the City
of Henderson Planning and Zoning Commission after holding a legally announced public hearing. The records
that monumented the Planning and Zoning Commission’s public hearing and certification of the Henderson Zoning
Ordinance, with signatures, can be found on file in Planning and Zoning Commission’s minutes and records located in
the City offices.
Since its adoption, the Henderson Zoning Ordinance may be updated from time to time to adjust to new trends, calibrate
regulations to current or future needs, close loopholes, or to comply with evolving case law or State Statutes. Each time
amendments are adopted, the Planning and Zoning Commission first held a legally advertised public hearing and certified
the amendments for adoption to the City Council. Those public hearings and certifications can be found on record
in the City offices. Details about each successful amendment can be found in the Planning and Zoning Commission’s
corresponding meeting minutes.
Article
Article 1: Ordinance Foundation 1-9
City Council Adoption 1
1.05 City Council Adoption
The City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance was adopted by the City of Henderson City Council by Ordinance
<NUMBER> on <DATE> by unanimous vote. The City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance became effective on
<DATE>. The ordinance instrument that adopted the Henderson Zoning Ordinance, with signatures, can be found on
file in the City’s Office.
Since its adoption, the Henderson Zoning Ordinance has been updated from time to time to adjust to new trends,
calibrate regulations to current or future needs, close loopholes, or to comply with evolving case law or State Law. The
City Council considered each amendment once the Planning and Zoning Commission held a legally advertised public
hearing and gave favorable recommendation to adopt the amendment. The ordinances that adopted each amendment to
the Henderson Zoning Ordinance can be found, with signatures, in the City’s offices.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
1-10
City Council Adoption 1
© 2017, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Article
City of Henderson
Zoning Ordinance
2
Zoning Districts
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
2-2
Agriculture (AG) District 2
District Intent
The AG (Agriculture) District is
intended to be used as follows:
Use, Type, and Intensity
• General agricultural operations
• Family farms
Application of District
• Existing agricultural land
Development Standards
• Enact development standards to
protect the natural environment and
neighboring low intensity uses.
• Enact development standards to grant
reasonable agricultural practices
Appropriate Adjacent Districts
• AG, PR, RE, R1, R2, R3, R4, M1, M2,
M3, IS, C1, C2, OC, I1, I2 and HI
Permitted Uses
Accessory Permitted Uses
• home business (type 1)
Agricultural Permitted Uses
• agricultural crop production
• agricultural products, storage
• agricultural tourism (type 1)
• forestry
• hobby farming
• land conservation
• orchard
• plant nursery, wholesale
• raising of farm animals
• stable (private)
• tree farm, wholesale
• vineyard
Institutional Permitted Uses
• nature preserve
• water tower
• wellhead, public
Residential Permitted Uses
• dwelling, single-family detached
Special Exception Uses
Accessory Special Exception Uses
• home business (type 2)
• home business (type 3)
Agricultural Special Exception Uses
• agricultural products, processing
• agricultural products, sales
• agricultural tourism (type 2)
• bio-diesel production (micro)
• grain elevator
• stable (public)
Commercial Special Exception Uses
• kennel
• shooting range (outdoor)
• winery
Industrial Special Exception Uses
• composting facility
• telecommunication facility
Residential Special Exception Uses
• bed and breakfast
2.01 Agriculture (AG) District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
Article
Article 2: Zoning Districts 2-3
Agriculture (AG) 2
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Structure
Height
Pitched Roof Structures
(from highest point on pitched roof)
Accessory Structure Primary Structure
chimneys are
exempt
Accessory Structure
• AS-01.....................................5-3
• AS-02.....................................5-4
Density and Intensity
• DI-01....................................5-19
Environmental
• EN-01...................................5-20
Fence and Wall
• FW-01..................................5-21
• FW-03..................................5-22
Floor Area
• FA-01...................................5-25
Height
• HT-01...................................5-26
Home Business
• HB-01...................................5-27
• HB-02...................................5-28
• HB-03...................................5-29
Keeping of Animals
• KA-01...................................5-30
Landscaping
• LA-01...................................5-32
• LA-05...................................5-36
Lighting
• LT-01....................................5-37
Lot
• LO-01...................................5-39
Outdoor Storage
• SS-01...................................5-41
Performance
• PF-01...................................5-55
Public Improvement
• PI-01....................................5-56
Setback
• SB-01...................................5-57
Sewer and Water
• SW-01..................................5-59
Signs
• SI-01....................................5-61
Special Exception
• SE-01...................................5-86
Structure
• ST-01...................................5-87
Telecommunication
• TC-01...................................5-88
Temporary Use
• TU-01...................................5-90
• TU-02...................................5-90
Trash Receptacle
• TR-01...................................5-92
Vision Clearance
• VC-01...................................5-93
Additional Development Standards that Apply
2.02 Agriculture (AG) District Development Standards
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Lot Width
Lot Area
Lot Depth
Property
Line
ROW
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Rear Yard
Setback
Side Yard
Setback
Building
Envelope
Front Yard
Setback
ROW
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Primary
Structure
Accessory
Structure
ROW
Lot
Coverage
Minimum Lot Area
• 5 acres
Minimum Lot Width
• 200 feet
Sewer and Water
• sewer utility connection is required when
available - 2X rule
• water utility connection is required when
available - 2X rule
Minimum Front Yard Setback
• 60 feet for primary and accessory
structure
Minimum Side Yard Setback
• 25 feet for primary structure
• 20 feet for accessory structure
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
• 30 feet for primary structure
• 15 feet for accessory structure
Maximum Lot Coverage
• 20% of lot area
Minimum Dwelling Unit Size
• 1,100 square feet
Maximum Primary Structures
• 8 non-residential structures
• 1 primary dwelling
Maximum Structure Height
• 40 feet for primary structure
• 40 feet for accessory structure
• 2 ½ stories for primary structure
• 2 stories for accessory structure
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
2-4
Parks and Recreation (PR) District 2
District Intent
The PR (Parks and Recreation)
District is intended to be used as
follows:
Use, Type, and Intensity
• All types of passive and active
recreation including parks, golf
courses, picnic areas, trails,
playgrounds, and sports fields
Application of District
• Existing and new parks and recreation
areas
Development Standards
• Promote high quality recreational areas
for public use and enjoyment
• unshielded outdoor lighting restricted to
early evening hours
Appropriate Adjacent Districts
• AG, PR, RE, R1, R2, R3, R4, M1, M2,
M3, IS, C1, C2, UC, OC, I1, I2 and HI
Permitted Uses
Agricultural Permitted Uses
• land conservation
Commercial Permitted Uses
• farmers market
• golf course
Institutional Permitted Uses
• botanical gardens
• community center
• nature center
• nature preserve
• park, public
• water tower
• wellhead, public
Residential Permitted Uses
• caretakers residence
Special Exception Uses
Agricultural Special Exception Uses
• forestry
Commercial Special Exception Uses
• cabins (for rent)
• campground
• country club
• driving range
• paintball facility
• party facility
• recreational vehicle park
• sports field (indoor)
• sports field (outdoor)
• swimming pool
Industrial Special Exception Uses
• composting facility
• telecommunication facility
• utility facility, above ground
Institutional Special Exception Uses
• observatory
• performing arts center
• police station
• wildlife preserve
• zoo
2.03 Parks and Recreation (PR) District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
Article
Article 2: Zoning Districts 2-5
Parks and Recreation (PR) District 2
Minimum Lot Area
• no minimum
Minimum Lot Width
• no minimum
Sewer and Water
• sewer utility connection is required
• water utility connection is required
Minimum Front Yard Setback
• 30 feet for primary and accessory
structure
Minimum Side Yard Setback
• 25 feet for primary and accessory
structure
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
• 25 feet for primary and accessory
structure
Maximum Lot Coverage
• 20% of lot area
Minimum Dwelling Unit Size
• 1,100 square feet
Maximum Primary Structures
• 10
Maximum Structure Height
• 40 feet for primary structure
• 25 feet for accessory structure
• 2 ½ stories for primary structure
• 1 story for accessory structures
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
ROW
Lot Area
Property
Line
Lot Width
Lot Depth
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Structure
Height
Pitched Roof Structures
(from highest point on pitched roof)
Accessory Structure Primary Structure
chimneys are
exempt
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Rear Setback
Side
Setback
Building
Envelope
Front Setback
ROW
Side
Setback
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
ROW
Accessory
Structures
Lot
Coverage
Accessory Structure
• AS-01.....................................5-3
• AS-02.....................................5-4
Density and Intensity
• DI-01....................................5-19
Environmental
• EN-01...................................5-20
Fence and Wall
• FW-01..................................5-21
• FW-02..................................5-22
Floor Area
• FA-01...................................5-25
Height
• HT-01...................................5-26
Landscaping
• LA-01...................................5-32
• LA-03...................................5-34
• LA-04...................................5-35
• LA-05...................................5-36
Lighting
• LT-01....................................5-37
Lot
• LO-01...................................5-39
Outdoor Storage
• SS-01...................................5-41
Parking
• PK-01...................................5-43
• PK-06...................................5-45
Performance
• PF-01...................................5-55
Public Improvement
• PI-01....................................5-56
Setback
• SB-01...................................5-57
Sewer and Water
• SW-01..................................5-59
Signs
• SI-01....................................5-61
• SI-05....................................5-71
Special Exception
• SE-01...................................5-86
Structure
• ST-01...................................5-87
Telecommunication
• TC-01...................................5-88
Temporary Use
• TU-01...................................5-90
• TU-04...................................5-91
Trash Receptacle
• TR-01...................................5-92
Vision Clearance
• VC-01...................................5-93
Additional Development Standards that Apply
2.04 Parks and Recreation (PR) District Development Standards
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
2-6
Residential Estate (RE) District 2
District Intent
The RE (Residential Estate) District is
intended to be used as follows:
Use, Type, and Intensity
• Residential estates and hobby farming
• Agricultural uses when surface water is
not negatively impacted
• Very low intensity single-family
detached dwellings on very large lots
Application of District
• Existing and new development
Development Standards
• Promote low-impact development in
harmony with a natural setting
Appropriate Adjacent Districts
• AG, PR, RE, R1, R2, and IS
Permitted Uses
Accessory Permitted Uses
• home business (type 1)
Agricultural Permitted Uses
• agricultural crop production
• hobby farming
• land conservation
• orchard
Residential Permitted Uses
• dwelling, single-family detached
Special Exception Uses
Accessory Special Exception Uses
• home business (type 2)
• home business (type 3)
Agricultural Special Exception Uses
• forestry
• plant nursery, wholesale
• raising of animals (farm)
• stable (private)
• tree farm, wholesale
Residential Special Exception Uses
• bed and breakfast
2.05 Residential Estate (RE) District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
Article
Article 2: Zoning Districts 2-7
Residential Estate (RE) District 2
Minimum Lot Area
• 3 acres
Minimum Lot Width
• 150 feet
Sewer and Water
• sewer utility connection is required
• water utility connection is required
Minimum Front Yard Setback
• 50 feet for primary and accessory
structure
Minimum Side Yard Setback
• 50 feet for primary structure
• 40 feet for accessory structure
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
• 50 feet for primary structure
• 30 feet for accessory structure
Maximum Lot Coverage
• 20% of lot area
Minimum Dwelling Unit Size
• 1,700 square feet
Maximum Primary Structures
• 1
Maximum Structure Height
• 40 feet for primary structure
• 30 feet for accessory structure
• 2 ½ stories for primary structure
• 2 stories for accessory structure
Accessory Structure
• AS-01.....................................5-3
• AS-03.....................................5-5
Architectural
• AR-01...................................5-14
Density and Intensity
• DI-01....................................5-19
Environmental
• EN-01...................................5-20
Fence and Wall
• FW-01..................................5-21
• FW-04..................................5-23
Floor Area
• FA-01...................................5-25
Height
• HT-01...................................5-26
Home Business
• HB-01...................................5-27
• HB-02...................................5-28
• HB-03...................................5-29
Keeping of Animals
• KA-02...................................5-30
Landscaping
• LA-01...................................5-32
• LA-02...................................5-33
• LA-05...................................5-36
Lighting
• LT-01....................................5-37
Lot
• LO-01...................................5-39
Outdoor Storage
• SS-01...................................5-41
Parking
• PK-01...................................5-43
• PK-02...................................5-44
Performance
• PF-01...................................5-55
Public Improvement
• PI-01....................................5-56
Setback
• SB-01...................................5-57
Sewer and Water
• SW-01..................................5-59
Signs
• SI-01....................................5-61
• SI-03....................................5-68
Special Exception
• SE-01...................................5-86
Structure
• ST-01...................................5-87
Temporary Use
• TU-01...................................5-90
• TU-03...................................5-91
Trash Receptacle
• TR-01...................................5-92
Vision Clearance
• VC-01...................................5-93
Additional Development Standards that Apply
2.06 Residential Estate (RE) District Development Standards
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
ROW
Lot Depth
Lot Width
Property
Line
Lot Area
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Structure
Height
Pitched Roof Structures
(from highest point on pitched roof)
Accessory Structure Primary Structure
chimneys are
exempt
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
ROW
Front
Yard
Setback
Building
Envelope
Side
Yard
Setback
Rear Yard
Setback
Side
Yard
Setback
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
ROW
Accessory
Structure
Lot
Coverage
Primary
Structure
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
2-8
Low Density Single-family Residential (R1) District 2
Permitted Uses
Accessory Permitted Uses
• home business (type 1)
Residential Permitted Uses
• dwelling, single-family detached
Special Exception Uses
Accessory Special Exception Uses
• home business (type 2)
• home daycare facility
Residential Special Exception Uses
• bed and breakfast
District Intent
The R1 (Low Density Single-family
Residential) District is intended to be
used as follows:
Use, Type, and Intensity
• Low intensity single-family detached
dwellings on large sized lots
Application of District
• Existing and new development
Development Standards
• Promote low impact development
Appropriate Adjacent Districts
• AG, PR, RE, R1, R2, IS, and C1
2.07 Low Density Single-family Residential (R1) District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
Article
Article 2: Zoning Districts 2-9
Low Density Single-family Residential (R1) District 2
Maximum Structure Height
• 35 feet for primary structure
• 25 feet for accessory structure
• 2 ½ stories for primary structure
• 1 story for accessory structure
Minimum Lot Area
• 10,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Width
• 100 feet
Sewer and Water
• sewer utility connection is required
• water utility connection is required
Minimum Front Yard Setback
• 35 feet for primary and accessory
structure
Minimum Side Yard Setback
• 10 feet for primary structure
• 5 feet for accessory structure
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
• 20 feet for primary structure
• 5 feet for accessory structure
Maximum Lot Coverage
• 30%
Minimum Dwelling Unit Size
• 1,500 square feet
Maximum Primary Structures
• 1
Accessory Structure
• AS-01.....................................5-3
• AS-04.....................................5-6
Architectural
• AR-01...................................5-14
Density and Intensity
• DI-01....................................5-19
Environmental
• EN-01...................................5-20
Fence and Wall
• FW-01..................................5-21
• FW-04..................................5-23
Floor Area
• FA-01...................................5-25
Height
• HT-01...................................5-26
Home Business
• HB-01...................................5-27
• HB-02...................................5-28
Keeping of Animals
• KA-03...................................5-31
Landscaping
• LA-01...................................5-32
• LA-02...................................5-33
• LA-05...................................5-36
Lighting
• LT-01....................................5-37
Lot
• LO-01...................................5-39
Outdoor Storage
• SS-01...................................5-41
Parking
• PK-01...................................5-43
• PK-02...................................5-44
Performance
• PF-01...................................5-55
Public Improvement
• PI-01....................................5-56
Setback
• SB-01...................................5-57
Sewer and Water
• SW-01..................................5-59
Signs
• SI-01....................................5-61
• SI-03....................................5-68
Special Exception
• SE-01...................................5-86
Structure
• ST-01...................................5-87
Temporary Use
• TU-01...................................5-90
• TU-03...................................5-91
Trash Receptacle
• TR-01...................................5-92
Vision Clearance
• VC-01...................................5-93
Additional Development Standards that Apply
2.08 Low Density Single-family Residential (R1) District Development Standards
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Property
Line
Lot Area
Lot Depth
Lot Width
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Structure
Height
Pitched Roof Structures
(from highest point on pitched roof)
Accessory Structure Primary Structure
chimneys are
exempt
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Rear
Yard
Setback
Building
Envelope
Front
Yard
Setback
Side
Yard
Setback
Side
Yard
Setback
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Accessory
Structure
Primary
Structure
Lot
Coverage
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
2-10
Medium Density Single-family Residential (R2) District 2
District Intent
The R2 (Medium Density Single-family
Residential) District is intended to be
used as follows:
Use Type and Intensity
• Moderate density single-family
detached on medium sized lots
Application of District
• Existing and new development
Appropriate Adjacent Districts
• AG, PR, RE, R1, R2, R3, M1, M2, M3,
IS and C1
Permitted Uses
Accessory Permitted Uses
• home business (type 1)
Residential Permitted Uses
• dwelling, single-family detached
Special Exception Uses
Accessory Special Exception Uses
• home business (type 2)
• home daycare facility
2.09 Medium Density Single-family Residential (R2) District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
Article
Article 2: Zoning Districts 2-11
Medium Density Single-family Residential (R2) District 2
Maximum Structure Height
• 35 feet for primary structure
• 25 feet for accessory structure
• 2 ½ stories for primary structure
• 1 story for accessory structure
Minimum Lot Area
• 7,500 square feet
Minimum Lot Width
• 75 feet
Sewer and Water
• sewer utility connection is required
• water utility connection is required
Minimum Front Yard Setback
• 30 feet for primary and accessory
structure
Minimum Side Yard Setback
• 7 ½ feet for primary structures
• 5 feet for accessory structures
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
• 20 feet for primary structure
• 5 feet for accessory structure
Maximum Lot Coverage
• 30%
Minimum Dwelling Unit Size
• 1,000 square feet
Maximum Primary Structures
• 1
Accessory Structure
• AS-01.....................................5-3
• AS-04.....................................5-6
Architectural
• AR-01...................................5-14
Density and Intensity
• DI-01....................................5-19
Environmental
• EN-01...................................5-20
Fence and Wall
• FW-01..................................5-21
• FW-04..................................5-23
Floor Area
• FA-01...................................5-25
Height
• HT-01...................................5-26
Home Business
• HB-01...................................5-27
• HB-02...................................5-28
Keeping of Animals
• KA-03...................................5-31
Landscaping
• LA-01...................................5-32
• LA-02...................................5-33
• LA-05...................................5-36
Lighting
• LT-01....................................5-37
Lot
• LO-01...................................5-39
Outdoor Storage
• SS-01...................................5-41
Parking
• PK-01...................................5-43
• PK-02...................................5-44
Performance
• PF-01...................................5-55
Public Improvement
• PI-01....................................5-56
Setback
• SB-01...................................5-57
Sewer and Water
• SW-01..................................5-59
Signs
• SI-01....................................5-61
• SI-03....................................5-68
Special Exception
• SE-01...................................5-86
Structure
• ST-01...................................5-87
Temporary Use
• TU-01...................................5-90
• TU-03...................................5-91
Trash Receptacle
• TR-01...................................5-92
Vision Clearance
• VC-01...................................5-93
Additional Development Standards that Apply
2.10 Medium Density Single-family Residential (R2) District Development Standards
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Lot Width
Lot Depth
R.O.W.
Property
Line
Lot Area
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Structure
Height
Pitched Roof Structures
(from highest point on pitched roof)
Accessory Structure Primary Structure
chimneys are
exempt
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
R.O.W.
Front Yard
Setback
Building
Envelope
Side
Yard
Setback
Rear Yard
Setback
Side
Yard
Setback
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
R.O.W.
Accessory
Structure
Lot
Coverage
Primary
Structure
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
2-12
High Density Single-family Residential (R3) District 2
District Intent
The R3 (High Density Single-family
Residential) District is intended to be
used as follows:
Use, Type, and Intensity
• High intensity single-family detached
dwellings on small sized lots
Application of District
• Existing and new development
Appropriate Adjacent Districts
• AG, PR, R2, R3, R4, M1, M2, M3, IS,
C1 and UC
Permitted Uses
Accessory Permitted Uses
• home business (type 1)
Residential Permitted Uses
• dwelling, single-family detached
Special Exception Uses
Accessory Special Exception Uses
• home business (type 2)
• home daycare facility
2.11 High Density Single-family Residential (R3) District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
Article
Article 2: Zoning Districts 2-13
High Density Single-family Residential (R3) District 2
Minimum Lot Area
• 6,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Width
• 60 feet
Sewer and Water
• sewer utility connection is required
• water utility connection is required
Minimum Front Yard Setback
• 25 feet for primary and accessory
structure
Minimum Side Yard Setback
• 7 ½ feet for primary structure
• 3 feet for accessory structure
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
• 20 feet for primary structure
• 5 feet for accessory structure
Maximum Lot Coverage
• 35% of lot area
Minimum Dwelling Unit Size
• 800 square feet
Maximum Primary Structures
• 1
Maximum Structure Height
• 35 feet for primary structure
• 25 feet for accessory structure
• 2 ½ stories for primary structure
• 1 story for accessory structure
Accessory Structure
• AS-01.....................................5-3
• AS-04.....................................5-6
Architectural
• AR-01...................................5-14
Density and Intensity
• DI-01....................................5-19
Environmental
• EN-01...................................5-20
Fence and Wall
• FW-01..................................5-21
• FW-04..................................5-23
Floor Area
• FA-01...................................5-25
Height
• HT-01...................................5-26
Home Business
• HB-01...................................5-27
• HB-02...................................5-28
Keeping of Animals
• KA-04...................................5-31
Landscaping
• LA-01...................................5-32
• LA-02...................................5-33
• LA-05...................................5-36
Lighting
• LT-01....................................5-37
Lot
• LO-01...................................5-39
Outdoor Storage
• SS-01...................................5-41
Parking
• PK-01...................................5-43
• PK-02...................................5-44
Performance
• PF-01...................................5-55
Public Improvement
• PI-01....................................5-56
Setback
• SB-01...................................5-57
Sewer and Water
• SW-01..................................5-59
Signs
• SI-01....................................5-61
• SI-03....................................5-68
Special Exception
• SE-01...................................5-86
Structure
• ST-01...................................5-87
Temporary Use
• TU-01...................................5-90
• TU-03...................................5-91
Trash Receptacle
• TR-01...................................5-92
Vision Clearance
• VC-01...................................5-93
2.12 High Density Single-family Residential (R3) District Development Standards
Additional Development Standards that Apply
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Lot Area
Property
Line
Lot Width
Lot Depth
R.O.W
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Structure
Height
Pitched Roof Structures
(from highest point on pitched roof)
Accessory Structure Primary Structure
chimneys are
exempt
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
R.O.W
Building
Envelope
Front Yard
Setback
Rear
Yard
Setback
Side
Yard
Setback
Side
Yard
Setback
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
R.O.W
Primary
Structure
Lot
Coverage
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
2-14
Manufactured Home (R4) District 2
District Intent
The R4 (Manufactured Home) District
is intended to be used as follows:
Use, Type, and Intensity
• High intensity single-family detached
dwellings on small to medium sized lots
Application of District
• Lease lot developments
• Manufactured home subdivisions
• Not used for infill development
Development Standards
• Enact development standards to
protect the quality of life of tenants and
surrounding zoning districts
Appropriate Adjacent Districts
• AG, PR, R3, R4, M1, M2, M3, IS and
C1
Permitted Uses
Accessory Permitted Uses
• home business (type 1)
Residential Permitted Uses
• dwelling, single-family detached
• dwelling, manufactured home
Special Exception Uses
Accessory Special Exception Uses
• home business (type 2)
• home daycare facility
Residential Special Exception Uses
• assisted living facility
• bed and breakfast
• dwelling, duplex (2 units)
• dwelling, single-family attached
2.13 Manufactured Home (R4) District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
Article
Article 2: Zoning Districts 2-15
Manufactured Home (R4) District 2
Maximum Structure Height
• 35 feet for primary structure
• 25 feet for accessory structure
• 2 ½ stories for primary structure
• 1 story for accessory structure
Minimum Lot Area
• 5,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Width
• 50 feet
Sewer and Water
• sewer utility connection is required
• water utility connection is required
Minimum Front Yard Setback
• 25 feet for primary and accessory
structure
Minimum Side Yard Setback
• 7 ½ feet for primary structure
• 5 feet for accessory structure
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
• 20 feet for primary structure
• 5 feet for accessory structure
Maximum Lot Coverage
• 40% of lot area
Minimum Dwelling Unit Size
• 800 square feet
Maximum Primary Structures
• 1
Accessory Structure
• AS-01.....................................5-3
• AS-05.....................................5-7
Architectural
• AR-02...................................5-14
Density and Intensity
• DI-01....................................5-19
Environmental
• EN-01...................................5-20
Fence and Wall
• FW-01..................................5-21
• FW-04..................................5-23
Floor Area
• FA-01...................................5-25
Height
• HT-01...................................5-26
Home Business
• HB-01...................................5-27
• HB-02...................................5-28
Keeping of Animals
• KA-04...................................5-31
Landscaping
• LA-01...................................5-32
• LA-02...................................5-33
• LA-05...................................5-36
Lighting
• LT-01....................................5-37
Lot
• LO-01...................................5-39
Outdoor Storage
• SS-01...................................5-41
Parking
• PK-01...................................5-43
• PK-03...................................5-44
Performance
• PF-01...................................5-55
Public Improvement
• PI-01....................................5-56
Setback
• SB-01...................................5-57
Sewer and Water
• SW-01..................................5-59
Signs
• SI-01....................................5-61
• SI-03....................................5-68
Special Exception
• SE-01...................................5-86
Structure
• ST-01...................................5-87
Temporary Use
• TU-01...................................5-90
• TU-03...................................5-91
Trash Receptacle
• TR-01...................................5-92
Vision Clearance
• VC-01...................................5-93
Additional Development Standards that Apply
2.14 Manufactured Home (R4) District Development Standards
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Property
Line
Lot Depth
Lot Width
ROW
Lot Area
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Structure
Height
Pitched Roof Structures
(from highest point on pitched roof)
Accessory Structure Primary Structure
chimneys are
exempt
© 2012, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Building
Envelope
Side Yard
Setback
Side Yard
Setback
Rear Yard
Setback
Front Yard
Setback
ROW
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Primary
Structure
Accessory
Structure
Lot
Coverage
ROW
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
2-16
Low Density Multiple-family Residential (M1) District 2
District Intent
The M1 (Low Density Multiple-family
Residential) District is intended to be
used as follows:
Use, Type, and Intensity
• Low density multiple-family buildings
in the form of duplexes, triplexes and
quadplexes
Application of District
• Existing and new development
Appropriate Adjacent Districts
• AG, PR, R2, R3, R4, M1, M2, IS and
C1
Permitted Uses
Accessory Permitted Uses
• home business (type 1)
Residential Permitted Uses
• dwelling, duplex (2 units)
• dwelling, multiple-family (3 to 4 units)
Special Exception Uses
Residential Special Exception Uses
• assisted living facility
• dwelling, single-family attached
• dwelling, single-family detached
• fair housing facility
2.15 Low Density Multiple-family Residential (M1) District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
Article
Article 2: Zoning Districts 2-17
Low Density Multiple-family Residential (M1) District 2
Maximum Structure Height
• 35 feet for primary structure
• 25 feet for accessory structure
• 2 stories for primary structure
• 1 story for accessory structure
Minimum Lot Area
• 10,000 square feet
• 7,000 square feet per dwelling unit
Minimum Lot Width
• 100 feet
Sewer and Water
• sewer utility connection is required
• water utility connection is required
Minimum Front Yard Setback
• 25 feet for primary and accessory
structure
Minimum Side Yard Setback
• 10 feet for primary structure
• 10 feet for accessory structure
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
• 25 feet for primary structure
• 15 feet for accessory structure
Maximum Lot Coverage
• 35% of lot area
Minimum Dwelling Unit Size
• 600 square feet per dwelling with a
minimum average of 800 square feet
Maximum Density
• 8 units per acre
Maximum Primary Structures
• 1
Accessory Structure
• AS-01.....................................5-3
• AS-04.....................................5-6
Architectural
• AR-01...................................5-14
Density and Intensity
• DI-01....................................5-19
Environmental
• EN-01...................................5-20
Fence and Wall
• FW-01..................................5-21
• FW-04..................................5-23
Floor Area
• FA-01...................................5-25
Height
• HT-01...................................5-26
Home Business
• HB-01...................................5-27
Landscaping
• LA-01...................................5-32
• LA-02...................................5-33
• LA-05...................................5-36
Lighting
• LT-01....................................5-37
Lot
• LO-01...................................5-39
Outdoor Storage
• SS-01...................................5-41
Parking
• PK-01...................................5-43
• PK-04...................................5-44
Performance
• PF-01...................................5-55
Public Improvement
• PI-01....................................5-56
Setback
• SB-01...................................5-57
Sewer and Water
• SW-01..................................5-59
Signs
• SI-01....................................5-61
• SI-03....................................5-68
Special Exception
• SE-01...................................5-86
Structure
• ST-01...................................5-87
Temporary Use
• TU-01...................................5-90
• TU-03...................................5-91
Trash Receptacle
• TR-01...................................5-92
Vision Clearance
• VC-01...................................5-93
Additional Development Standards that Apply
2.16 Low Density Multiple-family Residential (M1) District Development Standards
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Structure
Height
Pitched Roof Structures
(from highest point on pitched roof)
Accessory Structure Primary Structure
chimneys are
exempt
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Building
Envelope
ROW
Front Yard
Setback
Rear Yard
Setback
Side
Yard
Setback
Side
Yard
Setback
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Primary
Structure
Lot
Coverage
ROW
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Lot Area
Property
Line
Lot Width
Lot Depth
ROW
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
2-18
Medium Density Multiple-family Residential (M2) District 2
District Intent
The M2 (Medium Density Multiplefamily
Residential) District is intended
to be used as follows:
Use, Type, and Intensity
• Medium density multiple-family
buildings in the form of condominiums,
townhouses, and small apartment
buildings
Application of District
• Existing and new development
Development Standards
• Enact development standards to
protect the quality of life for tenants
and surrounding zoning districts
Appropriate Adjacent Districts
• AG, PR, R2, R3, R4, M1, M2, M3, IS,
C1, C2, UC, OC and I1
Permitted Uses
Accessory Permitted Uses
• home business (type 1)
Residential Permitted Uses
• assisted living facility
• dwelling, duplex (2 units)
• dwelling, multiple-family (3 to 4 units)
• dwelling, multiple-family (5 to 8 units)
• dwelling, single-family attached
• retirement community
Industrial Permitted Uses
• utility facility, above ground
Special Exception Uses
Residential Special Exception Uses
• dwelling, multiple-family (9 to 16 units)
• dwelling, single-family detached
• fair housing facility (large)
• nursing home
2.17 Medium Density Multiple-family Residential (M2) District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
Article
Article 2: Zoning Districts 2-19
Medium Density Multiple-family Residential (M2) District 2
Maximum Structure Height
• 40 feet for primary structure
• 25 feet for accessory structure
• 2 ½ stories for primary structure
• 1 story for accessory structure
Minimum Lot Area
• 25,000 square feet
• 4,500 square feet per dwelling unit
Minimum Lot Width
• 100 feet
Sewer and Water
• sewer utility connection is required
• water utility connection is required
Minimum Front Yard Setback
• 35 feet for primary and accessory
structure
Minimum Side Yard Setback
• 10 feet for primary structure
• 10 feet for accessory structure
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
• 25 feet for primary structure
• 10 feet for accessory structure
Maximum Lot Coverage
• 40% of lot area
Minimum Dwelling Unit Size
• 600 square feet per dwelling unit for
multiple-family dwelling units with a
minimum average of 800 square feet
Maximum Density
• 15 units per acre
Maximum Primary Structures
• 4
Accessory Structure
• AS-01.....................................5-3
• AS-06.....................................5-8
Architectural
• AR-03...................................5-15
Density and Intensity
• DI-01....................................5-19
Environmental
• EN-01...................................5-20
Fence and Wall
• FW-01..................................5-21
• FW-04..................................5-23
Floor Area
• FA-01...................................5-25
Height
• HT-01...................................5-26
Home Business
• HB-01...................................5-27
Landscaping
• LA-01...................................5-32
• LA-03...................................5-34
• LA-04...................................5-35
• LA-05...................................5-36
Lighting
• LT-01....................................5-37
Lot
• LO-01...................................5-39
Outdoor Storage
• SS-01...................................5-41
Parking
• PK-01...................................5-43
• PK-04...................................5-44
Performance
• PF-01...................................5-55
Public Improvement
• PI-01....................................5-56
Setback
• SB-01...................................5-57
Sewer and Water
• SW-01..................................5-59
Signs
• SI-01....................................5-61
• SI-04....................................5-69
Special Exception
• SE-01...................................5-86
Structure
• ST-01...................................5-87
Temporary Use
• TU-01...................................5-90
• TU-03...................................5-91
Trash Receptacle
• TR-01...................................5-92
Vision Clearance
• VC-01...................................5-93
Additional Development Standards that Apply
2.18 Medium Density Multiple-family Residential (M2) District Development Standards
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Lot Width
Property
Line
Lot Depth
Lot Area
ROW
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Structure
Height
Pitched Roof Structures
(from highest point on pitched roof)
Accessory Structure Primary Structure
chimneys are
exempt
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Front
Yard
Setback
Side Yard
Setback
Side Yard
Setback
Rear
Yard
Setback
Building
Envelope
ROW
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Lot Coverage
Primary
Structure
ROW
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
2-20
High Density Multiple-family Residential (M3) District 2
District Intent
The M3 (High Density Multiple-family
Residential) District is intended to be
used as follows:
Use, Type, and Intensity
• Medium to high density multiple-family
buildings in the form of apartment
complexes
Application of District
• Existing and new development
Development Standards
• Enact development standards to
protect the quality of life for tenants
and surrounding zoning districts
Appropriate Adjacent Districts
• AG, PR, R2, R3, R4, M2, M3, IS and
C1, C2, OC and I1
Permitted Uses
Accessory Permitted Uses
• home business (type 1)
Residential Permitted Uses
• assisted living facility
• dwelling, multiple-family (3 to 4 units)
• dwelling, multiple-family (5 to 8 units)
• dwelling, multiple-family (9 to 16 units)
• nursing home
• retirement community
Industrial Permitted Uses
• utility facility, above ground
Special Exception Uses
Institutional Special Exception Uses
• hospice facility
Residential Special Exception Uses
• dwelling, duplex (2 units)
• dwelling, multiple-family (17+ units)
• dwelling, single-family attached
• dwelling, single-family detached
2.19 High Density Multiple-family Residential (M3) District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
Article
Article 2: Zoning Districts 2-21
High Density Multiple-family Residential (M3) District 2
Maximum Structure Height
• 40 feet for primary structure
• 25 feet for accessory structure
• 3 stories for primary structure
• 1 story for accessory structure
Minimum Lot Area
• 1 acre
Minimum Lot Width
• 150 feet
Sewer and Water
• sewer utility connection is required
• water utility connection is required
Minimum Front Yard Setback
• 35 feet for primary and accessory
structure
Minimum Side Yard Setback
• 10 feet for primary and accessory
structure
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
• 25 feet for primary structure
• 20 feet for accessory structure
Minimum Building Separation
• 25 feet for primary structure
• 15 feet for accessory structure
Maximum Lot Coverage
• 45% of lot area
Minimum Dwelling Unit Size
• 550 square feet per dwelling unit with a
minimum average of 700 square feet
Maximum Density
• 22 units per acre
Maximum Primary Structures
• 10
Accessory Structure
• AS-01.....................................5-3
• AS-06.....................................5-8
Architectural
• AR-03...................................5-15
Density and Intensity
• DI-01....................................5-19
Environmental
• EN-01...................................5-20
Fence and Wall
• FW-01..................................5-21
• FW-04..................................5-23
Floor Area
• FA-01...................................5-25
Height
• HT-01...................................5-26
Home Business
• HB-01...................................5-27
Landscaping
• LA-01...................................5-32
• LA-03...................................5-34
• LA-04...................................5-35
• LA-05...................................5-36
Lighting
• LT-01....................................5-37
Lot
• LO-01...................................5-39
Outdoor Storage
• SS-01...................................5-41
Parking
• PK-01...................................5-43
• PK-04...................................5-44
Performance
• PF-01...................................5-55
Public Improvement
• PI-01....................................5-56
Setback
• SB-01...................................5-57
Sewer and Water
• SW-01..................................5-59
Signs
• SI-01....................................5-61
• SI-04....................................5-69
Special Exception
• SE-01...................................5-86
Structure
• ST-01...................................5-87
Temporary Use
• TU-01...................................5-90
• TU-03...................................5-91
Trash Receptacle
• TR-01...................................5-92
Vision Clearance
• VC-01...................................5-93
Additional Development Standards that Apply
2.20 High Density Multiple-family Residential (M3) District Development Standards
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Lot Depth
Property
Line
Lot Width
ROW
Lot Area
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Structure
Height
Pitched Roof Structures
(from highest point on pitched roof)
Accessory Structure Primary Structure
chimneys are
exempt
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Building
Envelope Rear Yard
Setback
Side
Yard
Setback
Side
Yard
Setback
Front Yard
Setback
ROW
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Accessory
Structure
Lot
Coverage
Primary
Structure
ROW
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
2-22
Institutional (IS) District 2
District Intent
The IS (Institutional) District is
intended to be used as follows:
Use, Type, and Intensity
• Varying intensity of institutionally
owned lands, including Federal, State,
and local government facilities
Application of District
• Existing and new development
• Use as a buffer district or transitional
district
Development Standards
• Enact development standards
to minimize impacts on adjacent
residential properties while serving the
needs of the overall community
Appropriate Adjacent Districts
• AG, PR, RE, R1, R2, R3, R4, M1, M2,
M3, IS, C1, C2, UC, OC, I1, I2 and HI
Permitted Uses
Commercial Permitted Uses
• farmers market
Industrial Permitted Uses
• utility facility, above ground
Institutional Permitted Uses
• botanical gardens
• cemetery or mausoleum
• child care institution
• community center
• emergency service training facility
• fairground
• fire or rescue station
• government office
• government operations facility
• hospice facility
• hospital
• information center
• library
• museum
• observatory
• parking garage, public
• parking lot, public
• performing arts center
• place of worship
• police station
• post office
• school (P-12), private
• school (P-12), public
• sewage treatment facility, public
• university or college
• water tower
• water treatment facility, public
• wellhead, public
Residential Permitted Uses
• nursing home
Special Exception Uses
Commercial Special Exception Uses
• crematory
• day care
• software development
• trade or business school
Institutional Special Exception Uses
• homeless shelter
• jail
• juvenile detention facility
• prison
• recycling collection point
• rehabilitation clinic, drug
• shelter
• wildlife preserve
Residential Special Exception Uses
• assisted living facility
• fair housing facility
• hostel
2.21 Institutional (IS) District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
Article
Article 2: Zoning Districts 2-23
Institutional (IS) District 2
Minimum Lot Area
• no minimum
Minimum Lot Width
• no minimum
Sewer and Water
• sewer utility connection is required
• water utility connection is required
Minimum Front Yard Setback
• 35 feet for primary and accessory
structure
Minimum Side Yard Setback
• 15 feet for primary and accessory
structure
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
• 20 feet for primary and accessory
structure
Maximum Lot Coverage
• 50% of lot area
Minimum Main Floor Area
• no minimum
Maximum Primary Structures
• 10
Maximum Structure Height
• 50 feet for primary structure
• 25 feet for accessory structure
• 4 stories for primary structure
• 1 story for accessory structure
Accessory Structure
• AS-01.....................................5-3
• AS-07.....................................5-9
Density and Intensity
• DI-01....................................5-19
Environmental
• EN-01...................................5-20
Fence and Wall
• FW-01..................................5-21
• FW-05..................................5-23
Floor Area
• FA-01...................................5-25
Height
• HT-01...................................5-26
Landscaping
• LA-01...................................5-32
• LA-03...................................5-34
• LA-04...................................5-35
• LA-05...................................5-36
Lighting
• LT-01....................................5-37
Loading
• LD-01...................................5-38
Lot
• LO-01...................................5-39
Outdoor Storage
• SS-01...................................5-41
Parking
• PK-01...................................5-43
• PK-06...................................5-45
Performance
• PF-01...................................5-55
Public Improvement
• PI-01....................................5-56
Setback
• SB-01...................................5-57
Sewer and Water
• SW-01..................................5-59
Signs
• SI-01....................................5-61
• SI-05....................................5-71
Special Exception
• SE-01...................................5-86
Structure
• ST-01...................................5-87
Temporary Use
• TU-01...................................5-90
• TU-04...................................5-91
Trash Receptacle
• TR-01...................................5-92
Vision Clearance
• VC-01...................................5-93
Additional Development Standards that Apply
2.22 Institutional (IS) District Development Standards
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Lot Width
Lot Depth
Property
Line
ROW
Lot Area
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Structure
Height
Pitched Roof Structures
(from highest point
on pitched roof)
Flat Roof Structures
(from highest
section of flat roof)
Accessory
Structure mechanical
is exempt Primary
Structure
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
ROW
Rear Yard
Setback
Front Yard
Setback
Building
Envelope
Side
Yard
Setback
Side
Yard
Setback
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
ROW
Lot
Coverage
Primary
Structure
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
2-24
Local Commercial (C1) District 2
District Intent
The C1 (Local Commercial) District is
intended to be used as follows:
Use, Type, and Intensity
• Low intensity commercial uses
• Restrict uses to those compatible with
nearby residential development
Application of District
• Existing and new development
• Use as a buffer district or transitional
district
Development Standards
• Disallow commercial developments
that would notably exceed the building
mass of surrounding residential
structures
• Require quality development standards
to minimize impact on adjacent
residential properties
• Minimize light, noise, and water
pollution
Appropriate Adjacent Districts
• AG, PR, R1, R2, R3, R4, M1, M2, M3,
IS, C1, C2, UC and OC
Permitted Uses
Commercial Permitted Uses
• atm, drive-up
• atm, walk-up
• bakery
• barber or beauty shop
• coffee shop
• country club
• day care, adult
• day care, child
• delicatessen
• dry cleaning pickup and drop-off
• ice cream shop
• media rental
• nail salon
• office, general
• office, medical
• restaurant, no drive-through
• retail (type 1) very low intensity
• retail (type 2) low intensity
• tanning salon
• wellness facility
Industrial Permitted Uses
• utility facility, above ground
Institutional Permitted Uses
• community center
• police station
Residential Permitted Uses
• dwelling, upper floor (single-family)
Special Exception Uses
Commercial Special Exception Uses
• automobile oriented business (type 1)
• bank
• bar or tavern
• coin laundry
• counseling center
• design services
• parcel shipping
• photography studio
• real estate office
• retail (type 3) medium intensity
• studio arts
• swimming pool
Institutional Special Exception Uses
• school (P-12), private
Residential Special Exception Uses
• dwelling, upper floor (multiple-family)
2.23 Local Commercial (C1) District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
Article
Article 2: Zoning Districts 2-25
Local Commercial (C1) District 2
Minimum Lot Area
• 10,000 square feet
Maximum Lot Area
• 2 acres
Minimum Lot Width
• 100 feet
Sewer and Water
• sewer utility connection is required
• water utility connection is required
Minimum Front Yard Setback
• 10 feet for primary and accessory
structure
Minimum Side Yard Setback
• 5 feet for primary and accessory
structure
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
• 15 feet for primary structure
• 5 feet for accessory structure
Maximum Lot Coverage
• 50% of lot area
Minimum Dwelling Unit Size
• 800 square feet for a single-unit
development on upper floor
• 700 square feet per dwelling unit for
multiple-family dwelling units with a
minimum average of 800 square feet
Minimum Main Floor Area
• 500 square feet
Maximum Main Floor Area
• 40,000 cumulative square feet
Maximum Primary Structures
• 1
Maximum Structure Height
• 35 feet for primary structure
• 25 feet for accessory structure
• 2 stories for primary structure
• 1 story for accessory structure
Accessory Structure
• AS-01.....................................5-3
• AS-08...................................5-10
Architectural
• AR-04...................................5-16
Density and Intensity
• DI-01....................................5-19
Environmental
• EN-01...................................5-20
Fence and Wall
• FW-01..................................5-21
• FW-05..................................5-23
Floor Area
• FA-01...................................5-25
Height
• HT-01...................................5-26
Landscaping
• LA-01...................................5-32
• LA-03...................................5-34
• LA-04...................................5-35
• LA-05...................................5-36
Lighting
• LT-01....................................5-37
Loading
• LD-01...................................5-38
Lot
• LO-01...................................5-39
Outdoor Dining
• OD-01..................................5-40
Outdoor Storage
• SS-01...................................5-41
• SS-02...................................5-41
Parking
• PK-01...................................5-43
• PK-06...................................5-45
Performance
• PF-01...................................5-55
Public Improvement
• PI-01....................................5-56
Setback
• SB-01...................................5-57
Sewer and Water
• SW-01..................................5-59
Signs
• SI-01....................................5-61
• SI-07....................................5-77
Special Exception
• SE-01...................................5-86
Structure
• ST-01...................................5-87
Temporary Use
• TU-01...................................5-90
• TU-04...................................5-91
Trash Receptacle
• TR-01...................................5-92
Vision Clearance
• VC-01...................................5-93
Additional Development Standards that Apply
2.24 Local Commercial (C1) District Development Standards
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Property
Line
Lot Area
ROW
Lot Width
Lot Depth
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Structure
Height
Pitched Roof Structures
(from highest point
on pitched roof)
Flat Roof Structures
(from highest
section of flat roof)
Accessory
Structure mechanical
is exempt Primary
Structure
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
ROW
Rear Yard Setback
Front Yard
Setback
Building
Envelope
Side
Yard
Setback
Side
Yard
Setback
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
ROW
Primary
Structure
Lot
Coverage
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
2-26
General Commercial (C2) District 2
District Intent
The C2 (General Commercial) District
is intended to be used as follows:
Use, Type, and Intensity
• Medium to high intensity commercial
uses
Application of District
• Existing and new development
• Along major highways and arterials
where traffic impacts do not harm lower
intensity uses
Development Standards
• Disallow commercial structures that
notably exceed the building mass of
surrounding commercial structures
• Require quality development standards
to minimize impacts to adjacent
properties
• Minimize light, noise, and water
pollution
Appropriate Adjacent Districts
• AG, PR, M2, M3, IS, C1, C2, OC, I1
and I2
Permitted Uses
Commercial Permitted Uses
• animal grooming
• auction (indoor)
• automobile oriented business (type 1)
• automobile oriented business (type 2)
• bakery
• bank
• bank/atm, drive-up
• banquet hall
• bar or tavern
• barber or beauty shop
• bowling alley
• brew pub
• broadcast studio
• car rental
• catering service
• club or lodge
• coffee shop
• coin laundry
• computer service
• copy center
• delicatessen
• design services
• donation collection point
• dry cleaning pickup and drop-off
• express shipping center
• exterminator
• funeral home
• gas station
• hotel
• ice cream shop
• media rental
• medical clinic
• mobile device dealer
• nail salon
• night club
• office, general
• office, medical
• party facility
• pharmacy
• photography studio
• printing, commercial
• recreation center (indoor)
• recreation center (outdoor)
• repair shop, electronics
• repair shop, equipment
• restaurant, drive-in
• restaurant, drive-through only
• restaurant, no drive-through
• restaurant with drive-up window
• retail, agriculture related
• retail (type 1) very low intensity
• retail (type 2) low intensity
• retail (type 3) medium intensity
• retail (type 4) high intensity
• seamstress/tailor
• spa
• studio arts
• tanning salon
• tattoo/piercing parlor
• theater, movie (indoor)
• tool/equipment rental (indoor)
• trade or business school
• veterinary clinic
• wellness facility
• winery
Industrial Permitted Uses
• utility facility, above ground
Institutional Permitted Uses
• parking lot, public
• place of worship
• police station
• school (P-12), private
2.25 General Commercial (C2) District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
Special Exception Uses
Commercial Special Exception Uses
• auction (outdoor)
• automobile oriented business (type 3)
• check cashing service
• crematory
• day care, adult
• day care, child
• kennel
• motel
• office, construction trade
• paintball facility
• retail (type 5) very high intensity
• self-storage warehouse
• sexually oriented entertainment
• shooting range (indoor)
• sports field (indoor)
• swimming pool
• theater, movie (outdoor)
• tool/equipment rental (outdoor)
• veterinary hospital
• water park
Industrial Special Exception Uses
• dry cleaning processing
• warehouse
Institutional Special Exception Uses
• recycling collection point
Residential Special Exception Uses
• dwelling, upper floor (multiple-family)
• dwelling, upper floor (single-family)
Article
Article 2: Zoning Districts 2-27
General Commercial (C2) District 2
Minimum Lot Area
• 20,000 square feet
Maximum Lot Area
• 10 acres
Minimum Lot Width
• 100 feet
Sewer and Water
• sewer utility connection is required
• water utility connection is required
Minimum Front Yard Setback
• 25 feet for primary structure
• 30 feet for accessory structure
Minimum Side Yard Setback
• 15 feet for primary structure
• 15 feet for accessory structure
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
• 20 feet for primary structure
• 20 feet for accessory structure
Maximum Lot Coverage
• 55% of lot area
Minimum Main Floor Area
• 500 square feet
Maximum Primary Structures
• 5
Maximum Structure Height
• 40 feet for primary structure
• 25 feet for accessory structure
• 3 stories for primary structure
• 1 story for accessory structure
Accessory Structure
• AS-01.....................................5-3
• AS-10...................................5-12
Architectural
• AR-04...................................5-16
Density and Intensity
• DI-01....................................5-19
Environmental
• EN-01...................................5-20
Fence and Wall
• FW-01..................................5-21
• FW-05..................................5-23
Floor Area
• FA-01...................................5-25
Height
• HT-01...................................5-26
Landscaping
• LA-01...................................5-32
• LA-03...................................5-34
• LA-04...................................5-35
• LA-05...................................5-36
Lighting
• LT-01....................................5-37
Loading
• LD-01...................................5-38
Lot
• LO-01...................................5-39
Outdoor Dining
• OD-01..................................5-40
Outdoor Storage
• SS-02...................................5-41
Parking
• PK-01...................................5-43
• PK-06...................................5-45
Performance
• PF-01...................................5-55
Public Improvement
• PI-01....................................5-56
Setback
• SB-01...................................5-57
Sewer and Water
• SW-01..................................5-59
Sexually Oriented Business
• SX-01...................................5-60
Signs
• SI-01....................................5-61
• SI-07....................................5-77
Special Exception
• SE-01...................................5-86
Structure
• ST-01...................................5-87
Temporary Use
• TU-01...................................5-90
• TU-04...................................5-91
Trash Receptacle
• TR-01...................................5-92
Vision Clearance
• VC-01...................................5-93
Additional Development Standards that Apply
2.26 General Commercial (C2) District Development Standards
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Lot
Area
Lot Width
Lot Depth
Property
Line
ROW
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Structure
Height
Pitched Roof Structures
(from highest point
on pitched roof)
Flat Roof Structures
(from highest
section of flat roof)
Accessory
Structure mechanical
is exempt Primary
Structure
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
ROW
Rear Yard
Setback
Front Yard
Setback
Building
Envelope
Side
Yard
Setback
Side
Yard
Setback
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Lot
Coverage
Primary
Structure
ROW
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
2-28
Urban Commercial (UC) District 2
District Intent
The UC (Urban Commercial) District is
intended to be used as follows:
Use Type and Intensity
• Moderate intensity retail, restaurant,
services, institutional, and professional
office uses
• Medium density housing and office
uses in upper floors of multiple-story
buildings
Application of District
• Existing downtown
• New “village center” development
Development Standards
• Pedestrian friendly development
standards
• Downtown, urban-style buildings
• Focus on appropriate building mass
and design
Appropriate Adjacent Districts
• PR, R3, M2, IS, C1 and UC
Permitted Uses
Commercial Permitted Uses
• atm walk-up
• bakery
• bank
• bar or tavern
• barber or beauty shop
• brew pub
• club or lodge
• coffee shop
• computer service
• copy center
• counseling center
• delicatessen
• design services
• dry cleaning pickup and drop-off
• express shipping center
• farmers market
• ice cream shop
• media rental
• mobile device dealer
• nail salon
• office, general
• office, medical
• pharmacy
• real estate office
• repair shop, electronics
• restaurant
• retail (type 1) very low intensity
• retail (type 2) low intensity
• retail (type 3) medium intensity
• seamstress/tailor
• shoe repair
• spa
• studio arts
• tanning salon
• title company
• travel agency
Institutional Permitted Uses
• community center
• government office
• information center
• library
• parking garage, public
• parking lot, public
• police station
Residential Permitted Uses
• assisted living facility, upper floor
• dwelling, upper floor (multiple-family)
• dwelling, upper floor (single-family)
Special Exception Uses
Commercial Special Exception Uses
• automobile oriented business (type 1)
• atm, drive-up
• banquet hall
• billiard hall
• day care, adult
• day care, child
• funeral home
• hotel
• medical clinic
• parking lot, pay
• party facility
• repair shop, general
• retail (type 4) high intensity
• tattoo/piercing parlor
• theater, movie (indoor)
• wellness facility
Institutional Special Exception Uses
• hospice facility
• performing arts center
• shelter
• university or college
Residential Special Exception Uses
• bed and breakfast, upper floor
2.27 Urban Commercial (UC) District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
Article
Article 2: Zoning Districts 2-29
Urban Commercial (UC) District 2
Minimum Lot Area
• 1,500 square feet
Maximum Lot Area
• 2 acres
Minimum Lot Width
• 15 feet
Sewer and Water
• sewer utility connection is required
• water utility connection is required
Minimum Front Yard Setback
• 0 feet for primary and accessory
structure
Maximum Front Yard Setback
• 20 feet for primary and accessory
structure
Minimum Side Yard Setback
• 0 feet for primary and accessory
structure
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
• 0 feet for primary and accessory
structure
Maximum Lot Coverage
• 95% of lot area
Minimum Main Floor Area
• 500 square feet
Minimum Dwelling Unit Size
• 700 square feet per dwelling unit with a
minimum average of 800 square feet
Maximum Primary Structures
• 1
Maximum Structure Height
• 60 feet for primary structure
• 15 feet for accessory structure
• 5 stories for primary structure
• 1 story for accessory structure
Minimum Structure Height
• 25 feet for primary structure
• 0 feet for accessory structure
• 2 stories for primary structure
Accessory Structure
• AS-01.....................................5-3
• AS-09................................... 5-11
Architectural
• AR-05...................................5-17
Density and Intensity
• DI-01....................................5-19
Environmental
• EN-01...................................5-20
Fence and Wall
• FW-01..................................5-21
• FW-05..................................5-23
Floor Area
• FA-01...................................5-25
Height
• HT-01...................................5-26
Home Business
• HB-01...................................5-27
• HB-02...................................5-28
Landscaping
• LA-01...................................5-32
• LA-03...................................5-34
• LA-04...................................5-35
• LA-05...................................5-36
Lighting
• LT-01....................................5-37
Loading
• LD-01...................................5-38
Lot
• LO-01...................................5-39
Outdoor Dining
• OD-01..................................5-40
Outdoor Storage
• SS-01...................................5-41
Parking
• PK-01...................................5-43
• PK-05...................................5-44
Performance
• PF-01...................................5-55
Public Improvement
• PI-01....................................5-56
Setback
• SB-01...................................5-57
Sewer and Water
• SW-01..................................5-59
Signs
• SI-01....................................5-61
• SI-06....................................5-74
Special Exception
• SE-01...................................5-86
Structure
• ST-01...................................5-87
Temporary Use
• TU-01...................................5-90
Trash Receptacle
• TR-01...................................5-92
Additional Development Standards that Apply
2.28 Urban Commercial (UC) District Development Standards
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Property
Line
Lot
Area
Lot Width
Lot Depth
Primary
Structure
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Structure
Height
Pitched Roof Structures
(from highest point
on pitched roof)
Flat Roof Structures
(from highest
section of flat roof)
Accessory
Structure mechanical
is exempt Primary
Structure
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Building
Envelope
Primary
Structure
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Primary
Structure
Lot
Coverage
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
2-30
Office Commercial (OC) District 2
District Intent
The OC (Office Commercial) District is
intended to be used as follows:
Use, Type, and Intensity
• Office, technology, and office park
Application of District
• Existing and new development
Development Standards
• Minimize the impacts to surrounding
areas
• Unified and organized arrangement of
structures, parking areas, lighting, and
related facilities
• Minimize light, noise, and water
pollution
Appropriate Adjacent Districts
• AG, PR, M2, M3, IS, C1, C2, OC, I1
and I2
Permitted Uses
Commercial Permitted Uses
• bank
• atm, drive-up
• coffee shop
• computer service
• copy center
• delicatessen
• express shipping center
• office, general
• office, medical
• rehabilitation clinic, medical
• software development
• title company
• travel agency
• wellness facility
Industrial Permitted Uses
• flex space
• research center, general
• research center, medical
• utility facility, above ground
Institutional Permitted Uses
• police station
• university or college
Special Exception Uses
Commercial Special Exception Uses
• counseling center
• day care, adult
• day care, child
• medical clinic
• restaurant, no drive-through
• trade or business school
• veterinary clinic
• veterinary hospital
Industrial Special Exception Uses
• call center
Residential Special Exception Uses
• nursing home
2.29 Office Commercial (OC) District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
Article
Article 2: Zoning Districts 2-31
Office Commercial (OC) District 2
Minimum Lot Area
• 21,780 square feet
Minimum Lot Width
• 50 feet
Sewer and Water
• sewer utility connection is required
• water utility connection is required
Minimum Front Yard Setback
• 30 feet for primary structure
• 40 feet for accessory structure
Minimum Side Yard Setback
• 20 feet for primary structure
• 20 feet for accessory structure
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
• 20 feet for primary structure
• 10 feet for accessory structure
Maximum Lot Coverage
• 50% of lot area
Minimum Main Floor Area
• 500 square feet
Maximum Main Floor Area
• 15,000 square feet
Maximum Primary Structures
• 3
Maximum Structure Height
• 40 feet for primary structure
• 25 feet for accessory structure
• 2 ½ stories for primary structure
• 1 story for accessory structure
Accessory Structure
• AS-01.....................................5-3
• AS-07.....................................5-9
Architectural
• AR-04...................................5-16
Density and Intensity
• DI-01....................................5-19
Environmental
• EN-01...................................5-20
Fence and Wall
• FW-01..................................5-21
• FW-05..................................5-23
Floor Area
• FA-01...................................5-25
Height
• HT-01...................................5-26
Landscaping
• LA-01...................................5-32
• LA-03...................................5-34
• LA-04...................................5-35
• LA-05...................................5-36
Lighting
• LT-01....................................5-37
Loading
• LD-01...................................5-38
Lot
• LO-01...................................5-39
Outdoor Storage
• SS-01...................................5-41
Parking
• PK-01...................................5-43
• PK-06...................................5-45
Performance
• PF-01...................................5-55
Public Improvement
• PI-01....................................5-56
Setback
• SB-01...................................5-57
Sewer and Water
• SW-01..................................5-59
Signs
• SI-01....................................5-61
• SI-08....................................5-80
Special Exception
• SE-01...................................5-86
Structure
• ST-01...................................5-87
Temporary Use
• TU-01...................................5-90
• TU-04...................................5-91
Trash Receptacle
• TR-01...................................5-92
Vision Clearance
• VC-01...................................5-93
Additional Development Standards that Apply
2.30 Office Commercial (OC) District Development Standards
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Structure
Height
Pitched Roof Structures
(from highest point
on pitched roof)
Flat Roof Structures
(from highest
section of flat roof)
Accessory
Structure mechanical
is exempt Primary
Structure
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Lot Width
Lot Depth
Property
Line
ROW
Lot Area
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
ROW
Rear Yard
Setback
Front Yard
Setback
Building
Envelope
Side
Yard
Setback
Side
Yard
Setback
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
ROW
Lot
Coverage
Primary
Structure
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
2-32
Low Intensity Industrial (I1) District 2
District Intent
The I1 (Low Intensity Industrial)
District is intended to be used as
follows:
Use, Type, and Intensity
• Low to moderate public intensity
industrial uses
• Business parks, distribution operations,
and industrial parks
• Stand alone buildings or multiple
primary structures
Application of District
• Existing and new development
• Buffer between industrial uses and
lower intensity districts
Development Standards
• Utilize time, place, and manner
development standards that minimize
the impact on surrounding areas
• Allow outdoor storage areas when
screened
• Minimize light, noise, water, and air
pollution
Appropriate Adjacent Districts
• AG, PR, M2, M3, IS, C2, OC, I1 and I2
Permitted Uses
Commercial Permitted Uses
• automobile oriented business (type 3)
• broadcast studio
• exterminator
• lumberyard
• office, construction trade
• office, general
• printing, commercial
• self-storage warehouse
• software development
• tool/equipment rental (indoor)
• tool/equipment rental (outdoor)
• trade or business school
• veterinary hospital
Industrial Permitted Uses
• assembly
• bottling/canning
• brewery
• composting facility
• distribution facility
• dry cleaning processing
• flex space
• freight terminal
• industrial park
• materials recycling (type 1)
• printer, industrial
• produce terminal
• research center, general
• research center, medical
• sign fabrication
• storage tanks (non-hazardous)
• testing lab, electronics
• testing lab, materials
• tool and die shop
• utility facility, above ground
• warehouse
• welding service
• wholesale business
Institutional Permitted Uses
• government operations facility
• recycling collection point
• water tower
Special Exception Uses
Agricultural Special Exception Uses
• agricultural products, processing
• agricultural products, storage
Commercial Special Exception Uses
• party facility
• recreation center (indoor)
• restaurant
• retail (type 5) very high intensity
• sports field (indoor)
• wellness facility
Industrial Special Exception Uses
• asphalt plant
• broadcast facility
• concrete plant
• fleet vehicle storage
• food processing
• liquid fertilizer distribution
• materials recycling (type 2)
• metal casting
• outdoor storage
• saw mill
• telecommunication facility
• transfer station
Institutional Special Exception Uses
• school (P-12), public
2.31 Low Intensity Industrial (I1) District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
Article
Article 2: Zoning Districts 2-33
Low Intensity Industrial (I1) District 2
Minimum Lot Area
• 1 acre
Minimum Lot Width
• 100 feet
Sewer and Water
• sewer utility connection is required
• water utility connection is required
Minimum Front Yard Setback
• 40 feet for primary and accessory
structure
Minimum Side Yard Setback
• 20 feet for primary and accessory
structure
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
• 20 feet for primary and accessory
structure
Maximum Lot Coverage
• 50% of lot area
Minimum Main Floor Area
• 500 square feet
Maximum Main Floor Area
• 150,000 square feet
Maximum Primary Structures
• 5
Maximum Structure Height
• 50 feet for primary structure
• 35 feet for accessory structure
• 3 stories for primary structure
• 1 story for accessory structure
Accessory Structure
• AS-01.....................................5-3
• AS-11...................................5-13
Architectural
• AR-06...................................5-18
Density and Intensity
• DI-01....................................5-19
Environmental
• EN-01...................................5-20
Fence and Wall
• FW-01..................................5-21
• FW-06..................................5-24
Floor Area
• FA-01...................................5-25
Height
• HT-01...................................5-26
Landscaping
• LA-01...................................5-32
• LA-03...................................5-34
• LA-04...................................5-35
• LA-05...................................5-36
Lighting
• LT-01....................................5-37
Loading
• LD-01...................................5-38
Lot
• LO-01...................................5-39
Outdoor Storage
• SS-03...................................5-42
Parking
• PK-01...................................5-43
• PK-06...................................5-45
Performance
• PF-01...................................5-55
Public Improvement
• PI-01....................................5-56
Setback
• SB-01...................................5-57
Sewer and Water
• SW-01..................................5-59
Signs
• SI-01....................................5-61
• SI-09....................................5-83
Special Exception
• SE-01...................................5-86
Structure
• ST-01...................................5-87
Telecommunication
• TC-01...................................5-88
Temporary Use
• TU-01...................................5-90
• TU-04...................................5-91
Trash Receptacle
• TR-01...................................5-92
Vision Clearance
• VC-01...................................5-93
Additional Development Standards that Apply
2.32 Low Intensity Industrial (I1) District Development Standards
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Lot Width
Lot Depth
Property
Line
ROW
Lot
Area
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Structure
Height
Pitched Roof Structures
(from highest point
on pitched roof)
Flat Roof Structures
(from highest
section of flat roof)
Accessory
Structure mechanical
is exempt Primary
Structure
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
ROW
Front Yard
Setback
Building
Envelope
Side
Yard
Setback
Rear Yard
Setback
Side
Yard
Setback
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
ROW
Lot
Coverage
Primary
Structure
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
2-34
General Industrial (I2) District 2
District Intent
The I2 (General Industrial) District is
intended to be used as follows:
Use, Type, and Intensity
• Moderate to high intensity industrial
uses
• Business parks, distribution operations,
and industrial parks
• Stand alone buildings or multiple
primary structures
Application of District
• Existing and new development
• Buffer between heavier industrial uses
and lower intensity districts
Development Standards
• Utilize time, place, and manner
development standards that minimize
the impacts on surrounding areas
• Allow outdoor storage areas when
screened
• Minimize light, noise, water, and air
pollution
Appropriate Adjacent Districts
• AG, PR, IS, C2, OC, I1, I2 and HI
Permitted Uses
Agricultural Permitted Uses
• agricultural products, processing
• agricultural products, storage
Commercial Permitted Uses
• tool/equipment rental (outdoor)
Industrial Permitted Uses
• asphalt plant
• assembly
• bottling/canning
• brewery
• broadcast facility
• composting facility
• concrete plant
• distribution facility
• dry cleaning processing
• fleet vehicle storage
• flex space
• food processing
• freight terminal
• heavy equipment repair
• industrial park
• liquid fertilizer distribution
• manufacturing, light
• materials recycling (type 1)
• materials recycling (type 2)
• metal casting
• outdoor storage
• pipeline transportation
• printer, industrial
• produce terminal
• research center, general
• saw mill
• sign fabrication
• stone cutting
• storage tanks (non-hazardous)
• telecommunication facility
• testing, general
• testing lab, electronics
• testing lab, materials
• tool and die shop
• transfer station
• utility facility, above ground
• warehouse
• welding service
• wholesale business
Institutional Permitted Uses
• government operations facility
• recycling collection point
• water tower
Special Exception Uses
Commercial Special Exception Uses
• crematory
• office, construction trade
• restaurant, no drive-through
• retail (type 5) very high intensity
• sports field (indoor)
Industrial Special Exception Uses
• bio-fuel production
• chemical manufacturing
• incinerator
• manufacturing, heavy
• meat processing
• mining, rock or sand
Institutional Special Exception Uses
• jail
• juvenile detention facility
• prison
2.33 General Industrial (I2) District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
Article
Article 2: Zoning Districts 2-35
General Industrial (I2) District 2
Minimum Lot Area
• 1 acre
Minimum Lot Width
• 200 feet
Sewer and Water
• sewer utility connection is required
• water utility connection is required
Minimum Front Yard Setback
• 55 feet for primary and accessory
structure
Minimum Side Yard Setback
• 20 feet for primary and accessory
structure
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
• 10 feet for primary and accessory
structure
Maximum Lot Coverage
• 50% of lot area
Minimum Main Floor Area
• 500 square feet
Maximum Main Floor Area
• not applicable
Maximum Primary Structures
• 10
Maximum Structure Height
• 70 feet for primary structure
• 35 feet for accessory structure
• 3 stories for primary structure
• 1 story for accessory structure
Accessory Structure
• AS-01.....................................5-3
• AS-11...................................5-13
Architectural
• AR-06...................................5-18
Density and Intensity
• DI-01....................................5-19
Environmental
• EN-01...................................5-20
Fence and Wall
• FW-01..................................5-21
• FW-06..................................5-24
Floor Area
• FA-01...................................5-25
Height
• HT-01...................................5-26
Landscaping
• LA-01...................................5-32
• LA-03...................................5-34
• LA-04...................................5-35
• LA-05...................................5-36
Lighting
• LT-01....................................5-37
Loading
• LD-01...................................5-38
Lot
• LO-01...................................5-39
Outdoor Storage
• SS-03...................................5-42
Parking
• PK-01...................................5-43
• PK-06...................................5-45
Performance
• PF-01...................................5-55
Public Improvement
• PI-01....................................5-56
Setback
• SB-01...................................5-57
Sewer and Water
• SW-01..................................5-59
Signs
• SI-01....................................5-61
• SI-09....................................5-83
Special Exception
• SE-01...................................5-86
Structure
• ST-01...................................5-87
Telecommunication
• TC-01...................................5-88
Temporary Use
• TU-01...................................5-90
Trash Receptacle
• TR-01...................................5-92
Vision Clearance
• VC-01...................................5-93
Additional Development Standards that Apply
2.34 General Industrial (I2) District Development Standards
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Lot Width
Lot Depth
Property
Line
ROW
Lot
Area
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Structure
Height
Pitched Roof Structures
(from highest point
on pitched roof)
Flat Roof Structures
(from highest
section of flat roof)
Accessory
Structure mechanical
is exempt Primary
Structure
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
ROW
Front Yard
Setback
Building
Envelope
Side
Yard
Setback
Rear Yard
Setback
Side
Yard
Setback
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
ROW
Lot
Coverage
Primary
Structure
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
2-36
High Impact (HI) District 2
District Intent
The HI (High Impact) District is
intended to be used as follows:
Use, Type, and Intensity
• All intensities of high impact uses
Application of District
• Existing and new development
• Lot-specific zoning
Development Standards
• Enact development standards to
minimize impact to adjacent properties
• Minimize light, noise, water, and air
pollution
Appropriate Adjacent Districts
• AG, PR, IS, I2 and HI
Permitted Uses
Commercial Permitted Uses
• amusement park
• shooting range (outdoor)
Industrial Permitted Uses
• asphalt plant
• bio-fuel production
• blast furnace
• chemical manufacturing
• coke oven
• concrete plant
• construction materials landfill
• electrical generation plant
• explosives manufacturing
• fireworks manufacturing
• incinerator
• junk yard
• materials recycling (type 3)
• mining, rock or sand
• petroleum processing
• rail yard
• rendering plant
• rock crushing
• sanitary landfill/refuse dump
• saw mill
• scrap metal yard
• smelting
• storage tanks (hazardous)
• utility facility, above ground
Institutional Permitted Uses
• jail
• juvenile detention facility
• prison
Special Exception Uses
2.35 High Impact (HI) District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
Article
Article 2: Zoning Districts 2-37
High Impact (HI) District 2
Minimum Lot Area
• 10 acres
Minimum Lot Width
• 300 feet
Sewer and Water
• sewer utility connection is required
• water utility connection is required
Minimum Front Yard Setback
• 200 feet for primary and accessory
structure
Minimum Side Yard Setback
• 150 feet for primary and accessory
structure
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
• 150 feet for primary and accessory
structure
Maximum Lot Coverage
• 30% of lot area
Minimum Main Floor Area
• 500 square feet
Maximum Primary Structures
• 10
Maximum Structure Height
• 80 feet for primary structure
• 40 feet for accessory structure
• 4 stories for primary structure
• 1 story for accessory structure
Accessory Structure
• AS-01.....................................5-3
• AS-11...................................5-13
Density and Intensity
• DI-01....................................5-19
Environmental
• EN-01...................................5-20
Fence and Wall
• FW-01..................................5-21
• FW-06..................................5-24
Floor Area
• FA-01...................................5-25
Height
• HT-01...................................5-26
Landscaping
• LA-01...................................5-32
• LA-03...................................5-34
• LA-04...................................5-35
• LA-05...................................5-36
Lighting
• LT-01....................................5-37
Loading
• LD-01...................................5-38
Lot
• LO-01...................................5-39
Outdoor Storage
• SS-03...................................5-42
Parking
• PK-01...................................5-43
• PK-06...................................5-45
Performance
• PF-01...................................5-55
Public Improvement
• PI-01....................................5-56
Setback
• SB-01...................................5-57
Sewer and Water
• SW-01..................................5-59
Signs
• SI-01....................................5-61
• SI-09....................................5-83
Special Exception
• SE-01...................................5-86
Structure
• ST-01...................................5-87
Trash Receptacle
• TR-01...................................5-92
Vision Clearance
• VC-01...................................5-93
Additional Development Standards that Apply
2.36 High Impact (HI) District Development Standards
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Lot Width
Lot Depth
Property
Line
Lot
Area
ROW
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Structure
Height
Pitched Roof Structures
(from highest point
on pitched roof)
Flat Roof Structures
(from highest
section of flat roof)
Accessory
Structure mechanical
is exempt Primary
Structure
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
ROW
Rear Yard
Setback
Front Yard
Setback
Building
Envelope
Side
Yard
Setback
Side
Yard
Setback
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
ROW
Lot
Coverage
Primary
Structure
Accessory
Structure
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
2-38
Appropriate Adjacent Districts 2
Table 2-A Appropriate Adjacent Districts
Adjacent
District Zoning District of Subject Property
AG PR RE R1 R2 R3 R4 M1 M2 M3 IS C1 C2 UC OC I1 I2 HI
AG X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X
PR X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X
RE X X X X X X
R1 X X X X X X X
R2 X X X X X X X X X X X
R3 X X X X X X X X X X X
R4 X X X X X X X X X
M1 X X X X X X X X X
M2 X X X X X X X X X X X X X X
M3 X X X X X X X X X X X X
IS X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X
C1 X X X X X X X X X X X X X X
C2 X X X X X X X X X X
UC X X X X X X
OC X X X X X X X X X X
I1 X X X X X X X X X
I2 X X X X X X X X
HI X X X X X
© 2017, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Article
City of Henderson
Zoning Ordinance
3
Overlay Districts
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
3-2
Floodplain Overlay (FPO) District 3
District Intent
The Floodplain Overlay (FPO)
District is intended to prevent loss of
property, prolonged inconveniences,
loss of life and risks of injury caused
by flooding events.
Land Use Restrictions
• Any use that is not compatible with
periodic flooding
Development Standard Restrictions
• Prevent primary structures from being
located in a floodplain
• Prevent accessory structures that
cannot be periodically inundated with
water
• Prevent underground storage tanks
Effect on Uses
Permitted Uses in the base zoning
district shall not be permitted in the
FPO District except when they are
a permitted use in the base zoning
district AND are listed below.
Special Exception Uses in the base
zoning district shall not be permitted
in the FPO District except when they
are listed as a Special Exception Use
in the base zoning district AND are
listed below.
The following land uses and site
features shall be permitted in the FPO
District, if they are also a permitted
use or Special Exception Use in the
base zoning district:
• agricultural crop production
• agricultural products, storage
• agricultural tourism (type 1)
• botanical gardens
• forestry
• golf course
• hobby farming
• land conservation
• nature preserve
• orchard
• park, public
• plant nursery, wholesale
• raising of farm animals
• tree farm, wholesale
• utility structures (public)
• utility structures (private)
• vineyard
Effect on Standards
The development standards from
the base zoning district shall apply
to the FPO District in addition to the
development standards described in
Section 3.04: FPO District Development
Standards.
3.01 Floodplain Overlay (FPO) District Intent, Effect on Uses, and Effect on Standards
Article
Article 3: Overlay Districts 3-3
Floodplain Overlay (FPO) District 3
3.02 FPO District Applicability
The following requirements apply to all land within the FPO District as defined in Section 3.03: FPO District
Boundary. Under no circumstances shall a planned development or rezoning of property change the applicability of the
FPO District’s land use restrictions and applicable development standards.
3.03 FPO District Boundary
The boundaries for the FPO District shall be any area that is a Special Flood Hazard Areas (i.e. “100-year floodplain”
or 1% chance floodplain) on a FIRM map; and any area not shown on a FIRM map, but drawn onto the City of
Henderson’s Official Zoning Map as an FPO District.
3.04 FPO District Development Standards
A. Exemptions: None
B. Fences and Walls: Fences and walls shall not be permitted in the FPO District, except a wire farm animal enclosure
fence with at least four (4) inch by four (4) inch clear space between any two (2) parallel wires.
C. Parking Lots: Parking lots associated with an adjacent commercial, institutional, multiple-family residential, or
industrial land use shall not be partially or fully located in the FPO District.
D. Retention and Detention Standards: Retention and detention ponds are not permitted in the FPO District.
E. Storage Tank Standards: Under no circumstance shall above ground or below ground storage tanks be located in
the FPO District.
F. Pedestrian Facilities: Any trails or walkways intended for pedestrians or bicycles located in the FPO District shall
be constructed to endure the periodic inundation with water.
G. Signs: Commercial Signs shall not be located in the FPO District.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
3-4
Historic District Overlay (HDO) District 3
District Intent
The historic district overlay is
intended to protect, enhance,
and preserve historic landmarks.
Specifically, this overlay is intended
to:
• Protect, enhance and perpetuate
historic landmarks which represent
or reflect distinctive and important
elements of the city’s cultural, social,
economic, political, archaeological, and
architectural history.
• Safeguard the city’s historic and
cultural heritage, as embodied and
reflected in such historic landmarks.
• Stabilize and improve property values
in such locations.
• Foster civic pride in the beauty of noble
accomplishments of the past.
• Protect and enhance the city’s
attractions to tourist and visitors, and
provide incidental support and stimulus
to business and industry.
• Strengthen the economy of the city.
• Promote the use of historic landmarks
for the cultural, prosperity, education
and welfare of the people of the city
and visitors to the city.
Effect on Uses
Permitted Uses in the base zoning
district shall be permitted in the HDO
District except when they are listed
below as a non-permitted use.
Special Exception Uses in the base
zoning district shall be a Special
Exception Use in the HDO District
except when they are listed below as
a non-permitted use.
The following land uses and site
features shall NOT be permitted in
the HDO District even if they are a
permitted use or Special Exception
Use in the base zoning district:
• gas station
Effect on Standards
The development standards from
the base zoning district shall apply
to the HDO District in addition to the
standards described on the following
pages.
3.05 Historic District Overlay (HDO) District Intent, Effect on Uses, and Effect on Standards
Article
Article 3: Overlay Districts 3-5
Historic District Overlay (HDO) District 3
3.06 HDO District Applicability
The following requirements apply to all land within the HDO District as defined in Section 3.07: HDO District
Boundary. Under no circumstances shall a planned development or rezoning of property change the applicability of the
HDO District’s land use restrictions and applicable development standards.
3.07 HDO District Boundary
The boundaries for the HDO District shall be as shown on the Official Zoning Map.
3.08 HDO Historic Landmark Designation
The City Council may designate certain buildings, land, areas and districts in the city as historic landmarks and define,
amend and delineate the boundaries thereof on the Official Zoning Map. The abbreviation “HDO” shall be used on the
Official Zoning map to indicate the applicability of the overlay district on buildings, land, areas and districts.
3.09 HDO Criteria For Historic Landmark Designation
In making such designation as set forth in this section, the City Council shall consider one (1) or more of the following
criteria:
A. Character, interest or value as part of the development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the City of Henderson,
State of Texas, or the United States.
B. Location as the site of a significant historic event;
C. Identification with a person or persons who significantly contributed to the culture and development of the city;
D. Exemplifications of the cultural, economic, social or historical heritage of the city;
E. Portrayal of the environment of a group of people in an era of history characterized by a distinctive architectural style;
F. Embodiment of distinguishing characteristics of an architectural type or specimen;
G. Identification as the work of an architect or master builder whose individual work has influenced the development
of the city;
H. Embodiment of elements of architectural or master builder whose individual work has influenced the development
of the city;
I. Relationship to other distinctive buildings, sites or areas which are eligible for preservation according to a plan
based on historic, cultural or architectural motif;
J. Unique location of singular physical characteristics representing an established and familiar visual feature of a
neighborhood, community or the city;
K. Archaeological value in that it has produced or can be expected to produce into affecting theories of historic or
prehistoric interest;
L. Value as an aspect of community sentiment or public pride.
3.10 HDO Establishment of Historic Landmark Preservation Committee
A. There is herby created a committee to be known as the Historic Landmark Preservation Committee of the city
composed of seven (7) members appointed by the City Council within sixty (60) days. All members shall have
knowledge and experience in the field of history, art, architecture or real estate planning and development, and shall
be appointed from a list of nominees solicited from;
1. Rusk County Historical Commission
2. Rusk County Heritage Association
3. Henderson Downtown Association
4. Rusk County Board of Realtors
5. Rusk County Chamber of Commerce
6. Henderson Downtown Property Owners
7. City of Henderson Main Street Coordinator
8. Such other Individuals and organizations as the City Council may in its discretion wish to consult or consider.
B. Appointments to the Historic Landmark Preservation Committee shall be for a term of two (2) years ending on the
first day of February in even numbered years, and the members shall serve without compensation. The Historic
Landmark Preservation Committee shall designate a chairman and a vice chairman from its members.
C. The Historic Landmark Preservation Committee shall meet at least quarterly, with additional meetings upon call by
the committee chairman or upon petition of a simple majority of committee members. Four (4) members present
shall constitute a quorum, and issues shall be decided by a simple majority vote of the members present. The
minutes of each meeting shall be filled in the office of the City Secretary.
D. In addition to the seven (7) members appointed by the City Council, the City Manager or his representative, the
Building Official, the Main Street Manager and a representative from the Rusk County Tourism Department shall
sit on the Historic Landmark Preservation Committee as ex-office members. They shall not have voting powers but
shall assist the Historic Landmark Preservation Committee in its varied functions.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
3-6
Historic District Overlay (HDO) District 3
3.11 HDO Function of Historic Landmark Preservation Committee
A. The Historic Landmark Preservation Committee shall thoroughly familiarize itself with the buildings, land, areas,
and districts within the city, which may be eligible for designation as historic landmarks and shall prepare a historic
landmark preservation plan, hereinafter referred to as the “preservation plan”, which shall:
1. Identify and catalog buildings, land, areas and districts of historical, architectural, archaeological or cultural
value along with statements of fact which verify their significance;
2. Identify criteria to be used in determining whether certain buildings, land, areas and districts should be designated
as historic landmarks;
3. Identify guidelines to be used in determination of whether to grant or deny certificates of appropriateness for
proposed alterations to the exterior of a designated historic landmark;
4. Formulate a program for private and public action which will state the role of various city agencies in the
preservation of historic landmarks;
5. Suggest sources of funds for preservation and restoration activities for all acquisitions, to include federal, state,
municipal, private and foundation sources; and
6. Recommend incentives for preservation.
B. The Historic Landmark Preservation Committee shall recommend to the Planning and Zoning Commission that
certain buildings, land, areas and district in the city be designated as historic landmarks. Each recommendation
shall include:
1. Those premises, lots or tracts to be designated,
2. Any additional uses to be permitted in the “HDO”,
3. Specific criteria for the required preservation of the exteriors of the premises within the designated subdistrict.
C. If the Historic Landmark Preservation Committee finds that certain buildings, land, areas or districts cannot be
preserved without acquisition, the Historic Landmark Preservation Committee shall recommend to the Planning
and Zoning Commission that the fee or a lesser Interest in the property be acquired by gift to purchase, using funds
available for preservation or restoration.
D. Where there are conditions under which the required preservation of a historic landmark would cause undue
hardship to the owner or owners, use changes may be recommended by the Historic Landmark Preservation
Committee. Such changes shall be in keeping with the spirit and intent of this overlay district.
E. Periodically the Historic Landmark Preservation Committee shall review the status of designated historic landmark
subdistricts and include in the Historic Landmark Preservation Committee minutes a report of such review.
F. The designation of a historic landmark subdistrict may be amended or removed using the same procedure as
provided for establishing the original designation.
3.12 HDO Action by Planning and Zoning Commission
A. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold public hearings as provided in the zoning ordinance of the city
to consider any historic landmark subdistrict designation recommended by the Historic Landmark Preservation
Committee.
B. At the conclusion of a hearing the Planning and Zoning Commission shall set forth in writing its recommendation,
including the findings of fact that constitute the basis for its decision and shall transmit such recommendation to the
City Council.
3.13 HDO Action by City Council and Recording Designation
A. Reserved for future use.
3.14 HDO Certificate of Appropriateness Review
A. No permit for proposed work for the exterior of a designated historic landmark shall be issued to any applicant
by the Building Official of the City unless the application has first been reviewed by the Historic Landmark
Preservation Committee.
B. When applying for a building permit for the exterior of a designated historic landmark, use applicant shall forward
two copies of all detailed plans, elevations, perspectives, specifications and other documents pertaining to the work
to the Building Official, who shall forward such application to the Historic Landmark Preservation Committee
Chairman within five (5) days of receipt thereof. Any applicant may request a meeting with the Historic Landmark
Preservation Committee before submitting an application and may consult with the Historic Landmark Preservation
Committee during the review of the permit application.
Article
Article 3: Overlay Districts 3-7
Historic District Overlay (HDO) District 3
C. Upon review of the application, if the Historic Landmark Preservation Committee finds the proposed work of a
nature which will not adversely affect any significant historical or architectural feature of the historic landmark,
and which is appropriate and consistent with the spirit and purposes of this overlay district, it shall forward a
“Certificate of Appropriateness” to the Building Official of the City within ten (10) days, and the Building Official
shall advise the applicant is disapproved.
D. If the Historic Landmark Preservation Committee finds that the proposed work will adversely affect or destroy any
significant architectural, archaeological, or cultural ventures of the landmark, or is inappropriate or inconsistent
with the spirit and purpose of this overlay district, it shall inform the building official the application is disapproved.
E. If no action has been taken by the Historic Landmark Preservation Committee within forty-five (45) days of the
original receipt by the Building Official, a “Certificate of Appropriateness” shall be deemed issued by the Historic
Landmark Preservation Committee and the Building Official shall advise the applicant.
F. No change shall be made in the application for any building permit after Issuance of a “Certificate of
Appropriateness” without re-submittal to the Historic Landmark Preservation Committee and approval there in the
same manner as provided above.
G. After a decision is reached by the Historic Landmark Preservation Committee denying an application for
“Certificate of Appropriateness,” a re-submittal of application will not be accepted for additional hearing within a
twelve (12) month period from the date of final decision except upon written request by the applicant, indicating the
Incorporation of changed in plans and specifications to the original application as recommended by the Committee
which would protect the distinctive character of the historic landmark.
H. Proposed exterior changes and alterations to a designated historic landmark not requiring a building permit
shall be submitted in writing directly to the Historic Landmark Preservation Committee for a “Certificate of
Appropriateness” which shall be granted before such work can be undertaken. The application shall specifically
describe the alteration or change proposed. If the Historic Landmark Preservation Committee finds the proposed
work of a nature which will adversely affect may significant architectural or historical venture of a designated
historic landmark, and which is inappropriate\ate or inconsistent with the spirit and purposes of this overlay
district, the Historic Landmark Preservation Committee shall notify the applicant within thirty (30) days that said
application has been disapproved; otherwise, the application shall be deemed approved and the Certificate of
Appropriateness issued. Section 3.14(F) and Section 3.14 (G) apply here also.
I. Ordinary repair and maintenance which does not involve changes in architectural or historical value, style, general
design, arrangement, texture, material, or color are exempt form the provisions of this ordinance. The foregoing
prohibitions shall not apply to color of paint on wooden structures.
J. Appeal: Any applicant aggrieved by a ruling of the Historic Landmark Preservation Committee under the provisions
of this section may, within thirty (30) days after the filing appeal to the City Council of Henderson.
3.15 HDO Historic Landmark Demolition or Removal
A. If application is received by the Building Official for demolition or removal of any designated historic landmark,
or designated building within the “HDO” as provided for in Sections 3.11: HDO Function of Historic Landmark
Preservation Committee, Section 3.12: HDO Action by Planning and Zoning Commission, and Section 3.13: HDO
Action by City Council and Recording Designation, the Historic Landmark Preservation Committee shall hold
a hearing within thirty (30) days after the application is initially filed and forwarded to the Historic Landmark
Preservation Committee. The Historic Landmark Preservation Committee shall hear all other interested parties.
The Historic Landmark Preservation Committee shall consider the state of repair of the building, the reasonableness
of the cost of restoration of repairs, taking into account the purpose of preserving the designated historic landmark,
the character of the neighborhood, and all other factors, which it finds appropriate. The Historic Landmark
Preservation Committee may recommend the disapproval of the application by determining that in the interest
of preserving historical values, the structure should not be demolished; and in that event, the application shall be
suspended for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days from the date of application. Within the suspension period.
The Historic Landmark Preservation Committee may request an extension of the suspension period by the City
Council. If the City Council, after notice to the applicant and public hearing, determines that there is reasonable
ground for preservation, the Council may extend the suspension period for an additional period not exceeding one
hundred twenty (120) days, to a total of not more than two hundred forty (240) days from the date of application
for demolition. During the period of suspension of the application, no permit shall be issued for such demolition
or removal nor shall any person demolish or remove the building or structure. If no action is taken by the City
Council within two hundred forty (240) days from the date of application, the demolition permit shall be issued and
the Building Official shall so advise the application.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
3-8
Historic District Overlay (HDO) District 3
3.16 HDO Provisions Herein Not to Affect the Present Uses
A. Use classification as to all property which may be included in a historic landmark subdistrict shall continue to be
governed by the zoning ordinance of the city and shall continue upon establishing an “HDO”.
3.17 HDO Penalties
A. It shall be unlawful to construct, reconstruct, structurally alter, remodel, renovate, restore, demolish, raze or
maintain any historic landmark in violation of the provisions of this overlay district. In addition to other remedies,
the city may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful construction, restoration,
demolition, razing, or maintenance, to restrain, correct or abate such violation.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this overlay district shall be guilty of a separate offense for each day or
portion thereof during which any such violation is committed, continued or permitted; and each offense shall be
punished by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00).
3.18 HDO District Development Standards
A. None
© 2017, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Article
City of Henderson
Zoning Ordinance
4
Planned Development District
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
4-2
Planned Development (PD) District 4
4.01 Planned Development (PD) District Intent, Regulations, and Prerequisites
District Intent
The PD (Planned Development)
District is intended to provide flexible
development standards for medium
to large scale developments that do
not easily comply with the applicable
zoning district standards due to any
of the following:
• Interest in an integrated mixed‑use
development.
• Desire to preserve a unique natural
feature by shifting the allowable
development intensity to another area.
• Interest in a tiny house development.
• Interest in a zero lot line development.
• Interest in a traditional neighborhood
design (i.e. grid streets and alley
access).
• Interest in a lease-lot development.
• Interest in other unique or innovative
development design.
The need for waivers or variances
shall not by itself justify the pursuit of
a Planned Development
Application of District
• Should only be permitted where the
development clearly complement
neighboring areas and where public
infrastructure is adequate.
Planning and Zoning Commission
• Any parcel that meets the prerequisites
specified herein may be rezoned to
a Planned Development District after
Planning and Zoning Commission
review and approval, and after the City
of Henderson City Council reviews
and adopts the Planned Development
Ordinance.
• Under no circumstances are the
Planning and Zoning Commission
or City Council required to rezone a
property to a PD District.
Regulations
Permitted Uses
• Predominantly in line with the permitted
uses in the original zoning district
• Compatible with surrounding land uses
and adjacent zoning districts
• Flexible only to the extent permitted in
Article 4: Planned Development District
Development Standards
• Generally in line with the intent of the
original zoning district
• Compatible with surrounding land uses
and adjacent zoning districts
• Flexible only to the extent permitted in
Article 4: Planned Development District
Design Standards
• Predominantly in compliance with City
of Henderson's Subdivision Control
Ordinance.
• Flexible only to the extent permitted in
Article 4: Planned Development District
Construction Standards
• Fully in compliance with City of
Henderson's Standard Details.
Prerequisites
Site Area
• The minimum site area required for a
Planned Development is 3 acres
Zoning Districts
• Only the following standard zoning
districts may be rezoned to a Planned
Development District: AG, PR, R1, R2,
R3, M1, M2, M3, IS, C1, C2, OC, I1,
and I2.
Article
Article 4: Planned Developments 4-3
Planned Development (PD) District 4
4.02 General Planned Development Standards
A. Description: A Planned Development (PD) District is a special district that can be pursued by an applicant in
which a stand alone ordinance regulating the development is drafted and which binds the development to its unique
language.
B. Creation: The procedure for the creation of a PD District shall be consistent with the process set forth in Article 7:
Processes of the Zoning Ordinance.
C. Maps: PD Districts shall be identified with “PD” on the Official Zoning Map. When possible, the ordinance
number adopting the PD should also be labeled on the Official Zoning Map.
D. Regulations:
1. Development Standards: The requirements of Article 5: Development Standards of the Zoning Ordinance shall
apply to Planned Developments unless alternate standards are deemed appropriate by the Planning and Zoning
Commission in order to accomplish the intent of the Planned Development. Any lessening of the required
standards of the Zoning Ordinance shall be directly linked to the District Intent of the Planned Development
described on the previous page.
2. Regulating Plan and Ordinance: A Regulating Plan and Ordinance shall indicate the proposed land uses,
location of all proposed improvements, proposed regulations, and other specifications which shall govern the
Planned Development. If the Regulating Plan and Ordinance is silent or does not address a particular land use,
development standard, design standard, or other specification, the Zoning Administrator shall determine the
best fitting Zoning District and apply the regulations from that district where the PD District is silent. If a best
fit cannot be determined, then the standards from the previous zoning district that applied to the subject land
shall be used.
4.03 Origination of Proposals
A proposal for a PD District shall be initiated by the property owner(s). The site proposed for a Planned Development
shall be under single ownership, or if multiple owners exist a legal document, legal partnership, or corporation shall be
provided indicating that all owners of property support and desire to develop the land. Said legal document shall also
indicate who the owners appoint as their representative.
4.04 Rules of Procedure
All proceedings brought under Article 4: Planned Development District are subject to the Rules of Procedure of the
Planning and Zoning Commission. All applications that involve subdivision of land shall also be subject to the City of
Henderson Subdivision Control Ordinance.
4.05 Limitation of Revisions to the Zoning Ordinance
A. Life Safety: Under no circumstance shall a Planned Development be exempt from a new or modified ordinance
that is intended to protect life safety and/or risk of injury.
B. Non-conformances: Under no circumstances shall a Planned Development alter the determination of legal nonconformances
determined in Article 6: Nonconformances.
C. Process: Under no circumstances shall a Planned Development alter the processes described in Article 7:
Processes.
D. Enforcement: Under no circumstances shall a Planned Development limit the City of Henderson’s right to enforce
its city code or this Zoning Ordinance as described in Article 8: Enforcement.
E. Definitions: Under no circumstances shall a Planned Development alter the definition or define the same term
differently than it is defined in Article 9: Definitions.
F. Fees or Penalties: Under no circumstances shall a Planned Development limit the City of Henderson’s fees or
penalties related to zoning processes, waivers, variances, building code compliance, zoning compliance, and
subdivision control compliance.
G. Rezoning to Standard District: All Planned Developments or subdistricts thereof, once ninety percent (90%)
built‑out are subject to being rezoned into an appropriate standard zoning district if the City of Henderson deems it
necessary to better or more efficiently administer the development.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
4-4
Planned Development (PD) District 4
4.06 Designation of Permanent Open Space
A. Exemption: If a development preserves twenty-five percent (25%) or more of the land being developed to preserve
an otherwise developable quality natural feature, no additional open space or usable open space requirement shall
apply.
B. Designation of Open Space: A Planned Development shall not be approved, unless the design provides for permanent
landscaped or natural open space. Open space shall be provided in at least the following percentage of the
total gross area of the Planned Development by type of use:
1. Single-family Residential Use: Fifteen percent (15%) of all land being developed shall be open space, and
twenty-five percent (25%) of that minimum open space area shall be usable space for recreation, accessible to
residents, and conveniently located. Privately owned yards shall not count as open space.
2. Multiple-family Residential Use: Fifteen percent (15%) of all land being developed shall be open space, and
twenty-five percent (25%) of that minimum open space area shall be usable space for recreation, accessible to
residents, and conveniently located. Privately owned yards shall not count as open space.
3. Office and Institutional Use: Twenty percent (20%) of all land developed shall be open space.
4. All Other Uses: Five percent (5%) of all land developed shall be usable open space.
C. Maintenance of Open Space: Open space shall be owned and maintained in perpetuity by either the:
1. Applicant or original owner;
2. An owner’s association or other not for profit corporation established for the purpose of maintaining common
area and common structures;
3. A not-for-profit corporation, like a land trust;
4. Lot owner(s) within the development; or
5. A municipal or public corporation, if it agrees by contract to accept the responsibility.
D. Mixed-uses: In the case of mixed‑uses, permanent open space shall be allocated to the property in proportion to the
uses assigned to the Planned Development and shall be located in close proximity to those uses.
E. Development in Stages: If the Preliminary Plan provides for the Planned Development to be constructed in phases,
at a minimum, open space shall be provided for each phase of the development in proportion to that phase’s
fractional use of the entire site.
© 2017, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Article
City of Henderson
Zoning Ordinance
5
Development Standards
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
5-2
District Icons 5
Section Name Page Number
Accessory Structure Standards (AS)..........................5-3
Architectural Standards (AR)..................................5-14
Density and Intensity Standards (DI).......................5-19
Environmental Standards (EN)................................5-20
Fence and Wall Standards (FW)..............................5-21
Floor Area Standards (FA).......................................5-25
Height Standards (HT).............................................5-26
Home Business Standards (HB)..............................5-27
Keeping of Animals Standards (KA).......................5-30
Landscaping Standards (LA)...................................5-32
Lighting Standards (LT)...........................................5-37
Loading Standards (LD)..........................................5-38
Lot Standards (LO)..................................................5-39
Outdoor Dining Standards (OD)..............................5-40
Outdoor Storage and Sales Standards (SS)..............5-41
Section Name Page Number
Parking Standards (PK)...........................................5-43
Performance Standards (PF)....................................5-55
Public Improvement Standards (PI).........................5-56
Setback Standards (SB)...........................................5-57
Sewer and Water Standards (SW)............................5-59
Sexually Oriented Entertainment
Business Standards (SX)..........................................5-60
Sign Standards Section (SI).....................................5-61
Special Exception Standards (SE)...........................5-86
Structure Standards (ST)..........................................5-87
Telecommunication Facility Standards (TC)...........5-88
Temporary Use and Structure Standards (TU).........5-90
Trash Receptacle Standards (TR)............................5-92
Vision Clearance Standards (VC)............................5-93
5.01 Icon Key
The following District Icons represent the described standard zoning districts.
- Agricultural District
- Parks and Recreation District
- Residential Estate District
- Low Density Single-family Residential District
- Medium Density Single-family Residential District
- High Density Single-family Residential District
- Manufactured Home District
- Low Density Multiple-family Residential District
- Medium Density Multiple-family Residential District
- High Density Multiple-family Residential District
- Institutional District
- Local Commercial District
- General Commercial District
- Urban Commercial District
- Office Commercial District
- Low Intensity Industrial District
- High Intensity Industrial District
- High Impact District
Article
Article 5: Development Standards 5-3
Accessory Structure Standards (AS) 5
5.02 AS-01: General Accessory Structure Standards
This Accessory Structure Standards (AS) section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Cross Reference: Some accessory structures are regulated independent of the Accessory Structure Standards. The
following types of structures are regulated elsewhere in Article 5: Development Standards.
1. Fences and Walls: See Fence and Wall Standards (FW).
2. Parking Lots: See Parking Standards (PK).
3. Signs: See Sign Standards (SI).
4. Swimming Pools: Swimming pools shall meet the regulations within these Accessory Structure Standards
sections and the International Building Code currently adopted by the City of Henderson, Texas Administrative
Code, Title 25 and the Health and Safety Code, Section 341 and Chapter 757.
5. Telecommunication Facilities: See Telecommunication Facility Standards (TC).
6. Temporary Uses and Structures: See Temporary Uses and Structure Standards (TU).
7. Trash Receptacles: See Trash Receptacle Standards (TR).
B. Applicability:
1. Minimum Front Yard Setback: The minimum front yard setback for accessory structures shall be as indicated
on the applicable two-page layout in Article 2: Zoning Districts.
2. Minimum Side Yard Setback: The minimum side yard setback for accessory structures shall be as indicated on
the applicable two-page layout in Article 2: Zoning Districts.
3. Minimum Rear Yard Setback: The minimum rear yard setback for accessory structures shall be as indicated on
the applicable two-page layout in Article 2: Zoning Districts.
4. Maximum Structure Height: The maximum accessory structure height shall be as indicated on the applicable
two-page layout in Article 2: Zoning Districts.
C. Exemption:
1. Essential Mechanical Equipment: Essential mechanical equipment, such as an air conditioner condensing unit
shall be exempt from the accessory structure standards.
2. Utility Facility: Any power lines, junction boxes, pump stations, mechanical equipment related to a public
utility shall be exempt from the accessory structure standards.
D. Prohibited Accessory Structures:
1. Non-Conventional Storage: An automobile, mobile home, manufactured home, recreational vehicle, semitractor
trailer, boat, motor vehicle, shipping containers, or trailer; in part, in whole, or of the like, shall not be
permitted as an accessory structure.
2. Portable Storage Units: Portable storage units typically used for moving or other permitted short-term storage
shall not be permitted as a permanent accessory structure.
E. Permits:
1. Required: An Improvement Location Permit shall be required prior to installation or construction of an accessory
structure unless specifically noted otherwise.
2. Not Required: In circumstances where an accessory structure permit is not required, the accessory structure
shall still meet all applicable Accessory Structure Standards.
3. Small Structure Exemption: See Section 7.02(B): Exemption from Improvement Location Permit for exemptions
for small structures (e.g. structures 90 sq. ft. or less).
F. Maintenance: An accessory structure shall be properly maintained and kept in good condition.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
5-4
Accessory Structure Standards (AS) 5
5.03 AS-02: Parks and Recreation and Agricultural Accessory Structure Standards
This Accessory Structure Standards (AS) section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Exempt Structures:
1. Driveways: A driveway leading from an attached or detached garage to a public street shall be permitted in a
front yard, side yard, and rear yard under all circumstances if the driveway is not greater than thirty-five (35)
feet in width and maintains a minimum setback of five (5) feet from the side property line.
2. Sidewalk to Street: A sidewalk leading from the front door to the public right-of-way shall be permitted in a
front yard under all circumstances if the sidewalk is not greater than six (6) feet in width.
3. Interior Sidewalk: A sidewalk in a front yard or side yard shall be permitted under all circumstances if the
sidewalk is not greater than five (5) feet in width, provides a means for pedestrian movement on site, and
maintains a minimum setback of five (5) feet from the side property line.
4. Recreational Vehicle Parking: A concrete or asphalt pad to park a recreational vehicle in a side yard shall be
permitted under all circumstances if the pad meets the minimum side yard setback applicable to accessory
structures, and is sized to park two (2) recreational vehicle at a time.
B. Types:
1. Storage-based: Storage-based accessory structures shall be permitted. Storage-based accessory structures shall
include barns, carports, detached garages, greenhouses, mini-barns, pool houses, sheds, and other structures
used primarily for storage purposes or otherwise not used for interior living space.
2. Recreation-based: Recreation-based accessory structures shall be permitted. Recreation-based accessory
structures shall include decks, gazebos, hot tubs, ground-mounted satellite dishes, sport courts, swimming
pools, and other structures used primarily for recreational purposes.
C. Relationship:
1. Use: An accessory structure shall relate to and complement the primary use of the lot or the zoning district’s
permitted uses.
2. Timing: An accessory structure may be installed or built on a lot prior to the construction of a primary structure
and may persist without the existence of the primary structure.
D. Quantity and Size:
1. Maximum Number: No limit.
2. Maximum Size: No limit.
E. Materials: Not applicable.
F. Location: Storage-based and recreation-based accessory structures shall not be located between a single-family
dwelling and a public right-of-way; otherwise, there is no limit on the location of storage-based or accessory-based
accessory structures.
G. Separation: A storage-based accessory structure shall be at least five (5) feet from a primary structure and from
another storage-based accessory structure.
Article
Article 5: Development Standards 5-5
Accessory Structure Standards (AS) 5
5.04 AS-03: Residential Estate Accessory Structure Standards
This Accessory Structure Standards (AS) section applies to the following zoning district:
The following standards apply:
A. Exempt Structures:
1. Driveways: A driveway leading from an attached or detached garage to a public street shall be permitted in a
front yard, side yard, and rear yard under all circumstances if the driveway is not greater than thirty-five (35)
feet in width and maintains a minimum setback of five (5) feet from the side property line.
2. Sidewalk to Street: A sidewalk leading from the front door to the public right-of-way shall be permitted in a
front yard under all circumstances if the sidewalk is not greater than six (6) feet in width.
3. Interior Sidewalk: A sidewalk in a front yard or side yard shall be permitted under all circumstances if the
sidewalk is not greater than five (5) feet in width, provides a means for pedestrian movement on site, and
maintains a minimum setback of five (5) feet from the side property line.
4. Recreational Vehicle Parking: A concrete or asphalt pad to park a recreational vehicle in a side yard shall be
permitted under all circumstances if the pad meets the minimum side yard setback applicable to accessory
structures, and is sized to park one (1) recreational vehicle at a time; or two (2) recreational vehicles if the
parcel is over one (1) acre and the parking pad is at least forty (40) feet from all property lines.
B. Types:
1. Storage-based: Storage-based accessory structures shall be permitted. Storage-based accessory structures shall
include barns, carports, detached garages, greenhouses, pole structures, pool houses, sheds, and other structures
used primarily for storage purposes or otherwise not used for interior living space.
2. Recreation-based: Recreation-based accessory structures shall be permitted. Recreation-based accessory
structures shall include decks, gazebos, hot tubs, ground-mounted satellite dishes, sport courts, swimming
pools, pergolas, and other structures used primarily for recreational purposes.
C. Relationship:
1. Use: An accessory structure shall relate to and complement the primary use of the lot.
2. Timing: An accessory structure shall not be installed or built on a lot prior to the construction of the primary
structure. However, an accessory structure may be constructed and completed concurrent to the construction of
a primary structure.
D. Quantity and Size:
1. Maximum Number: No more than three (3) storage-based accessory structures shall be permitted on a lot.
There is no limit on recreation-based accessory structures.
2. Maximum Size: The cumulative square footage of all storage-based accessory structures shall not exceed the
footprint of the primary structure; or two (2) times the footprint of the primary structure when the subject lot is
two (2) acres or greater in area.
E. Materials: The exterior finish and facade of all storage-based accessory structures greater than 160 square feet
in area shall match, closely resemble, or significantly complement the materials and colors used on the primary
structure.
F. Location: Storage-based accessory structures shall only be allowed in rear yards. Recreation-based accessory
structures shall only be permitted in side yards or rear yards. The following exceptions apply to storage-based and
recreation-based accessory structure locations:
1. Basketball Goals: A basketball goal along a driveway or mounted on the garage shall not be considered a sport
court. However, the minimum setback for a basketball goal shall be one-half (½) the minimum front hard
setback applicable to primary structures.
2. Detached Garage or Carport: A detached garage or carport may be placed in a side yard. A detached garage
may be placed forward of a primary structure, but only if it is side loading, less than 700 square feet of space, is
not taller than the primary structure, and to the side of the primary structure’s facade.
G. Separation: A storage-based accessory structure shall be at least five (5) feet from a primary structure and from
another storage-based accessory structure.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
5-6
Accessory Structure Standards (AS) 5
5.05 AS-04: Single-family and Two-family Residential Accessory Structure Standards
This Accessory Structure Standards (AS) section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Exempt Structures:
1. Driveways: A driveway leading from an attached or detached garage to a public street shall be permitted in a
front yard, side yard, and rear yard under all circumstances if the driveway is not greater than thirty-five (35)
feet in width and maintains a minimum setback of three (3) feet from the side property line.
2. Sidewalk to Street: A sidewalk leading from the front door to the public right-of-way shall be permitted in a
front yard under all circumstances if the sidewalk is not greater than six (6) feet in width.
3. Interior Sidewalk: A sidewalk in a front yard or side yard shall be permitted under all circumstances if the
sidewalk is not greater than five (5) feet in width, provides a means for pedestrian movement on site, and
maintains a minimum setback of five (5) feet from the side property line.
4. Recreational Vehicle Parking: A concrete or asphalt pad to park a recreational vehicle in a side yard shall be
permitted under all circumstances if the pad meets the minimum side yard setback applicable to accessory
structures, and is sized to park one (1) recreational vehicle at a time.
B. Types:
1. Storage-based: Storage-based accessory structures shall be permitted. Storage-based accessory structures
shall include detached garages, greenhouses, pool houses, sheds, and other structures used primarily for storage
purposes or otherwise not used for interior living space.
2. Recreation-based: Recreation-based accessory structures shall be permitted. Recreation-based accessory
structures shall include decks, gazebos, hot tubs, ground-mounted satellite dishes, sport courts, swimming
pools, pergolas, and other structures used primarily for recreational purposes.
C. Relationship:
1. Use: An accessory structure shall relate to and complement the primary use of the lot.
2. Timing: An accessory structure shall not be installed or built on a lot prior to the construction of the primary
structure. However, an accessory structure may be constructed and completed concurrent to the construction of
a primary structure.
D. Quantity and Size:
1. Maximum Number: No more than two (2) storage-based accessory structures shall be permitted on a lot. There
is no limit on recreation-based accessory structures.
2. Maximum Size: The cumulative square footage of all storage-based accessory structures shall not exceed fifty
percent (50%) of the footprint of the primary structure.
E. Materials: The exterior finish and facade of all storage-based accessory structures greater than 160 square feet in
area shall match or closely resemble, and significantly complement the materials and colors used on the primary
structure.
F. Location: Storage-based and recreation-based accessory structures shall only be allowed in rear yards with the
following exceptions:
1. Basketball Goals: A basketball goal along a driveway or mounted on the garage shall not be considered a sport
court. However, the minimum setback for a basketball goal shall be one-half (½) the minimum front yard
setback applicable to a primary structure.
2. Detached Garage or Carport: A detached garage or carport may be placed in a side yard.
G. Separation: A storage-based accessory structure shall be at least five (5) feet from a primary structure and from
another storage-based accessory structure.
Article
Article 5: Development Standards 5-7
Accessory Structure Standards (AS) 5
5.06 AS-05: Manufactured Home District Accessory Structure Standards
This Accessory Structure Standards (AS) section applies to the following zoning district:
The following standards apply:
A. Exempt Structures:
1. Driveways: A driveway leading from an attached or detached garage to a public street shall be permitted in a
front yard, side yard, and rear yard under all circumstances if the driveway is not greater than twenty (20) feet
in width and maintains a minimum setback of three (3) feet from the side property line.
2. Sidewalk to Street: A sidewalk leading from the front door to the public right-of-way shall be permitted in a
front yard under all circumstances if the sidewalk is not greater than six (6) feet in width.
3. Interior Sidewalk: A sidewalk in a front yard or side yard shall be permitted under all circumstances if the
sidewalk is not greater than five (5) feet in width, provides a means for pedestrian movement on site, and
maintains a minimum setback of three (3) feet from the side property line.
4. Recreational Vehicle Parking: Not permitted outside.
B. Types:
1. Storage-based: Storage-based accessory structures shall be permitted. Storage-based accessory structures shall
include detached garages, carports greenhouses, pool houses, sheds, and other structures used primarily for
storage purposes or otherwise not used for interior living space.
2. Recreation-based: Recreation-based accessory structures shall be permitted. Recreation-based accessory
structures shall include decks, gazebos, hot tubs, ground-mounted satellite dishes, sport courts, swimming
pools, pergolas, and other structures used primarily for recreational purposes.
C. Relationship:
1. Use: An accessory structure shall relate to and complement the primary use of the lot.
2. Timing: An accessory structure shall not be installed or built on a lot prior to the construction or installation of
the primary structure.
D. Quantity and Size:
1. Maximum Number: No more than one (1) storage-based accessory structures shall be permitted on a lot. There
is no limit on recreation-based accessory structures.
2. Maximum Size: The cumulative square footage of all storage-based accessory structures shall not exceed fifty
percent (50%) of the footprint of the primary structure.
E. Materials: The exterior finish and facade of all storage-based accessory structures greater than 160 square feet
in area shall match, closely resemble, or significantly complement the materials and colors used on the primary
structure.
F. Location: Storage-based and recreation-based accessory structures shall only be allowed in rear yards with the
following exceptions:
1. Basketball Goals: A basketball goal along a driveway or mounted on the garage shall not be considered a sport
court. However, the minimum setback for a basketball goal shall be one-half (½) the minimum front yard
setback applicable to a primary structure.
2. Detached Garage or Carport: A detached garage or carport may be placed in a side yard.
G. Separation: A storage-based accessory structure shall be at least five (5) feet from a primary structure and from
another storage-based accessory structure.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
5-8
Accessory Structure Standards (AS) 5
5.07 AS-06: Multiple-family Residential Accessory Structure Standards
This Accessory Structure Standards (AS) section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Exempt Structures:
1. Driveways and Drive Aisles: A driveway or drive aisles leading from an attached garage, detached garage,
or parking area to a public street shall be permitted in a front yard, side yard, and rear yard under all
circumstances if the driveway or drive aisle is not greater than twenty-five (25) feet in width and maintains a
minimum setback of five (5) feet from the side property line.
2. Sidewalk to Street: A sidewalk leading from the front door to the public right-of-way shall be permitted in a
front yard under all circumstances if the sidewalk is not greater than six (6) feet in width.
3. Interior Sidewalk: A sidewalk in a front yard or side yard shall be permitted under all circumstances if the
sidewalk is not greater than five (5) feet in width, provides a means for pedestrian movement on site, and
maintains a minimum setback of five (5) feet from the side property line.
4. Recreational Vehicle Parking: Not permitted outside.
B. Types:
1. Support-based: Support-based accessory structures shall be permitted. Support-based accessory structures
may include a management office, sales office, maintenance facility, indoor fitness room, indoor or outdoor
sport courts, indoor or outdoor swimming pool, pergola, indoor or outdoor play equipment, enclosed vending,
laundry, and other structures customarily incidental to the development. All support-based accessory structures
shall be subordinate to the residential component of the development; be located, designed, and intended to
serve only the needs of the development and its residents; and shall present no visible evidence of its nonresidential
nature to areas outside the development.
2. Storage-based: Except for garages and carports, storage-based accessory structures specific to each dwelling
unit shall not be permitted.
C. Relationship:
1. Use: An accessory structure shall relate to and complement the primary use of the land and be solely used in
connection with the primary use.
2. Timing:
a. Support-based: A support-based accessory structure may be installed or built on a lot prior to the construction
of a primary structure.
b. Storage-based: A storage-based accessory structure shall not be installed or built on a lot prior to the
construction of a primary structure. However, an accessory structure may be constructed and completed
concurrent to the construction of a primary structure.
D. Quantity and Size:
1. Maximum Number: No more than four (4) support-based accessory structures shall be permitted for any
development. Only one (1) storage-based accessory structure shall be permitted per one (1) primary structure.
2. Maximum Size: The cumulative square footage of all storage-based accessory structures shall not exceed 260
square feet per dwelling unit.
E. Materials: The exterior finish and facade of all accessory structures shall match, closely resemble, or significantly
complement the materials and colors used on the primary structure.
F. Location: Storage-based and accessory-based accessory structures shall be located where they will not negatively
impact a neighboring single-family residence or in a front yard. Otherwise, accessory structures may be located in
a side or rear yard.
G. Separation: A support-based accessory structure and storage-based accessory structure shall be at least twenty (20)
feet from a primary structure and from another support-based, or storage-based accessory structure.
Article
Article 5: Development Standards 5-9
Accessory Structure Standards (AS) 5
5.08 AS-07: Institutional Accessory Structure Standards
This Accessory Structure Standards (AS) section applies to the following zoning district:
The following standards apply:
A. Exempt Structures:
1. Sidewalks: Sidewalks for pedestrian movement on a site shall be permitted in a front, side or rear yard.
B. Types:
1. Support-based: Support-based accessory structures shall be permitted. A support-based accessory structure
shall include a maintenance facility, mechanical structure, freestanding canopy, stand-alone restroom facilities,
storage building, enclosed vending, kiosk, or structures used in support of the primary structure.
2. Recreation-based: Recreation-based accessory structures shall be permitted. A recreational-based accessory
structure shall include a deck, fountains, pavilion, picnic shelter, public art display, sport courts, terrace,
playground equipment or other structures that add a recreational element to the primary use of the land.
C. Relationship:
1. Use: An accessory structure shall relate to and complement the primary use of the land and be solely used in
connection with the specific primary use.
2. Timing: An accessory structure shall not be installed or built on a lot prior to the construction of the primary
structure. However, an accessory structure may be constructed and completed concurrent to the construction of
a primary structure.
D. Quantity and Size:
1. Maximum Number: Up to four (4) support-based accessory structures shall be permitted on a lot. There is no
limit on recreation-based accessory structures.
2. Maximum Size: No limit.
E. Materials: The exterior finish and facade of all accessory structures shall match, closely resemble, or significantly
complement the character of the district.
F. Location: Support-based accessory structures shall be allowed in front yards, side yards and rear yards. There is no
limit on the location of recreation-based accessory structures. However, they shall not be located where they will
negatively impact a neighboring single-family residence, or where they create a negative aesthetic from an adjacent
public right-of-way.
G. Separation: A support-based accessory structure shall be at least twenty (20) feet from a primary structure and from
another storage-based accessory structure.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
5-10
Accessory Structure Standards (AS) 5
5.09 AS-08: Local Commercial Accessory Structure Standards
This Accessory Structure Standards (AS) section applies to the following zoning district:
The following standards apply:
A. Exempt Structures:
1. Sidewalks: Sidewalks for pedestrian movement on a site shall be permitted in a front, side or rear yard.
B. Types:
1. Support-based: Support-based accessory structures shall be permitted. Support-based accessory structures
shall include a storage building, refrigeration or freezer unit, freestanding canopy, mechanical structure, or
other structure used in support of the primary structure.
2. Recreation-based: Recreation-based accessory structures shall be permitted. A recreational-based accessory
structure shall include a deck, terrace, play equipment, or other structures that add a recreational element to the
primary structure that is consistent with the intent of the district.
C. Relationship:
1. Use: An accessory structure shall relate to and complement the primary use of the land and be solely used in
connection with the specific primary use.
2. Timing: An accessory structure shall not be installed or built on a lot prior to the construction of the primary
structure. However, an accessory structure may be constructed and completed concurrent to the construction of
a primary structure.
D. Quantity and Size:
1. Maximum Number: No more than two (2) support-based accessory structure shall be permitted on a lot. There
is no limit on recreation-based accessory structures.
2. Maximum Size: The cumulative square footage of all storage-based accessory structures shall not exceed 800
square feet in area or ten percent (10%) of the area of the footprint of the primary structure, whichever is greater.
E. Materials: The exterior finish and facade of all accessory structures shall match, closely resemble, or significantly
complement the materials and colors used on the primary structure.
F. Location: Support-based and recreation-based accessory structures shall only be allowed in side yards and rear yards.
G. Separation: A support-based accessory structure shall be at least five (5) feet from a primary structure and from
another storage-based accessory structure.
Article
Article 5: Development Standards 5-11
Accessory Structure Standards (AS) 5
5.10 AS-09: Urban Commercial Accessory Structure Standards
This Accessory Structure Standards (AS) section applies to the following zoning district:
The following standards apply:
A. Exempt Structures:
1. Sidewalks: Sidewalks for pedestrian movement on a site shall be permitted in a front, side or rear yard.
B. Types:
1. Support-based: Support-based accessory structures shall be permitted for non-residential uses. Support-based
accessory structures shall include a storage building, refrigeration or freezer unit, mechanical structure, or other
structure used in support of the primary structure.
2. Recreation-based: Recreation-based accessory structures shall be permitted for non-residential uses.
Recreation-based accessory structures shall include a deck, fountain, pavilion, public art display, terrace, or
other structures that add a recreational element to the primary structure that is consistent with the intent of the
district.
3. Prohibited: Accessory structures related to residential uses shall not be permitted.
C. Relationship:
1. Use: An accessory structure shall relate to and complement the primary use of the land and be solely used in
connection with the specific primary use.
2. Timing: An accessory structure shall not be installed or built on a lot prior to the construction of the primary
structure. However, an accessory structure may be constructed and completed concurrent to the construction of
a primary structure.
D. Quantity and Size:
1. Maximum Number: One (1) support-based accessory structure shall be permitted on a lot. There is no limit on
recreation-based accessory structures.
2. Maximum Size: A support-based accessory structure shall not exceed 250 square feet in area or five percent
(5%) of the area of the footprint of the primary structure, whichever is larger.
E. Materials: The exterior finish and facade of any accessory structure shall match, closely resemble, or significantly
complement the materials and color used on the primary structures.
F. Location: Support-based and recreation-based accessory structures shall only be allowed in rear yards.
G. Separation: A support-based accessory structure shall be at least five (5) feet from a primary structure and from
another storage-based accessory structure.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
5-12
Accessory Structure Standards (AS) 5
5.11 AS-10: General Commercial Accessory Structure Standards
This Accessory Structure Standards (AS) section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Exempt Structures:
1. Sidewalks: Sidewalks for pedestrian movement on a site shall be permitted in a front, side or rear yard.
B. Types:
1. Support-based: Support-based accessory structures shall be permitted. Support-based accessory structures
shall include a maintenance facility, mechanical structure, freestanding canopy, storage building, refrigeration
or freezer unit, menu boards, or other structures used in support of the primary structure.
2. Recreation-based: Recreation-based accessory structures shall be permitted. Recreation-based accessory
structures shall include a deck, fountain, pavilion, picnic shelter, public art display, sport court, terrace, play
equipment, or other structures that add a recreational element to the primary use of the land.
C. Relationship:
1. Use: An accessory structure shall relate to and complement the primary use of the land and be solely used in
connection with the specific primary use.
2. Timing: An accessory structure shall not be permitted prior to the construction of a primary structure.
However, an accessory structure may be constructed and completed concurrent to the construction of a primary
structure.
D. Quantity and Size:
1. Maximum Number: Up to four (4) support-based accessory structure shall be permitted on a lot. There is no
limit on recreation-based accessory structures.
2. Maximum Size: A support-based accessory structure shall not exceed two (2) times the footprint of the primary
structure.
E. Materials: The exterior finish and facade of all accessory structures shall match, closely resemble, or significantly
complement the materials and color used on the primary structures.
F. Location: Support-based and recreation-based accessory structures shall only be allowed in side yards and rear yards.
G. Separation: A support-based accessory structure shall be at least five (5) feet from a primary structure and from
another storage-based accessory structure.
Article
Article 5: Development Standards 5-13
Accessory Structure Standards (AS) 5
5.12 AS-11: Industrial Accessory Structure Standards
This Accessory Structure Standards (AS) section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Exempt Structures:
1. Sidewalks: Sidewalks for pedestrian movement on a site shall be permitted in a front, side or rear yard.
B. Types:
1. Support-based: Support-based accessory structures shall be permitted. Support-based accessory structures
shall include a cooling tower, maintenance facility, mechanical structure, storage building, water tower, or other
structures used in support of the primary structure.
2. Recreation-based: Recreation-based accessory structures shall be permitted. Recreation-based accessory
structures shall include a deck, fountain, pavilion, picnic shelter, public art display, sport court, terrace, play
equipment, or other structures that add a recreational element to the primary use of the land.
C. Relationship:
1. Use: An accessory structure shall relate to and complement the primary use of the land and be solely used in
connection with the specific primary use.
2. Timing: An accessory structure may be installed or built on a lot prior to the construction of a primary structure
and may persist without the existence of the primary structure.
D. Quantity and Size:
1. Maximum Number: No limit.
2. Maximum Size: No limit.
E. Materials: The exterior finish and facade of any accessory structures over ten percent (10%) of the area of the
footprint of the primary structure shall match, closely resemble, or significantly complement the materials used on
the primary structures.
F. Location: Support-based and recreation-based accessory structures shall only be allowed in side yards and rear yards.
G. Separation: A support-based accessory structure shall be at least ten (10) feet from a primary structure and from
another storage-based accessory structure.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
5-14
Architectural Standards (AR) 5
5.13 AR-01: Residential Architectural Standards
This Architectural Standards (AR) section applies to the following districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Project Applicability: Architectural standards shall apply when an Improvement Location Permit for a new primary
structure is obtained.
B. Large Lot Exemption: Any primary structure or accessory structure that is located on a two (2) acre or greater
parcel and when the subject primary structure or accessory structure is greater than 150 feet from all property
lines, shall be exempt from Section 5.13(C)(2): Front Door, Section 5.13(C)(3): Garages, and Section 5.13(D):
Mechanical Equipment. Only structures that meet the previously mentioned minimum setback shall be exempt.
C. Architectural Standards:
1. Roof Design:
a. The minimum pitch for primary and accessory structures shall be five vertical units to twelve horizontal
units (5:12 pitch) for at least eighty percent (80%) of all roofs (e.g. allowing flat roofs over porches or shed
dormers).
b. Single-family and two-family dwellings shall have eaves or overhangs a minimum of nine (9) inches from
the facade's siding material on at least eighty percent (80%) of the roof line. The eave or overhang shall be
measured after the installation of masonry.
2. Front Door: Front doors on a side facade shall face and adjacent street or be within forty-five degrees (45°) of
parallel to an adjacent public street. Front doors in an alcove in the front facade shall face the adjacent public
street or be within ninety degrees (90°) of parallel to the adjacent public street.
3. Garages:
a. At minimum, a two-car, attached garage or detached garage shall be required for all single-family dwellings,
and a one-car attached garage or detached garage shall be required for each unit in a two-family
dwelling.
b. Front-loading garages shall not be located in front of the main living area of the dwelling by more than
eight (8) feet.
D. Mechanical Equipment: Mechanical equipment, central air conditioner units located on the ground, propane tanks,
and the like shall not be located in front of the front facade. On corner lots this standard applies to each facade that
faces a right-of-way.
5.14 AR-02: Manufactured Home District Architectural Standards
This Architectural Standards (AR) section applies to the following district:
The following standards apply:
A. Project Applicability: Architectural details consistent with the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance shall be
required when an Improvement Location Permit for a new primary structure is obtained.
B. Architectural Standards:
1. Front Facade: The front facade of a primary structure shall be between parallel to and twenty degrees (20°) of
parallel to the street to which the dwelling gains primary access, except as described below:
a. On corner lots, the front facade may face either street.
b. A single-family dwellings that is setback 200 feet or more from the street to which the dwelling gains
primary access shall orient the front facade between parallel to and ninety degrees (90°) of parallel to the
street.
2. Roof Design:
a. The minimum pitch for primary and accessory structures shall be five vertical units to twelve horizontal
units (5:12 pitch) for at least eighty percent (80%) of all roofs (e.g. allowing flat roofs over porches or shed
dormers).
b. Single-family and two-family dwellings shall have eaves or overhangs a minimum of nine (9) inches from
the facade's siding material on at least eighty percent (80%) of the roof line. The eave or overhang shall be
measured after the installation of masonry.
3. Front Door: Front doors shall be on the front facade or a side facade.
4. Garages:
a. A one-car garage, attached or detached, shall be required for all single-family dwellings.
b. Front-loading garages shall not be located in front any portion of the main living area.
C. Mechanical Equipment: Mechanical equipment, central air conditioner units located on the ground, propane tanks,
and the like shall not be located in front of the front facade. On corner lots this standard applies to each facade that
faces a right-of-way.
Article
Article 5: Development Standards 5-15
Architectural Standards (AR) 5
5.15 AR-03: Multiple-family Residential Architectural Standards
This Architectural Standards (AR) section applies to the following districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Project Applicability: Architectural details consistent with the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance shall be
required when an Improvement Location Permit for a new primary structure is obtained, or when an improvement
to a building is made equal to forty percent (40%) or greater of the pre-improvement building value.
B. Architectural Standards:
1. Materials: The front and side facades shall have a minimum of thirty percent (30%) brick, stone or other
decorative masonry material.
2. Front and Side Facades: A development with more than five (5) multiple-family buildings shall not be
permitted to have identical front and side facades for each building. To distinguish one building from another
at least three (3) different facade designs shall be used. Different facade design means that at least three (3)
characteristics shall be clearly different from the other multiple-family buildings, including, but not limited to:
notably different floor plans, notably different window placement, exterior siding color, exterior materials (e.g.
stone accents verses brick accent), notably different roof lines, or different garage placement.
3. Roof Design:
a. The minimum pitch for primary structures shall be five vertical units to twelve horizontal units (5:12 pitch)
for at least eighty percent (80%) of all roofs (e.g. allowing flat roofs over porches or shed dormers).
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
5-16
Architectural Standards (AR) 5
5.16 AR-04: Commercial Architectural Standards
This Architectural Standards (AR) section applies to the following districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Project Applicability: Architectural details consistent with the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance shall be
required when an Improvement Location Permit for a new primary structure is obtained, or when an improvement
to a building is made equal to forty percent (40%) or greater of the pre-improvement building value.
B. Architectural Standards:
1. Materials: No requirement.
2. Front Facade:
a. Any facade that faces a public right-of-way shall be finished to a standard similar to the architectural
quality of a front facade, including building materials, architectural detail, windows, and/or faux windows.
b. Long facades (30 feet or greater) or large areas (420 square feet or greater) of a facade without visual relief
shall not be permitted. Visual relief may include a window, faux window, column, a change in materials,
or any change in the plane of the facade.
c. Facades greater than 100 feet shall have a change in plane, a minimum two (2) foot projection or recess,
extending at least twenty percent (20%) of the overall length of the facade.
3. Roof Design:
a. Flat roof buildings shall have a recognizable “top” consisting of a cornice or other architectural band
utilizing a change in materials and color.
b. Sloped roof buildings shall have a minimum pitch of be five vertical units to twelve horizontal units (5:12
pitch) applicable to eighty percent (80%) of all roofed areas. Sloped roofs shall also have eaves with a
minimum twelve (12) inch overhang.
4. Entries: A building greater than 3,000 square feet in area shall have clearly defined, highly visible customer
entrances with at least two (2) of the following features:
a. Awning,
b. Porch,
c. Columns,
d. Raised parapets over the door,
e. Change of facade material around door opening,
f. Outdoor patios, or
g. Landscape planters or wing walls that incorporate landscaped areas and/or places to sit.
C. Site Planning and Layout: A building with multiple storefronts or a strip development with multiple buildings in
a row shall incorporate variation in storefront design, by using: variation in building height, building mass, roof
design, window quantity, window sizes, facade color, facade materials, and/or changes in wall planes.
Article
Article 5: Development Standards 5-17
Architectural Standards (AR) 5
5.17 AR-05: Urban Commercial Architectural Standards
This Architectural Standards (AR) section applies to the following districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Project Applicability: Architectural details consistent with the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance shall be
required when an Improvement Location Permit for a new primary structure is obtained, or when an improvement
to a building is made equal to forty percent (40%) or greater of the pre-improvement building value.
B. Architectural Standards:
1. Materials: At least eighty percent (80%) of front facades shall utilize brick or another durable and decorative
masonry product as the predominant facade material facing any public street.
2. Front Facade:
a. Any facade that faces a right-of-way shall be finished to a standard similar to the architectural quality of a
front facade, including building materials, architectural detail, windows, and/or faux windows.
3. Roof Design:
a. Flat roofs or shed roofs are required and shall have a “top” consisting of a cornice or other architectural
band utilizing a change in materials and color.
b. Shed roof buildings shall have a maximum pitch of three vertical units to twelve horizontal units (3:12
pitch) applicable to eighty percent (80%) of all roofed areas.
4. Entries: Buildings shall have clearly defined, pedestrian-oriented customer entrances with at least two (2) of
the following features:
a. Awning,
b. Recess,
c. Bump-out,
d. Architectural element above the door,
e. Change in facade material around door opening, or
f. Landscape planters flanking the doorway.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
5-18
Architectural Standards (AR) 5
5.18 AR-06: Industrial Architectural Standards
This Architectural Standards (AR) section applies to the following districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Project Applicability: Architectural details consistent with the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance shall be
required when an Improvement Location Permit for a new primary structure is obtained.
B. Exemption: Any building used predominantly for utilities, mechanical equipment, long-term storage, or maintenance
equipment shall be exempt from the below architectural standards.
C. Architectural Standards:
1. Front Facade: At least twenty percent (20%) of the front facade of industrial buildings shall be designed to
be aesthetic by either having prominent architectural feature (e.g. a corporate office or integrated architectural
feature); or shall be constructed predominantly using decorative precast panels, decorative masonry, EIFS, or
the like. Buildings with a prominent architectural feature may utilize decorative precast panels, decorative
masonry, EIFS, decorative metal siding, wood siding, or the like for the remaining portions of the front facade.
2. Compatibility: All primary structures on a site shall generally have complementary color, materials, and
architectural features.
3. Exterior Adjacent to Residential: The exterior of all primary and accessory structures adjacent to and within
100 feet of a residentially zoned lot or residentially occupied structures shall predominantly utilize decorative
precast panels, decorative masonry, EIFS, or similar materials. Alternatively, the Planning and Zoning
Commission may approve a landscape design that provides an effective buffer between the conflicting land
uses.
D. Roof: No standards apply.
E. Mechanical and Utility Equipment Screening: All mechanical equipment, trash compactors, pallets, and the like
shall generally be screened from view from public streets or residential areas. Screening can be achieved through
the use of landscaping, fences, or walls for ground placed equipment; or parapet walls or other roof features for
roof-mounted equipment. Screening enclosures shall be architecturally complementary to the primary structure.
Article
Article 5: Development Standards 5-19
Density and Intensity Standards (DI) 5
5.19 DI-01: Density and Intensity Standards
This Density and Intensity Standards (DI) section applies to the following districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Applicability: If a density or intensity standard does not appear on the two-page layout in Article 2: Zoning
Districts for a zoning district, then a density or intensity standard shall not apply to that particular zoning district.
1. Maximum Density: The maximum density shall be as indicated on the applicable two-page layout in Article 2:
Zoning Districts.
2. Maximum Lot Coverage: The maximum lot coverage shall be as indicated on the applicable two-page layout in
Article 2: Zoning Districts.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
5-20
Environmental Standards (EN) 5
5.20 EN-01: Environmental Standards
This Environmental Standards (EN) section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Prohibitive Geology: A lot or portions thereof shall be deemed unsuitable for primary structures when it contains
any of the characteristics listed below.
1. Slope: Pre-development slopes greater than twenty percent (20%).
2. Rock: Adverse rock formations.
3. Soil: Adverse soils.
4. Stability Limitations:
a. Has a low loading rate.
b. Has a low weight-bearing strength.
c. Has any other feature which will significantly accelerate the deterioration of a structure or significantly
reduce the structure’s stability.
5. Exemption: A primary structure may be permitted if a design is submitted and stamped by a registered
engineer. If steep slopes are present, the building design and site plan shall show and commit to adequate
measures for erosion control; minimum site disturbance; soil stability for structural load; storm water management;
aesthetic treatment of engineered structures; and final landscaping.
B. Air Quality:
1. Generally: A use shall not discharge ash, dust, smoke, vapors, noxious, toxic or corrosive matter, or other air
pollutants in such concentration as to conflict with public air quality standards or be detrimental to humans,
animals, vegetation, or property.
C. Soil and Water Quality:
1. Fill: All fill materials shall be free of environmentally hazardous materials, and the Zoning Administrator may
request representative samples of the fill for testing purposes.
2. Production: No use shall produce pollutants in such a quantity as to pollute soils, water bodies, adjacent
properties, or conflict with public water standards.
3. Storage: No property owner shall accumulate within the lot or discharge beyond the lot lines any waste, debris,
refuse, trash, discarded construction materials, discarded appliances, scrap metals, or rotting wood.
4. Disposal: No waste materials, garbage, rubbish, trash, construction material, gasoline, oil, flammables,
contaminated soils, tars, chemicals, grease, industrial or agricultural waste, or any other material of such nature,
quantity, obnoxiousness, toxicity, or temperature that it may contaminate, pollute, or harm surface water,
ground water, or soils shall be deposited, located, stored, or discharged on any lot unless expressly permitted by
all applicable law.
D. Environmental Feature Protective Setback: Primary structures, storage-based accessory structures, recreation-based
accessory structures, and support based-accessory structures shall be at least a twenty-five (25) feet from the
delineated boundary of a wetland, the floodway of a stream, or the edge of a lake or pond at its average elevation.
Article
Article 5: Development Standards 5-21
Fence and Wall Standards (FW) 5
5.21 FW-01: General Fence and Wall Standards
This Fence and Wall Standards (FW) section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Cross Reference:
1. Vision Clearance: Fences and walls shall meet all vision clearance standards in Vision Clearance Standards (VC).
2. Outdoor Storage: Fences are mandated for some types of outdoor storage. See the Outdoor Storage Standards
(OS) for those regulations.
3. Trash Receptacles: Trash Receptacles enclosures are mandated in some zoning districts. See the Trash
Receptacle Standards (TR) for those regulations.
4. Covenants: See Section 1.01(G)(2)(c): Other.
B. Permits:
1. Fence: An Improvement Location Permit for a fence shall be required.
2. Wall: An Improvement Location Permit for a wall shall be required.
C. Positioning:
1. Presentation: Fences and walls shall present the non-structural face outward (i.e. toward neighbors).
2. Property Line: Fences and walls shall be permitted on the property line, but if not on the property line shall be
at least three (3) feet from the property line so both sides of the fence can be maintained by the owner of the
fence.
3. Easement: No fence or wall shall be located within an easement unless written permission from the easement
holder has been granted.
D. Height Exemptions:
1. Sport Fields: Fences that surround event grounds, sport fields or sport courts shall be exempt from the
maximum fence height regulations, but shall not exceed eighteen (18) feet in height.
2. Large Setback: Fences that meet or exceed the side yard setback and rear yard setback for a primary structure,
in the subject zoning district, shall be exempt from the maximum fence height regulation, but shall not exceed
ten (10) feet in height, and shall not be located forward of the front facade of a primary structure. Under
no circumstance shall such a fence be closer than fifteen (15) feet to a property line, even if the applicable
minimum setback is less than fifteen (15) feet.
E. Maintenance: All fences and walls shall be properly maintained and kept in good condition.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
5-22
Fence and Wall Standards (FW) 5
5.22 FW-02: Parks and Recreation Fence and Wall Standards
This Fence and Wall Standards (FW) section applies to the following zoning district:
The following standards apply:
A. Types:
1. Permitted Materials: Wood, composite wood, stone, masonry, wrought iron, decorative powder-coated metal,
and PVC shall be permitted materials for fences and walls. Vinyl, zinc, or powder-coated chain link and
galvanized chain link shall only be permitted materials for fences that surround swimming pools, sport courts,
or similar recreational amenities.
2. Prohibited Materials: Fences and walls shall not incorporate barbed wire, above ground electrified wires, razor
wire, glass, sharpened top spikes, or similarly hazardous designs.
B. Location:
1. Front Yards: Only fences that are decorative in nature and do not serve as an enclosure shall be permitted in
front yard.
2. Side and Rear Yards: Fences and walls shall be permitted in side and rear yards.
C. Height:
1. Front Yards: Fences and walls shall not exceed three (3) feet in height.
2. Side and Rear Yards: Fences and walls shall not exceed six (6) feet in height.
5.23 FW-03: Agricultural Fence and Wall Standards
This Fence and Wall Standards (FW) section applies to the following zoning district:
The following standards apply:
A. Types:
1. Permitted Materials: Wood, composite wood, stone, masonry, wrought iron, decorative powder-coated metal,
PVC, vinyl, zinc, or powder-coated chain link, and galvanized chain link shall be permitted materials for fences
and walls. Chicken wire, wire mesh, agricultural wire (e.g. typical farm field fence), and fences that incorporate
barbed wire or above ground electrified wires shall only be permitted materials for fences that are used for
the containment of livestock or to surround fields.
2. Prohibited Materials: Fences and walls shall not incorporate razor wire, glass, sharpened top spikes, or other
similarly hazardous designs.
B. Location:
1. Front Yards: Fences and walls shall be permitted in the front yard if one (1) of the following conditions is met.
a. The fence or wall is decorative in nature and does not serve as an enclosure.
b. The fence is for the containment of farm animals.
c. The fence creates a barrier between a public road and a field (i.e. crops).
2. Side and Rear Yards: Fences and walls shall be permitted in side and rear yards.
C. Height:
1. Front Yards: Fences and walls shall not exceed three (3) feet in height; except containment fences and fences
around fields shall not exceed six (6) feet in height within the front yard.
2. Side and Rear Yards: Fences and walls shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height.
Article
Article 5: Development Standards 5-23
Fence and Wall Standards (FW) 5
5.24 FW-04: Residential Fence and Wall Standards
This Fence and Wall Standards (FW) section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Types:
1. Permitted Materials: Wood, composite wood, stone, masonry, wrought iron, decorative powder-coated metal,
PVC, vinyl, zinc, or powder-coated chain link, and galvanized chain link shall be permitted materials for fences
and walls.
2. Prohibited Materials: Fences and walls shall not incorporate chicken wire, mesh wire, agricultural wire, metal
or plastic slats within chain links, barbed wire, above ground electrified wires, razor wire, glass, sharpened top
spikes, or similarly hazardous designs.
B. Location:
1. Front: Only fences that are decorative in nature and do not serve as an enclosure shall be permitted in the
front.
2. Rear Yards and Side Yards: Fences and walls shall be permitted in a rear yard and Side Yards.
C. Height:
1. Front Yards: Fences and walls shall not exceed three (3) feet in height when located in a front yard.
2. Side and Rear Yards: Fences and walls shall not exceed six (6) feet in height when located in a side yard or
rear yard.
5.25 FW-05: Institutional and Commercial Fence and Wall Standards
This Fence and Wall Standards (FW) section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Types:
1. Permitted Materials: Wood, composite wood, stone, masonry, wrought iron, decorative powder-coated metal,
PVC, vinyl, zinc, or powder-coated chain link, and galvanized chain link shall be permitted materials for fences
and walls.
2. Prohibited Materials: Fences and walls shall not incorporate chicken wire, mesh wire, agricultural wire, metal
or plastic slats within chain links, barbed wire, above ground electrified wires, razor wire, glass, sharpened top
spikes, or similarly hazardous designs.
3. Administrative Discretion: While barbed wire, above ground electrified wires, and razor wire are not permitted
by right, the Zoning Administrator may permit the use of barbed wire or razor wire in special circumstances
(e.g. prison, secure computer server farm) when such use can be deemed safe for the general public and an
extraordinary need can be demonstrated.
B. Location:
1. Front Yards: Fences and walls shall not be permitted in front yards.
2. Side and Rear Yards: Fences and walls shall be permitted in a side yard and rear yard.
C. Height: Fences and walls shall not exceed four (4) feet in height in a side yard and six (6) feet in a rear yard.
1. Administrative Discretion: The Zoning Administrator may permit the height of a fence to exceed six (6) feet in
special circumstances (e.g. prison) when such a fence can be deemed necessary and an extraordinary need can
be demonstrated. Zoning Administrator discretion shall be limited to ten (10) feet in fence height.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
5-24
Fence and Wall Standards (FW) 5
5.26 FW-06: Industrial and High Impact Fence and Wall Standards
This Fence and Wall Standards (FW) section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Types:
1. Permitted Materials: Wood, composite wood, stone, masonry, wrought iron, decorative powder-coated metal,
PVC, vinyl, zinc, or powder-coated chain link, barbed wire, and galvanized chain link shall be permitted
materials for fences and walls.
2. Prohibited Materials: Fences and walls shall not incorporate chicken wire, mesh wire, agricultural wire, metal
or plastic slats within chain links, above ground electrified wires, razor wire, glass, sharpened top spikes, or
similarly hazardous designs.
3. Exception for Some Prohibited Materials: Chicken wire, mesh wire, agricultural wire, metal or plastic slats
within chain links, above ground electrified wires, and razor wire shall be permitted in rear yards and side
yards when they are installed where they meet the required setback for a primary structure. They may also be
permitted in front yards if setback a minimum of 100 feet from the public right-of-way.
B. Location:
1. Front Yards: Fences and walls shall not be permitted in front yards unless setback from a public right-of-way
by 100 feet.
2. Side and Rear Yards: Fences and walls shall be permitted in side and rear yards.
C. Height: Fences and walls shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height.
1. Administrative Discretion: The Zoning Administrator may permit the height of a fence to exceed eight (8)
feet in special circumstances (e.g. high security industry) when such a fence can be deemed necessary and an
extraordinary need can be demonstrated. Discretion shall be limited to twenty (20) feet in total fence height,
and shall be the minimum necessary to meet the demonstrated need.
Article
Article 5: Development Standards 5-25
Floor Area Standards (FA) 5
5.27 FA-01: Floor Area Standards
This Floor Area Standards (FA) section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Applicability: If a floor area standard does not appear on the two-page layout for a zoning district, then a standard
does not apply to that particular zoning district.
1. Minimum Main Floor Area: The minimum main floor area shall be per each two-page layout in Article 2:
Zoning Districts.
2. Maximum Main Floor Area: The maximum main floor area shall be per each two-page layout in Article 2:
Zoning Districts.
3. Minimum Dwelling Unit Size: The minimum dwelling unit size shall be per each two-page layout in Article 2:
Zoning Districts.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
5-26
Height Standards (HT) 5
5.28 HT-01: Height Standards
This Height Standards (HT) section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Cross Reference: The following sections have height limitations that are not regulated by the Height Standards
(HT).
1. Telecommunication Facilities: See Telecommunication Facility Standards (TC).
2. Signs: See Sign Standards (SG).
3. Fences and Walls: See Fence and Wall Standards (FW).
B. Applicability: If a height standard does not appear on the two-page layout for a zoning district, then a standard
does not apply to that particular zoning district.
1. Primary Structure: The maximum height for primary structures shall be per the applicable two-page layout in
Article 2: Zoning Districts.
2. Accessory Structure: The maximum height for accessory structures shall be per the applicable two-page layout
in Article 2: Zoning Districts.
3. Exceptions: The following types of structures or features shall be exempt or partially exempt from the
maximum structure height standards, assuming they are permitted uses or structural features, as stated:
a. Grain elevators and grain silos used for agricultural purposes may exceed the maximum structure height
but shall not exceed 150 feet in height.
b. Church steeples, bell towers, and religious symbols may exceed the maximum structure height but shall not
exceed 200% of the height of the primary structure or 150% of the maximum allowed height for primary
structures, whichever is greater.
c. Functional chimneys may exceed the maximum structure height but shall not extend more than ten (10)
feet above the roof's highest point.
d. Utility structures and water towers may exceed the maximum structure height, but shall not exceed one
hundred fifty (150) feet.
e. Roof-mounted antennas that are not located on the front roof plane may exceed the maximum structure
height, but shall not exceed five (5) feet over the maximum primary structure height or ten (10) feet above
the primary structure's height, whichever is less.
f. Pole-mounted antennas located in a rear yard may exceed the maximum structure height but shall not
exceed twenty (20) feet over the maximum primary structure height or thirty (30) feet above the primary
structure's height, whichever is less.
g. Roof-mounted mechanical equipment, including elevator bulkheads, may exceed the maximum structure
height but shall not extend any more than fifteen (15) feet above the roof's highest point; provided that it is
architecturally integrated into the building's features or is generally screened from view by an architectural
enclosure, parapet, or similar feature. Industrial uses shall be exempt from the integration and screening
requirement.
h. Flagpoles in all circumstances may be twenty-five (25) feet in height. Taller flagpoles are permitted when
the flagpole is at least one (1) foot from the property line for every foot of its height above the ground (e.g.
a 100 foot tall flagpole is permitted if it is at least 100 feet from all property lines).
i. Ham radio towers shall be exempt from the maximum structure height if the ham radio tower is located on
a lot owned by a ham radio operator that has a valid and active license from the Federal Communication
Commission (FCC).
Article
Article 5: Development Standards 5-27
Home Business Standards (HB) 5
5.29 HB-01: Type 1 Home Business Standards
This Home Business Standards (HB) section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Exemption: None.
B. Personnel:
1. Residency: The primary operator shall reside in the dwelling unit where the home business is located.
2. Employees: Only the residents of the dwelling unit in which the home business is located shall be employed
and work in the Type 1 Home Business. Employees who work exclusively outside the hosting residence shall
not be regulated by the employee standard.
C. Operations:
1. Prohibited Types: The home business shall not include walk-in retail sales.
2. Nuisance: The Type 1 Home Business shall not generate offensive noise, vibration, smoke, odors, dust, heat,
glare, or electrical disturbances.
3. Traffic: The home business shall not generate vehicular traffic in greater volumes than would normally be
expected in the neighborhood in which it is located.
4. Customers: The home business shall not have patron or customer visits to the home business.
5. Hours: The hours of operation of the home business shall not interfere with the use and enjoyment of adjacent
properties.
D. Design:
1. Primary Structure:
a. The home business shall be conducted entirely within the primary structure.
b. The home business shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the square footage of the primary structure.
c. There shall be no visible evidence of the home business, including but not limited to alterations to the
exterior of the residence which change the character of the residence, exterior displays, or the outdoor
storage of materials or equipment used in the home business.
2. Accessory Structure: An accessory structure shall not be utilized for any part of the home business.
3. Parking and Loading:
a. Off-street parking and loading facilities beyond what is common for a residential structure shall not be
permitted.
b. The home business shall not receive more deliveries per week than the average residential dwelling.
Deliveries shall be made primarily between 8:00 AM and 8:00 PM by a vehicle not larger than a utility
truck (e.g. FedEx or UPS delivery vehicles). A home business shall not utilize scheduled pick-up by
couriers in excess of one (1) time per week.
4. Mechanical Equipment: The home business shall not require the installation of mechanical equipment other
than that which is common in a residential structure.
5. Utility Service: The home business shall not require the installation of a sewer, water, or electrical utility
service that is beyond what is common in a residential structure. Exceeding typical phone, cable, or internet
services for residential property shall be permitted.
6. Signs: Signs shall not be permitted.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
5-28
Home Business Standards (HB) 5
5.30 HB-02: Type 2 Home Business Standards
This Home Business Standards (HB) section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Exemption: Home daycares are not regulated by these home business standards.
B. Personnel:
1. Residency: The primary operator shall reside in the dwelling unit where the home business is located.
2. Employees: One (1) employee who does not reside in the dwelling unit where the home business is located
may be employed and work at the home business. Employees who work exclusively outside the hosting
residence shall not be regulated by the employee standard.
C. Operations:
1. Prohibited Types: The home business shall not include walk-in retail sales.
2. Nuisance: The home business shall not generate offensive noise, vibration, smoke, odors, dust, heat, glare, or
electrical disturbances.
3. Traffic: The home business shall not generate vehicular traffic in greater volumes than would normally be
expected in the neighborhood in which it is located.
4. Customers: The home business shall be limited to three (3) patron or customer visits to the home business per
day on average during any given week.
5. Hours: The hours of operation of the home business shall be no earlier than 6:00 AM and no later than 9:00
PM for the employee that does not reside in the dwelling unit where the home business is located, and the
hours of operation of the home business shall not interfere with the use and enjoyment of adjacent residential
properties.
D. Design:
1. Primary Structure:
a. The home business shall be conducted entirely within the primary structure.
b. The home business shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the square footage of the primary structure or
500 square feet, whichever is less.
c. There shall be no visible evidence of the home business, including but not limited to alterations to the
exterior of the dwelling unit which change the character of the dwelling unit, exterior displays, or the
outdoor storage of materials or equipment used in the home business.
2. Accessory Structure: One accessory structure may be utilized for storage and other home business purposes;
however, an accessory building shall not be utilized as a space for an employee to work or for patrons or
customers to visit.
3. Parking and Loading:
a. Off-street parking and loading facilities beyond what is common for a residential structure shall not be
permitted.
b. The home business shall not receive more than three (3) deliveries per week. Deliveries shall be made
primarily between 8:00 AM and 8:00 PM by a vehicle not larger than a utility truck (e.g FedEx or UPS
delivery vehicles). A home business shall not utilize scheduled pick-up by couriers in excess of two (2)
times per week.
4. Mechanical Equipment: The home business shall not require the installation of mechanical equipment other
than that which is common in a residential structure.
5. Utility Service: The home business shall not require the installation of a sewer, water, or electrical utility
service that is beyond what is common in a residential structure. Exceeding typical phone, cable, or internet
services for residential property shall be permitted.
6. Signs: Signs shall not be permitted.
Article
Article 5: Development Standards 5-29
Home Business Standards (HB) 5
5.31 HB-03: Type 3 Home Business Standards
This Home Business Standards (HB) section applies to the following zoning district:
The following standards apply:
A. Exemption: Home daycare and farming operations are not regulated by these home business standards.
B. Personnel:
1. Residency: The primary operator of the home business shall reside in the primary dwelling on the same lot
where the home business is located.
2. Employees: Three (3) employees who do not reside in the primary dwelling where the home business is located
may be employed by the home business. Employees who work exclusively outside the hosting residence shall
not be regulated by the employee standard. However, employees that arrive on site to pick up work trucks or
equipment shall be considered on-site employees.
C. Operations:
1. Prohibited Types: The home business shall not include walk-in retail sales.
2. Nuisance: The home business shall not generate offensive noise, vibration, smoke, odors, dust, heat, glare, or
electrical disturbances.
3. Hours: The hours of operation of the home business shall be no earlier than 6:00 AM and no later than 9:00
PM for anyone who does not reside on the premises and for any activity that involves the accessory structure
where the home business is primarily located. There are no limits on the hours of operation of the office
component of the home business.
D. Design:
1. Primary Structure:
a. The office component of the home business may be operated in the primary structure (i.e. the residence).
b. The home business shall not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the square footage of the primary structure.
c. There shall be no evidence of the home business from alterations to the exterior of the primary structure
(i.e. the residence). However, the character of the property may show minimal evidence of its business
use, including exterior storage of materials, vehicles, or equipment used in the home business.
2. Accessory Structure:
a. The home business shall be predominantly conducted within an accessory structure.
b. The home business may consume one hundred percent (100%) of the square footage of the accessory structure.
3. Parking and Loading:
a. Off-street parking and loading facilities beyond what is common for a residential structure or agricultural
use shall not be permitted.
b. There shall be no more than six (6) motor vehicles parked on the lot at any time.
c. The home business shall not receive more than five (5) deliveries per week. Deliveries shall be made primarily
between 8:00 AM and 8:00 PM by a vehicle not larger than a utility truck (e.g. FedEx or UPS delivery vehicles).
A home business shall not utilize scheduled pick-up by couriers in excess of five (5) time per week.
4. Exterior Storage:
a. Vehicles, trailers, and other equipment used in the home business shall be stored and/or parked in an
organized manner that is in an inconspicuous location.
b. All exterior storage shall be located behind the footprint of the primary structure and behind or beside the
accessory structure that is used for the home business.
c. All exterior storage shall be screened as to not be obvious from neighboring primary structures and from
any right-of-way.
5. Mechanical Equipment: The home business shall not require the installation of industrial-grade mechanical
equipment. Commercial-grade mechanical equipment shall be permitted.
6. Utility Service: The home business shall not require the installation of a sewer or water utility service beyond
what is common in a residential structure. Commercial-grade electrical services and exceeding typical phone,
cable, or internet services for residential property shall be permitted.
7. Sign Standards: One (1) wall sign shall be permitted on the front facade of the accessory structure but shall not
exceed ten (10) square feet in area, regardless of its distance from the street. The maximum height of the sign
shall be nine (9) feet. The sign shall not be lighted.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
5-30
Keeping of Animals Standards (KA) 5
5.32 KA-01: Agricultural Keeping of Animals Standards
This Keeping of Animals Standards (KA) section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Exotic Animals: None Permitted.
B. Farm Animals: Pastured farm animals are permitted as follows:
1. Minimum Lot Area: The minimum lot area to qualify for raising farm animals shall be five (5) acres.
2. Maximum Animal Units: Twenty (20) animal units per acre. Each type of animal is assigned an animal unit as
determined in the table below.
Animal Type Animal Unit Additional Standards
Cattle 10 animal units per cow
(2 per acre)
0.5 acres per animal shall be a fenced pasture with a minimum pasture of 1 acre
Horse 10 animal units per horse
(2 per acre)
0.5 acres per animal shall be a fenced pasture with a minimum pasture of 1 acre
Llama and Alpaca 6 animal units per Llama
or Alpaca
(3.33 per acre)
0.4 acres per animal shall be a fenced pasture with a minimum pasture of 1 acre
Goat and Sheep 5 animal units per goat
or sheep
(4 per acre)
0.1 acres per animal shall be fenced pasture with a minimum pasture of .5 acre
Swine 5 animal units per pig
(4 per acre)
0.1 acres per animal shall be a fenced containment area
Chicken 1 animal units per
chicken
(20 per acre)
required minimum acreage may include the entire lot's acreage. Absolute
maximum number of chickens is 50
Rabbit 1 animal units per rabbit
(20 per acre)
required minimum acreage may include the entire lot's acreage. Absolute
maximum number of rabbits is 50
5.33 KA-02: Residential Estate Keeping of Animals Standards
This Keeping of Animals Standards (KA) section applies to the following zoning district:
The following standards apply:
A. Exotic Animals: None permitted.
B. Farm Animals: Pastured farm animals are permitted as follows:
1. Minimum Lot Area: The minimum lot area to qualify for raising chickens shall be one-half (½) acre, and for
raising any other farm animal shall be one and one-half (1 ½) acres.
2. Limitation on Animal Types: Only the animal types listed in the table below are permitted.
3. Maximum Animal Units: Five (5) animal units per acre. Each type of animal is assigned an animal unit as
determined in the table below.
Animal Type Animal Unit Additional Standards
Cattle 10 animal units per cow
(1 per 2 acres)
0.5 acres per animal shall be a fenced pasture with a minimum pasture of 1 acre.
The absolute maximum number of cattle on any lot shall be 3.
Horse 10 animal units per horse
(1 per 2 acres)
0.5 acres per animal shall be a fenced pasture with a minimum pasture of 1 acre.
The absolute maximum number of horses on any lot shall be 3.
Llama and Alpaca 6 animal units per Llama
or Alpaca
(1 per 1.2 acre)
0.4 acres per animal shall be a fenced pasture with a minimum pasture of 1 acre.
The absolute maximum number of llama and/or alpaca on any lot shall be 5.
Goat (doe and wether only)
and Sheep
5 animal units per goat
or sheep
(1 per acre)
0.1 acres per animal shall be fenced pasture with a minimum pasture of .5 acre.
The absolute maximum number of goat and/or sheep on any lot shall be 6.
Swine 5 animal units per pig
(1 per acre)
0.1 acres per animal shall be a fenced containment area
Chicken (hens only) 1 animal units per
chicken
(5 per acre)
required minimum acreage may include the entire lot's acreage. The absolute
maximum number of chickens on any lot shall be 10, regardless of acreage.
Rabbit 1 animal units per rabbit
(5 per acre)
required minimum acreage may include the entire lot’s acreage. The absolute
maximum number of rabbits on any lot shall be 10, regardless of acreage.
Article
Article 5: Development Standards 5-31
Keeping of Animals Standards (KA) 5
5.34 KA-03: Lower Density Single-Family Residential Keeping of Animals Standards
This Keeping of Animals Standards (KA) section applies to the following zoning district:
The following standards apply:
A. Exotic Animals: None permitted.
B. Farm Animals: Farm animals are permitted as follows:
1. Minimum Lot Area: The minimum lot area to qualify for raising farm animals shall be one-third (⅓) acre.
2. Limitation on Animal Types: Only hens and rabbits are permitted.
3. Maximum Animal Units: Up to five (5) chickens shall be permitted per lot under one (1) acre, and up to seven
(7) chickens shall be permitted on lots one (1) acre or greater.
4. Containment: Best practices shall be used to contain chickens to the subject lot.
5. Location: Permitted farm animals shall only be permitted in the rear yard.
6. Setback: Chicken coops and rabbit hutches shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the subject lot’s
property line.
5.35 KA-04: Higher Density Single-Family Residential Keeping of Animals Standards
This Keeping of Animals Standards (KA) section applies to the following zoning district:
The following standards apply:
A. Exotic Animals: None permitted.
B. Farm Animals: Farm animals are permitted as follows:
1. Minimum Lot Area: The minimum lot area to qualify for raising farm animals shall be one-quarter (¼) acre.
2. Limitation on Animal Types: Only hens and rabbits are permitted.
3. Maximum Animal Units: Up to three (3) chickens shall be permitted per lot under one-half (½) acre, and up to
five (5) chickens shall be permitted on lots three-quarter (3/4) acre or greater.
4. Containment: Best practices shall be used to contain chickens to the subject lot.
5. Location: Permitted farm animals shall only be permitted in the rear yard.
6. Setback: Chicken coops and rabbit hutches shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the subject lot’s
property line.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
5-32
Landscaping Standards (LA) 5
5.36 LA-01: General Landscaping Standards
This Landscaping Standards (LA) section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Cross Reference:
1. Fence and Wall: See Fence and Wall Standards (FW) for other elements related to landscaping.
2. Vision Clearance Standards: See Vision Clearance Triangle Standards (VC) for limitations on where landscaping
can be planted.
3. Trees Preservation: Removal of trees or other vegetation within the right-of-way shall not occur without the
permission of the City Manager or City Council.
B. Applicability: The landscaping in this and the following sections shall be required when one (1) of the following
conditions is met:
1. New Primary Structure: An Improvement Location Permit for a new primary structure is obtained.
2. Additional Square Feet to Primary Structure: An Improvement Location Permit for an addition to the primary
structure that adds fifty percent (50%) or more square footage is obtained.
3. Additional Value to Primary Structure: An Improvement Location Permit for improvements to the primary
structure adds fifty percent (50%) or more value to the pre-improvement primary structure’s value.
C. Placement:
1. Easements: Landscape materials shall not be planted in rights-of-way or easements without permission from
the City and/or the easement holder. A tree’s canopy, however, may project over a right-of-way or any type of
easement.
2. Infrastructure, Street and Pedestrian Facility Interference:
a. Landscape materials shall be located to avoid future interference with overhead and underground utilities.
b. Landscape materials shall maintain at least five (5) feet of horizontal clearance from sewer and water lines.
c. Landscape materials shall not project partially or fully across sidewalks, pedestrian paths, and the like
except when it is above a height of six (6) feet.
d. Landscape materials shall not project partially or fully across street curbs or pavement edges, except when
it is above a height of nine (9) feet.
D. Enforcement: Required foundation plantings and yard plantings shall only be required to be installed for sixty
(60) days after Certificate of Occupancy. Required foundation plantings and yard plantings that die, are moved, or
otherwise altered thereafter are not subject to enforcement. Required parking lot plantings and bufferyard plantings
are essential elements of a project. Owners and their successors in title are responsible for the regular maintenance
of all parking lot and bufferyard landscaping materials such that they are kept in good and healthy condition.
Failure to maintain required parking lot landscaping and bufferyard plantings shall be subject to enforcement.
E. Tree Preservation Credits: Prior to development of a site, the preservation of an existing healthy tree shall constitute
an in-kind credit toward meeting the landscape standards in the Zoning Ordinance. A credit shall be granted
per tree that contributes to and similarly satisfies the intent of the landscape standards within the Zoning Ordinance.
1. Tree Preservation Plan: If tree preservation credits are desired, a Tree Preservation Plan shall be submitted
prior to any construction activity. The Tree Preservation Plan shall identify the trees intended to be saved and a
strategy for retaining and protecting the trees and their existing root systems during and after development.
2. Credits:
a. For each preserved deciduous tree with the caliper measurement of eight (8) inches or greater, credit for
three (3) trees shall be granted.
b. For each preserved evergreen tree eight (8) feet tall or greater, credit for one (1) tree shall be granted.
3. Drip Line Protection: Any tree intended to be protected shall have a construction fence or similar conspicuous
barrier installed around the tree at the drip line. Soil disturbance or compaction shall be prohibited within the
drip line. Storage of materials inside that fence shall be prohibited.
4. Unplanned Damage: Any tree intended to be saved that is removed or damaged shall no longer provide a
credit, and then new trees would have to be planted to meet the landscaping regulations.
Article
Article 5: Development Standards 5-33
Landscaping Standards (LA) 5
5.37 LA-02: Residential Lot Planting Standards
This Landscaping Standards (LA) section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Exemptions: A front facade on a single-family home that is 300 feet or more from a public street shall be exempt
from the foundation planting standards below.
B. Quantity: The quantities listed below are in addition to landscape materials that may be required by bufferyard
planting specified in other sections of the Landscaping Standards.
1. Foundation Plantings:
a. Primary structures with facades that face a street and that are eighty (80) lineal feet or less in width, shall
plant at least five (5) shrubs in front of the facade that faces the street. This provision applies to all facades
that face a street.
b. Facades of primary structure that face a street and are over eighty (80) lineal feet, shall plant one (1) shrub
for every ten (10) lineal feet of facade frontage on a street. This provision applies to all facades that face a
street.
2. Yard Plantings:
a. Lots 10,000 square feet or less shall plant one (1) canopy tree. Each tree shall have a caliper measurement
of at least two (2) inches at the time of planting.
b. Lots over 10,000 square feet, but less than 20,000 square feet, shall plant two (2) canopy trees. Each tree
shall have a caliper measurement of at least two (2) inches at the time of planting.
c. Lots over 21,780 square feet (i.e. ½ acre), but less than 43,560 square feet (i.e. 1 acre), shall plant three (3)
canopy trees. Each tree shall have a caliper measurement of at least two (2) inches at the time of planting.
d. Lots 43,560 square feet or more shall plant four (4) canopy trees, plus one (1) canopy tree for every
additional 15,000 square feet of lot size above 43,560 square feet. Each tree shall have a caliper measurement
of at least two (2) inches at the time of planting. Under no circumstances shall more than eight (8)
trees be required to meet this provision regardless of lot size.
C. Placement:
1. Foundation Plantings: Foundation plantings shall be planted along the foundation fronting the street and be
located within eight (8) feet of the building’s front facade.
2. Yard Plantings: Yard plantings shall be planted in the front yard and/or side yards. Only in circumstances
when required yard plantings will clearly not fit or would clearly be unhealthy for the tree shall they be permitted
to be placed in the rear yard.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
5-34
Landscaping Standards (LA) 5
5.38 LA-03: Non-Single-Family Residential Lot Planting Standards
This Landscaping Standards (LA) section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Exemption: Land zoned Urban Commercial shall be exempt from the below landscaping standards, but shall be
required to install at least one window box planter or stand alone planter on the subject property, or on the public
sidewalk. Under no circumstances shall a window box or stand alone planter create a pinch-point less than five (5)
feet in width for pedestrians.
B. Quantity: The quantities listed below are in addition to landscape materials that may be required by parking lot
planting and bufferyard planting specified in other sections of the Landscaping Standards.
1. Foundation Plantings:
a. Primary structures with facades that face a street and that are eighty (80) lineal feet or less in width, shall
plant at least five (5) shrubs in front of the facade that faces the street. This provision applies to all facades
that face a street.
b. Facades of primary structure that face a street and are over eighty (80) lineal feet, shall plant one (1) shrub
or ornamental tree for every sixteen (16) lineal feet of front facade length. This provision applies to all
facades that face a street.
2. Yard Plantings:
a. Lots 21,780 square feet (i.e. ½ acre) or less shall plant two (2) canopy trees. Each tree shall have a caliper
measurement of at least two (2) inches at the time of planting.
b. Lots over 21,780 square feet (i.e. ½ acre) shall plant two (2) canopy trees, plus one (1) canopy tree for
every additional 21,780 square feet (i.e. ½ acre) of lot size above 21,780 square feet. Each tree shall have a
caliper measurement of at least two (2) inches at the time of planting. Under no circumstances shall more
than ten (10) trees be required for this provision.
C. Placement:
1. Foundation Plantings: Foundation plantings shall be planted along the foundation fronting the street and be
located within ten (10) feet of the building’s facade.
2. Yard Plantings: Yard plantings shall be planted in the front and/or side yards. Only in circumstances when
required yard plantings will clearly not fit or would clearly be unhealthy for the tree shall they be permitted to
be placed in the rear yard.
Article
Article 5: Development Standards 5-35
Landscaping Standards (LA) 5
5.39 LA-04: Parking Lot Planting Standards
This Landscaping Standards (LA) section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Applicability: Any use that utilizes a surface parking lot with twenty (20) or more parking spaces shall be required
to meet the following parking lot planting requirements.
B. Quantity: The quantities listed below are in addition to landscape materials that may be required by lot planting,
and bufferyard planting specified in other sections of the Landscaping Standards.
1. Parking Lot Perimeter Plantings: Parking lots with twenty (20) or more spaces shall have one (1) deciduous
tree per fifty (50) feet of parking lot perimeter and one (1) shrub per twenty-five (25) feet of parking lot
perimeter. Each tree shall have a caliper measurement of at least one and one-half (1 ½) inches and each shrub
shall be at least a one and one-half (1 ½) gallon container.
2. Parking Lot Perimeter Planting Exemption: Portions of a parking lot’s perimeter that are immediately adjacent
to a primary structure on the same lot shall be exempt from the calculation for determining quantity.
3. Parking Lot Interior Plantings: Parking lots with fifty (50) or more parking spaces shall have two (2)
landscape islands, and one (1) additional island for every additional forty (40) parking spaces. Each landscape
island shall be at least 180 square feet in area. Each landscape island shall contain at least one (1) tree with a
caliper measurement of at least one and one-half (1 ½) inches at the time of planting. Parking lot landscape
islands shall be maintained with durable plant materials, decorative stone, and/or mulch. Gravel shall not
be permitted. If a parking lot only has one (1) aisle then any required landscape islands shall be installed as
landscape bumpouts.
C. Placement:
1. Parking Lot Perimeter Plantings: Parking lot perimeter plantings shall be installed within ten (10) feet of the
parking lot edge. Clustering and inconsistent spacing of perimeter plantings is encouraged to imitate natural
vegetation. Equal spacing of perimeter planting is discouraged. All plantable sides of a parking lot shall have
parking lot perimeter plantings installed in proportion to the lineal feet of parking lot perimeter per side.
2. Parking Lot Interior Plantings: Landscape islands (or bumpouts if a single aisle design) shall be distributed
logically throughout the parking lot.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
5-36
Landscaping Standards (LA) 5
5.40 LA-05: Bufferyard Planting Standards
This Landscaping Standards (LA) section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Project Applicability:
1. Conflicting Districts: Bufferyards shall be installed along side and rear property lines where conflicting zoning
districts meet, as indicated on Table 5-A. An “R” in Table 5-A indicates a bufferyard shall be required.
2. Responsibility: The owner of a property that is more intense shall be responsible for installing the bufferyard at
the time the property is developed or improved. However, in the event a property is down-zoned, resulting in a
conflict with a pre-existing and more intense use or zoning district, then the bufferyard shall be the responsibility
of the owner of the property that down-zoned the property.
B. Design:
1. Depth: Bufferyards shall be thirty (30) feet in depth along the entire segment of property line which is
contiguous to the lesser intense zoning district. A required buffer yard shall not count toward minimum setback
requirements.
2. Quantities: The following shall be the minimum requirements for landscape materials in the bufferyard:
a. One (1) evergreen tree per fifteen (15) feet of shared boundary with the conflicting zoning district shall be
planted, plus
b. One (1) canopy tree per thirty (30) feet of shared boundary with the conflicting zoning district shall be
planted.
3. Placement: Required landscape materials shall be installed such to effectively screen visibility between the
two properties; with special emphasis of blocking views from the primary structure on the lesser intense zoning
district, when applicable.
Table 5-A: Buffer Yards Required
PR AG RE R1 R2 R3 R4 M1 M2 M3 IS C1 C2 UC OC I1 I2 HI
PR R R R R
AG R R
RE R R R R R R R R R R R R R
R1 R R R R R R R R
R2 R R R R R R R R
R3 R R R R R R R R
R4 R R R R R R
M1 R R R R R R R
M2 R R R R R R R
M3 R R R R R R R
IS R R R R R R R R R
C1 R R R R R R R R R R
C2 R R R R R R R R R
UC R R
OC R R R R R R R R R R R R R
I1 R R R R R R R R R R
I2 R R R R R R R R R R R R R
HI R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R R
Article
Article 5: Development Standards 5-37
Lighting Standards (LT) 5
5.41 LT-01: Lighting Standards
This Lighting Standards (LT) section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Exemption: Any exterior light (or cumulatively. a fixture with more than one light element) that emits 1,200
lumens or less shall be exempt. All other exterior lights shall comply with the following regulations.
B. Rule to Prevent Circumvention: Any interior light that is clearly intended to provide light outside the building shall
be regulated as if it were an exterior light.
C. Cross Reference:
1. Parking Lot Lighting: See Parking Standards (PK) for parking lot lighting requirements.
2. Illumination of Signs: See Sign Standards (SI) for standards regarding the illumination of signs.
D. Consistency: All exterior lighting fixtures and poles within a single development shall be consistent in style, color,
and size.
1. Permitted:
a. Lighting Fixtures:
i. Single-Family Residential: A pole, wall, or ground mounted lighting fixture shall be a cutoff fixture,
and shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height above the ground.
ii. Non-Single-Family Residential: A pole, wall, or ground mounted lighting fixture shall be a full-cutoff
fixture to direct light where it is needed and shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in height.
iii. Sport Courts or Fields: Sport field and sport court lights may be semi-cutoff or cutoff fixtures, shall
not exceed ninety-eight (98) feet in height, and shall be turned off by 10:00 PM Sunday through
Thursday and 11:00 PM Friday through Saturday. The time limitations are only applicable to lights
above thirty (30) feet in height.
2. Prohibited: Non-cutoff fixtures and semi-cutoff fixtures shall not be permitted, except as permitted above.
3. Administrative Discretion: Special events may be granted permission by the Zoning Administrator when such
events are short term, serve the public good, and an exterior lighting need for the event can be demonstrated.
E. Glare: Light fixtures shall be shielded and/or located to prevent direct view of the lighting element causing a
safety risk to drivers, cyclist or pedestrians. Any structural part of the light fixture providing shielding shall be
permanently affixed.
F. Light Trespass: The maximum allowable light at a property line shall be five (5) lux, with the following exceptions:
1. Commercial or Institutional Zoning Districts: When the subject property is located within a commercial
or institutional zoning district and the adjacent property is also located within a commercial zoning district,
institutional zoning district, or an industrial zoning district, then the allowable light at the property line shall
be twenty (20) lux, but only along the sides of the property that are adjacent to those specified zoning districts.
However, no light shall cross an adjacent commercial or industrial property and reach a property line with a
residential district with greater than five (5) lux.
2. Industrial Zoning Districts: When the subject property is located within an industrial zoning district and the
adjacent property is also located within an industrial zoning district, then the allowable light at the property line
shall be thirty (30) lux, but only along the sides of the property that are adjacent to the specified zoning district.
However, no light shall cross an adjacent industrial property and reach a property line with a residential district
with greater than five (5) lux.
G. Measurement Rules: Measurements of exterior light readings shall be taken at any point along the property line of
the subject property with a light meter facing the center of the property, and at any height between ground level up
to thirty-five (35) feet above the ground.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
5-38
Loading Standards (LD) 5
5.42 LD-01: Loading Standards
This Loading Standards (LD) section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Project Applicability: The following loading standards only apply when a project electively involves one (1) or
more loading dock.
B. Design:
1. Location:
a. Loading docks shall be located so that they are not clearly visible from public streets. If such a location is
not possible, a loading dock visible from a public street shall be screened by solid structure walls and/or
effective landscape buffers.
b. Loading docks shall have adequate maneuvering area for trucks to enter and exit a loading dock.
Maneuvering areas shall be designed to accommodate semi tractor trailers, even if they are not intended to
be used by the current land owner.
c. Trucks shall not block rights-of-way, streets, alleys, aisles, or other internal circulation when maneuvering
into or while being docked at a loading dock.
2. Surface Materials: Loading docks shall be paved with asphalt or concrete.
3. Drainage: Loading docks shall be constructed to allow proper drainage away from the structure. Such
drainage shall not include piped systems that convey water directly into a sanitary sewer, storm sewer or
waterway. Filtration strips shall be required at the discharge point.
Article
Article 5: Development Standards 5-39
Lot Standards (LO) 5
5.43 LO-01: Lot Standards
This Lot Standards (LO) section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. General: An undeveloped parcel of land, including common area within a subdivision, shall be maintained in
perpetuity such that nuisance from the accumulation of trash debris, or junk, or proliferation of nuisance animals
does not occur. Further, natural or man made drainageways and drainage retention shall not obstructed or overgrown,
such that its function is impaired.
B. Applicability: If a lot standard does not appear on the two-page layout for a zoning district, then the standard does
not apply to that particular zoning district.
1. Minimum Dwelling Site Area: The minimum dwelling site area shall be per each two-page layout in Article 2:
Zoning Districts.
2. Minimum Dwelling Site Width: The minimum dwelling site width shall be per each two-page layout in Article
2: Zoning Districts.
3. Minimum Lot Area: The minimum lot area shall be per each two-page layout in Article 2: Zoning Districts.
4. Maximum Lot Area: The maximum lot area shall be per each two-page layout in Article 2: Zoning Districts.
5. Minimum Lot Width: The minimum lot width shall be per each two-page layout in Article 2: Zoning Districts.
C. Minimum Lot Frontage: The minimum lot frontage onto a public street shall be forty (40) feet or sixty percent
(60%) of the required minimum lot width, whichever is greater, excluding parcels zoned Urban Commercial (UC).
However, lots permitted to gain access from a cul-de-sac shall have a minimum lot frontage requirement of twentyfive
(25) feet.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
5-40
Outdoor Dining Standards (OD) 5
5.44 OD-01: Outdoor Dining Standards
This Outdoor Dining Standards (OD) section applies to the following district:
The following standards apply:
A. Prerequisite: Any establishment that wishes to have outdoor dining partially or fully within the right-of-way shall
first get approval from the legislative body of jurisdiction if a local street or the Texas Department of Transportation
if the right-of-way is managed by the State of Texas.
B. Applicability: Outdoor seating that is fully or partially in the public right-of-way. These regulations do not apply
to outdoor dining that is fully on private property associated with a permitted restaurant or eating establishment.
C. Permits: An Improvement Location Permit shall be required prior to establishing an outdoor dining area. A new
permit shall not be required if it is dismantled or otherwise not used year-round, unless changes to the previously
approved layout are made.
D. Operations: Generally, outdoor dining is permitted year-round from 6:00 AM until 11:00 PM Sunday through
Thursday and 6:00 AM until 12:00 midnight Friday through Saturday.
E. Design:
1. Circulation and Accessibility:
a. All outdoor dining areas shall maintain a minimum five (5) foot wide pedestrian clear-way on the public
sidewalk. The pedestrian clear-way shall be free of all obstacles including but not limited to tree wells,
fire hydrants, street light poles, and newspaper boxes. This pedestrian clear-way shall be maintained at all
times.
b. Outdoor dining areas shall not interfere with handicap accessibility, curbs, ramps, or driveways.
c. Portions of outdoor dining areas fronting a right-of-way may have a pedestrian barrier enclosing the
outdoor dining area except for ingress/egress into the establishment. The pedestrian barrier shall be:
i. Decorative metal,
ii. Sturdy, stable, and have sufficient weight so they cannot be blown over by wind, and
iii. At least thirty (30) inches in height.
d. Outdoor dining areas that do not front a right-of-way may have a pedestrian barrier. The pedestrian barrier
shall be:
i. Constructed of wood, composite wood, stone, masonry, wrought iron, decorative metal, or a combination
of these materials,
ii. Permanently attached to the ground, and
iii. At least thirty (30) inches in height.
e. No element of the outdoor dining area shall interfere with the primary pedestrian access into any structure.
2. General:
a. A sufficient number of trash containers shall be provided outdoors and be readily accessible to outdoor
diners. However, full service establishments with outdoor dining areas shall not be required to provide
outdoor trash containers.
b. There shall be no storage of food trays; carts; receptacles for dirty dishes or trays; carts for utensils; or
cooking appliances in any portion of the outdoor dining area.
c. There shall be no self-serve or server stations in any portion of the outdoor dining area.
3. Furniture:
a. To maintain a high quality environment, quality materials shall be used for outdoor dining areas. Outdoor
dining furniture and outdoor trash containers shall be iron, steel, aluminum, weather-resistant wood,
composite wood, or resin.
b. Umbrellas are permitted, but shall be flame retardant, color-fast fabric with anti-flyback features.
Article
Article 5: Development Standards 5-41
Outdoor Storage and Sales Standards (SS) 5
5.45 SS-01: General Outdoor Storage and Sales Standards
This Outdoor Storage and Sales Standards (SS) section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Prohibited Outdoor Storage: The outdoor storage of equipment, products, supplies, materials, machinery, building
materials, waste or scrap, pallets, and the like shall not be permitted, except during construction projects with valid
building permits.
B. Parked Vehicles: Parked vehicles shall not encroach into a right-of-way or block or impede an access easement,
sidewalk, or driving aisle. Parked vehicles shall also be parked on a durable surface, specifically, gravel, concrete
or asphalt
C. Parked or Stored Recreational Vehicles:
1. Quantity: No more than two (2) different types (e.g. a boat and camper) of recreational vehicle shall be stored
or parked outdoors on a lot at any one (1) time. However, this shall not limit recreational vehicles parked
inside an enclosed structure.
2. Outdoor Location:
a. If being stored, a recreational vehicle shall be located on a solid paved surface in a rear yard or side yard
of a lot such that no part of the recreational vehicle projects forward of the building line of the primary
structure.
b. A recreational vehicle shall be prohibited from being stored or parked on a vacant platted lot in a residential
subdivision.
c. A recreational vehicle may be parked on the street or on the driveway if the duration is seven (7) days or
less in any thirty day period of time.
d. A stored recreational vehicle shall also meet all accessory structure setback standards for the subject lot.
3. Use: At no time shall a stored recreational vehicle be occupied or used for living, sleeping, or home business
purposes.
D. Unconventional Storage: A mobile home, manufactured home, recreational vehicle, semi-tractor trailer, boat,
shipping container, box truck, motor vehicle, or trailer, in part or in whole, or of the like, shall not be located
outdoors and used for storage of equipment, products, supplies, materials, machinery, building materials, waste or
scrap, collections, or the like.
5.46 SS-02: Commercial Outdoor Storage Standards
This Outdoor Storage and Sales Standards (SS) section applies to the following zoning district:
The following standards apply:
A. Outdoor Storage:
1. Maximum Area: Outdoor storage shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the gross floor area of the primary
structure. Outdoor storage areas larger than ten percent (10%) but less than thirty percent (30%) shall be
subject to a Special Exception.
2. Minimum Front Yard Setback: Outdoor storage areas may not be forward of the front facade of the primary
structure on the lot. If there is no primary structure on the site, outdoor storage shall not be permitted.
3. Minimum Side and Rear Yard Setback:
a. Adjacent to Residential Use: The minimum side and rear yard setback shall be fifty (50) feet when
adjacent to any property that is zoned or used as residential.
b. All Other Uses: The minimum side and rear yard setback shall be twenty (20) feet for all other uses.
B. Outdoor Sales:
1. Maximum Area: Outdoor sales shall not exceed eighty percent (80%) of the lot area. Outdoor sales areas larger
than eighty percent (80%) and up to 100% shall be subject to a Special Exception.
2. Minimum Front Yard Setback: Outdoor sales areas shall have a front yard setback of twenty (20) feet.
3. Minimum Side and Rear Yard Setback:
a. Adjacent to Residential Use: The minimum side and rear yard setback shall be fifty (50) feet when
adjacent to any property that is zoned or used as residential.
b. All Other Uses: The minimum side and rear yard setback shall be fifteen (15) feet or the applicable
primary setback for the applicable zoning district, whichever is greater, for all other uses.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
5-42
Outdoor Storage and Sales Standards (SS) 5
5.47 SS-03: Industrial and High Impact Outdoor Storage Standards
This Outdoor Storage and Sales Standards (SS) section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Outdoor Storage: Outdoor storage of vehicles, equipment, products, supplies, materials, machinery, building
materials, waste or scrap, pallets, and the like shall be permitted if all of the following conditions are met.
1. Location: Outdoor storage areas may be located in the side yard or rear yard.
2. Setbacks: Outdoor storage adjacent to a right-of-way shall be set back a minimum of forty (40) feet. Outdoor
storage adjacent to residentially zoned property shall be set back 100 feet from the property line.
3. Screening: Outdoor storage shall be substantially screened by an opaque fence when adjacent to any property
zoned or used as residential. Said fence may be up to twelve (12) feet in height.
B. Outdoor Sales:
1. Maximum Area: Outdoor sales shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of the lot area. Outdoor sales areas larger
than forty percent (40%) and up to sixty percent (60%) shall be subject to a Special Exception.
2. Minimum Front Yard Setback: Outdoor sales areas shall have a front yard setback of thirty (30) feet.
3. Minimum Side and Rear Yard Setback:
a. Adjacent to Residential Use: The minimum side and rear yard setback shall be fifty (50) feet when
adjacent to any property that is zoned or used as residential.
b. All Other Uses: The minimum side and rear yard setback shall be fifteen (15) feet or the applicable
primary setback for the applicable zoning district, whichever is greater, for all other uses.
Article
Article 5: Development Standards 5-43
Parking Standards (PK) 5
5.48 PK-01: General Parking Standards
This Parking Standards (PK) section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Project Applicability: The parking standards shall apply to any of the following:
1. New Primary Structure: Construction of a new primary structure.
2. Major Change to Primary Structure Size: Increasing or decreasing the footprint of a primary structure by ten
percent (10%) or more of its size.
3. Second Change to Primary Structure Size: Increasing or decreasing the footprint of a primary structure which
has already been expanded or decreased one (1) time per Section 5.48(A)(2): Major Change to Primary
Structure Size.
4. Major Change in Parking Lot Size: Increasing or decreasing an existing parking lot by ten percent (10%) or
more of its existing size or number of paring spaces.
5. Second Change to Parking Lot Size: Increasing or decreasing a parking lot which has already been expanded
or decreased one (1) time per Section 5.48(A)(4): Major Change in Parking Lot Size.
B. Setbacks: All parking areas and aisles in non-single-family residential zoning districts shall comply with the accessory
structure setbacks found in Article 2: Zoning Districts for the subject lot’s zoning district. However, shared
parking lots shall be exempt from setbacks from the subject property line.
C. Cross Reference:
1. Temporary Sales in Parking Lots: For standards regarding temporary structures and temporary uses located in
existing parking lots or parking areas, see Temporary Use and Structure Standards (TU).
D. Permits: An Improvement Location Permit shall be required for new parking lots or the expansion of an existing
parking lot.
E. Design:
1. Materials: All off-street parking shall utilize a paved surface of concrete, asphalt, brick pavers, porous
concrete, or the like. Gravel, stone, rock, dirt, sand, or grass shall not be permitted as parking surfaces; except
as specifically permitted in another parking standard section.
2. Size of Parking Spaces: Each off-street parking space shall be a minimum of nine (9) feet wide and eighteen
(18) feet in length.
3. Right-of-way: Off-street parking spaces shall not be fully or partially in a right-of-way or access easement.
F. Prohibited: Parking of motor vehicles shall not be permitted on yards, lawns, or similar pervious-surfaced areas on
a lot.
G. Temporary Special Event Parking: When a special event (e.g. carnival, day camp) is permitted on grounds that do
not have adequate parking lots or other improved parking surface, then a parking management proposal from the
event coordinator or the property owner shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator. The parking management
proposal shall include: expected attendance, expected duration of the event, expected peaks in attendance if applicable,
description of the intended activities, impact of rain or inclement weather, and a site drawing. The site drawing
shall include: access management from the public street, areas to be used for the special event activities, areas to be
used for special event parking, areas prone to ponding or flooding, means for cars to get to parking spaces without
dead-ends, and any other information requested by the Zoning Administrator. The minimum number of parking
spaces shall be two (2) spaces per five (5) persons expected to attend at the peak time of the event. The Zoning
Administrator has full discretion to request more or allow less parking if evidence constitutes such a decision. If
expected parking cannot be properly and safely accommodated on-site, then the permit for the special event may be
revoked.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
5-44
Parking Standards (PK) 5
5.49 PK-02: Single-family Residential Parking Standards
This Parking Standards (PK) section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Quantity: A minimum of four (4) off-street parking spaces shall be required per dwelling unit.
B. Location:
1. Same Lot: The required parking spaces shall be located on the same lot as the dwelling unit.
2. Garages: The required parking spaces may include spaces within garages.
C. Material: T hedrive way sha llbea pa ve d
surface
of
concrete,
asphalt,
brick
pavers,
porous
concrete,
or
the
like.
If
a
garage
exists,therequiredpavedsurface
shall
be
a
“parking
apron”
contiguous
to
the
garage.
5.50
PK-03: Manufactured Home District Parking Standards
This
Parking
Standards
(PK)
section
applies
to
the
following
zoning
district:
The following standards apply:
A. Quantity: A minimum of three (3) off-street parking spaces shall be required per dwelling unit.
B. Location:
1. Same Lot: The required parking spaces shall be located on the same lot as the dwelling unit.
2. Garages: The required parking spaces may include spaces within garages.
C. Material: T hedrive way sha llbe apa ve d
surface
of
concrete,
asphalt,
brick
pavers,
porous
concrete,
or
the
like.
If
a
garage
exists,therequiredpavedsurface
shall
be
a
“parking
apron”
contiguous
to
the
garage.
5.51
PK-04: Multiple-family Residential Parking Standards
This
Parking
Standards
(PK)
section
applies
to
the
following
zoning
districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Quantity:
1. Tenants: A minimum of one and one-half (1½) parking spaces shall be required per dwelling unit; and
2. Visitors: One (1) parking space per every two (2) dwelling units shall be required for visitors.
B. Location:
1. Tenants: Tenant parking spaces shall be located on the same site as the dwelling unit. Tenant parking spaces
may include spaces within garages and/or carports.
2. Visitors: Visitor parking spaces shall be located in a common parking area or as angled parking along internal
private streets, but shall be proportionately assigned to areas within 200 feet of each multiple-family structure.
5.52 PK-05: Urban Commercial Parking Standards
This Parking Standards (PK) section applies to the following zoning district:
The following standards apply:
A. Quantity: One (1) off-street parking space shall be required per residential dwelling unit, when applicable.
B. Location: The off-street parking space required shall be a private parking space (i.e. not a public parking space)
within six hundred (600) feet of the entryway into the building to which the dwelling unit is located and may be
within a private, public or municipal-owned parking lot. However, such spaces shall not be on-street parking
spaces.
C. Restrictions: Off-street parking shall not be between a front facade of a primary structure and a street right-of-way.
Article
Article 5: Development Standards 5-45
Parking Standards (PK) 5
5.53 PK-06: Non-residential Parking Standards
This Parking Standards (PK) section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Quantity:
1. Minimum Number:
a. Off-street parking shall be required for all uses as shown in Table 5-B: Minimum Number Of Parking
Spaces Per Use. The land use is listed in the left column. The minimum number of parking spaces for
employees or tenants is the in middle column, and the minimum number of parking spaces for visitors,
clients, and customers is in the right column. The minimum number of parking spaces shall be the sum
of all three (3) columns. The numbers do not guarantee the quantity needed per use, only minimums are
expressed.
b. A development that combines two (2) or more uses or group of adjacent developments may provide a
shared parking area if the shared lot provides a minimum of seventy-five percent (75%) of the required
spaces for each use and the Zoning Administrator approves the shared parking area.
c. If a use is not clearly noted in Table 5-B: Minimum Number Of Parking Spaces Per Use, the Zoning
Administrator shall determine a use with similar employment and customer characteristics, therefore
determining the minimum number of parking spaces required.
2. Maximum Number: Developments that wish to have more than 130% of the minimum required number of
spaces shall be required to increase the required perimeter parking lot landscaping (see Section 5.39 Parking
Lot Planting Standards) by fifty percent (50%), and increase the number or size of the required parking lot
landscape islands or peninsulas by fifty percent (50%). Developments that wish to have more than 160% of the
minimum required number of spaces shall be required to double the required perimeter parking lot landscaping,
double the size of the required parking lot landscape islands and peninsulas. To install the additional plant
material, the perimeter parking lot landscaping may be planted within fifteen feet of the parking lot’s perimeter.
3. Bicycle Parking: Developments are encouraged to provide bicycle parking areas when appropriate. If
provided, bicycle parking areas shall be within sixty (60) feet of the main entryway into the primary structure
or be located inside the primary structure. A permanently anchored bike rack should be installed to provide the
opportunity for secure parking of bicycles.
4. Stacking Lanes: When present, the following ancillary features shall provide minimum, unobstructed stacking
lane space as indicated below to accommodate drop-off and pick-up.
a. ATM: 3 per ATM lane.
b. Bank drive-up: 2 per drive-up window lane.
c. Car wash: 4 per automated car wash, and 2 per self-serve wash bay, not including the wash bays.
d. Coffee shop drive-up: 6 spaces to the menu board and 2 spaces from the menu board to the payment
window.
e. Gas station pump lanes: 1 space for each side of a pump island, from both directions; 2 in total.
f. Day care center: 4.
g. Dry cleaner: 2.
h. Fast food restaurant drive-up: 6 spaces to the menu board and 2 spaces from the menu board to the
payment window.
i. Hotel check-in: 4
j. Place of worship per curb-side drop-off door: 4.
k. School: 15 spaces for Elementary, 10 spaces for Middle School, and 5 spaces for High School.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
5-46
Parking Standards (PK) 5
B. Design: Parking lots and parking areas shall meet the following criteria:
1. Aisle Widths: Minimum parking aisle widths shall be as follows:
a. Sixty-one degree (61º) to ninety degree (90º) angle spaces shall have a minimum twenty (20) feet wide
parking aisle for one-way traffic or minimum twenty-six (26) feet wide parking aisle for two-way traffic.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Min. 9 Feet
Min. 18 Feet
Min. 20 Feet
61-90 Degree Parking - One Way
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Min. 9 Feet
Min. 18 Feet
Min. 26 Feet
61-90 Degree Parking - Two Way
b. Forty-six degree (46º) to sixty degree (60º) angle spaces shall have a minimum of fifteen (15) feet wide
parking aisle for one-way traffic.
c. Up to forty-five degree (45º) angle spaces shall have a minimum twelve (12) feet wide parking aisle for
one-way traffic.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Min. 9 Feet
Min. 18 Feet
Min. 15 Feet Max. 22.25 Feet
46-60 Degree Parking - One Way
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Min. 9 Feet
Min. 18 Feet
Min. 12 Feet Max. 19.5 Feet
1-45 Degree Parking - One Way
2. Aisle Exits: All parking aisles shall have an outlet or turn around. Dead-end parking aisles shall not be
permitted.
3. Driving Lanes: Driving lanes in parking lots that provide access to parking aisles shall be defined by striping,
curbs, pavement markings, arrows, or parking spaces.
4. Maneuvering: Parking areas shall be designed to prevent vehicles from maneuvering in a public right-of-way.
5. Drainage: Parking areas shall be constructed to prevent ninety-five percent (95%) of a parking lots area from
ponding.
Article
Article 5: Development Standards 5-47
Parking Standards (PK) 5
6. Lighting:
a. All parking lots shall be illuminated during dark hours of the day through the the hours that the general public
and employees are present on site. The light fixtures and poles shall be consistent in color, size, height, and
design.
b. Parking lot lights shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height, measured from the bottom of the fixture
to the ground.
c. Parking lot lights shall meet all standards in Lighting Standards (LT).
7. Connectivity:
a. Connectivity to adjacent commercial, institutional, or industrial parking lots shall be required in at least
one (1) location. This may be accomplished through an aisle connector, frontage street, access street, or
stub to an adjacent undeveloped lot zoned for commercial, institutional, or industrial use. The Zoning
Administrator may waive this requirement when:
i. Pre-existing adjacent development will not feasibly allow such a connection,
ii. Topography or geologic feature will not feasibly allow such a connection,
iii. The resulting connection would create a pedestrian or vehicular hazard, or
iv. The neighboring use would substantially conflict with the proposed use on the subject lot.
8. Cart Corrals: Cart corrals shall be required for all retail businesses with more than twenty-thousand (20,000)
square feet of retail space; that provide shopping carts, or the like, to customers; and that allow those carts to
leave the building. Cart corrals shall be maintained in good condition.
a. Design: Cart corrals shall be made of permanent materials on three (3) sides creating an enclosure, and
shall be anchored to the parking lot surface. Cart corrals shall be constructed using one of the following
material options:
i. Metal railing at least thirty-six (36) inches in height with curbed landscape area on all three (3) sides.
The landscape area shall be a minimum of three (3) feet in width and contain a minimum of one (1)
shrub per four (4) feet of landscaping bed; or
ii. Brick masonry walls at least thirty-six (36) inches in height on all three (3) sides. The materials used
in the brick masonry wall shall complement the architecture of the principal structure. Bricks used in
the masonry wall shall not exceed six (6) inches by six (6) inches by twelve (12) inches in size.
b. Maximum Size: Cart containment area shall not exceed ten (10) feet in width and thirty-six (36) feet in
length.
c. Cumulative Containment: All cart corrals in combination shall be able to accommodate at least fifty
percent (50%) of the fleet of shopping carts available.
9. Reduced Parking Lot Area Standards: A parking lot may be built with fewer spaces than the required minimum
of vehicular spaces identified in Table 5-B: Minimum Number Of Parking Spaces Per Use if the following
standards are met.
a. Adequate and appropriate land area shall be land-banked such that the full number of parking spaces
required in Table 5-B: Minimum Number Of Parking Spaces Per Use can be built on-site at a later date,
should the need arise.
b. The property owner shall record a site plan that clearly denotes the land-banked area, and that identifies the
area as a “no-build area.” The no-build area shall only allow landscaping material and shall restrict any
septic system, structure, foundation, change in topography, or any other permanent or temporary structure
or alteration that would make it cost prohibitive or difficult to develop parking on that area in the future.
c. A design for a parking lot that accommodates all the required parking spaces and that abides by the
on-site drainage standards shall be submitted for review. The reduced parking lot shall be a portion of
the full parking lot. The full and partial parking lot designs shall be concurrently subject to the same
review process necessary to meet the applicable requirements of the Zoning Ordinance. If both designs
are approved, the smaller parking lot design may be constructed and the full parking lot design shall be
recorded.
d. Under no circumstances may the smaller parking lot design establish less than forty percent (40%) of the
minimum required parking spaces in Table 5-B: Minimum Number Of Parking Spaces Per Use.
e. If the smaller parking lot is regularly full, or periodically beyond capacity, the additional parking shall
be required to be constructed. Evidence of employees or guests parking on the grass or on-street shall
constitute a violation.
C. Material : A publi c park ’s parki ng l ot shall b e apav ed
surface
of
concrete ,
asphalt,
brick
pavers,
porous
concrete ,
or
the
like;stripedandpostedhandicapparkingspaces.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
5-48
Parking Standards (PK) 5
Table 5-B: Minimum Number Of Parking Spaces Per Use
Land Use
Parking Types
Employee/Tenant Parking Visitor/Client/Customer Parking
Commercial Uses
amusement park - 1 space per 3 persons of maximum capacity
animal grooming 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per 400 sq. ft. of GFA
auction (indoor) - 1 space per 3 persons of maximum capacity
auction (outdoor) - discretionary, as per zoning administrator study
automobile accessory installation 1 space per employee on the largest shift 2 spaces per bay
automobile body shop 1 space per employee on the largest shift 2 spaces per bay
automobile oil change facility 1 space per employee on the largest shift 2 spaces per bay
automobile repair/service station 1 space per employee on the largest shift 2 spaces per bay
automobile wash 1 space per employee on the largest shift 2 spaces per bay (full or self-service)
bakery - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. GFA
bank - 1 space per 250 sq. ft. GFA
bank/atm, drive-up - -
bank/atm, walk-up - 1 space per ATM
banquet hall - 1 space per 2.5 persons of maximum capacity
bar or tavern - 1 space per 2.5 persons of maximum capacity
barber or beauty shop - 3 spaces per chair
billiard hall - 1 space per 200 sq. ft. or 1 space per table, whichever results in the greater number of spaces
bowling alley - 4 spaces per lane
brew pub - 1 space per 2.5 persons of maximum capacity
broadcast studio 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of GFA
campground (primitive) - 1 per designated campsite
campground (serviced) - 1 space per designated campsite
car rental 2 spaces per employee on the largest shift -
catering service 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of GFA accessible to the public
check cashing service - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of GFA
club or lodge - 1 space per 3 persons of maximum capacity
coffee shop - 1 space per 2 seats
coin laundry - 1 space per 3 washing machines
computer service 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per 400 sq. ft. of GFA
copy center 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of GFA
counseling center 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per 200 sq. ft. of GFA , a minimum of 4 spaces
country club - 1 space per 3 persons of maximum seating capacity
crematory 1 space per employee on the largest shift 5 visitor spaces
day care, adult - 1 space per 4 persons of licensed capacity
day care, child - 1 space per 4 persons of licensed capacity
delicatessen - 1 space per 2 seats
design services 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor spaces
donation collection point 1 space per employee on the largest shift 5 visitor spaces
driving range - 2 spaces per 3 tee boxes
dry cleaning pickup and drop-off 3 spaces 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of GFA accessible to the public
express shipping center 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of GFA
exterminator 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per vehicle normally parked on the premises
farmers market - 1 space per 200 sq. ft. GFA
funeral home - 1 space per 4 chapel or parlor seats
gas station 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per 200 gross sq. ft. of convenience store space and 1 space per pump; plus, as per
Section 5.53(A)(4)(e)
golf course - 24 spaces per 9 holes
hotel 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per hotel unit
ice cream shop - 1 space per 3 seats
kennel - 1 space per 10 pet accommodation spaces
media rental - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. GFA
medical clinic - 4 spaces per treatment room
mobile device dealer - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. GFA
motel 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per unit
nail salon - 3 spaces per station
Article
Article 5: Development Standards 5-49
Parking Standards (PK) 5
Land Use
Parking Types
Employee/Tenant Parking Visitor/Client/Customer Parking
Commercial Uses
night club - 1 space per 2.5 persons of maximum capacity
office, construction trade 1 space per employee on the largest shift -
office, general - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. GFA
office, medical - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. GFA
paintball facility - 1 space per 3 persons of maximum capacity
parcel shipping 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of GFA accessible to the public
party facility 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per 3 persons of maximum capacity
pharmacy 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of GFA accessible to the public
photography studio - 3 spaces per studio
printing, commercial - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. GFA
race track - 1 space per 4 seats
real estate office - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. GFA
recreation center (indoor) - 1 space per 3 persons of maximum capacity
recreation center (outdoor) - 1 space per 3 persons of maximum capacity
recreational vehicle park 1.5 spaces per recreation vehicle site
rehabilitation clinic, medical - 4 spaces per treatment room
repair shop, electronics - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. GFA
repair shop, equipment - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. GFA
repair shop, general - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. GFA
restaurant 1 space for each employee of largest shift 1 space per 3 seats
restaurant, drive-in 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per ordering station
restaurant, drive-through only 1 space per employee on the largest shift -
restaurant with drive-up window - 1 space per 3 seats
RETAIL USES: See Page 5-53
seamstress/tailor - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. GFA
self-storage warehouse 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per 100 individual storage spaces
sexually oriented entertainment - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. GFA
shoe repair - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. GFA
shooting range (indoor) - 1 space per range lane
shooting range (outdoor) - 2 spaces per shooting station
software development 1 space per employee on the largest shift -
spa 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1.5 spaces per treatment room
sports field (indoor) 1 space per employee on the largest shift 20 spaces per field or court
sports field (outdoor) 1 space per employee on the largest shift 20 spaces per field or court
studio arts - 1 space per 3 persons of maximum capacity
swimming pool - 1 space per 75 sq. ft. of swimming pool area
tanning salon - 2 spaces per tanning room or station
tattoo/piercing parlor - 3 spaces per chair or studio
theater, movie (indoor) 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per 3 seats
theater, movie (outdoor) 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per maximum car capacity
title company - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. GFA
tool/equipment rental (indoor) 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per 500 sq. ft. of indoor showroom space; 1 space per 20 outdoor units (vehicles) displayed
tool/equipment rental (outdoor) 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per 500 sq. ft. of indoor showroom space; 1 space per 20 outdoor units (vehicles) displayed
trade or business school 1 space per teacher, staff, administrator 1 space per 3 students
travel agency - 4 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of GFA
veterinary clinic - 4 spaces per treatment room
veterinary hospital - 4 spaces per treatment room
water park 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per 3 persons of maximum capacity
wellness facility - 4 spaces per treatment room
winery 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per 300 sq. ft. GFA
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
5-50
Parking Standards (PK) 5
Land Use
Parking Types
Employee/Tenant Parking Visitor/Client/Customer Parking
Institutional Uses
aquarium 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per 3 persons of maximum capacity
arena - 3 spaces per seat
botanical gardens - 1 space per 3 persons of maximum capacity
cemetery or mausoleum - 1 space per 50 grave sites
child care institution 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per 3 persons client capacity
community center - 1 space per 3 persons of maximum capacity
emergency service training facility 1 space per teacher, staff, administrator 1 spaces per 2 students
fairground - discretionary, as per zoning administrator study
fire or rescue station 1 space per employee -
government office - 1 space per 500 gross sq. ft. or 1 per 2 seats in the largest assembly space capacity, whichever
results in the largest number
government operations facility 1 space per employee on the largest shift -
heliport, public - 1 space per 2 enplaning passengers
homeless shelter - 1 space per 3 persons of maximum capacity
hospice facility 1 space per employee on the largest shift 3 spaces per hospice suite
hospital - 2 spaces per 1 bed
information center 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of GFA accessible to the public
jail 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 8 cells
juvenile detention facility 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 8 cells
laundromat - 1 space per 2 machines (e.g. washers, dryers)
library - 1 space per 3 persons of maximum capacity
museum - 1 space per 2.5 persons of maximum capacity
nature center - 1 space per 3 persons of maximum capacity
nature preserve - 2 spaces
observatory - 5 spaces
park, public - 1 space per acre; 20 spaces per sport court or field; and 1 space per 75 sq. ft. of water surface of
pools
performing arts center - 1 space per 3 seats
place of worship - 3 spaces per 7 seats
police station 1 space per employee on the largest shift 2 visitor spaces
post office 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per 150 sq. ft. accessible to the public
prison 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 15 cells
recycling collection point 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per collection bin
rehabilitation clinic, drug 1 space per employee on the largest shift 4 spaces per treatment room or doctor
school (P-12), private 1 space per teacher, staff, administrator 3 spaces per elementary or junior high classroom; 1 space per 10 high school student capacity; and
1 space per 4 seats in the largest assembly space in the school (based on occupancy)
school (P-12), public 1 space per teacher, staff, administrator 3 spaces per elementary or junior high classroom; 1 space per 10 high school student capacity; and
1 space per 4 seats in the largest assembly space in the school (based on occupancy)
sewage treatment facility, public 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
shelter - 1 space per 3 persons of maximum capacity
sports stadium - 4 spaces per seat
university or college 1 space per teacher, staff, administrator 1 space per 5 students
water tower - 1 space per facility
water treatment facility, public - 1 space per facility
wellhead, public - 2 spaces
wildlife preserve - 5 spaces
zoo 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per 3 persons of maximum capacity
Article
Article 5: Development Standards 5-51
Parking Standards (PK) 5
Land Use
Parking Types
Employee/Tenant Parking Visitor/Client/Customer Parking
Industrial Uses
asphalt plant 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
assembly 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
bio-diesel production 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
bio-fuels production 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
blast furnace 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
bottling/canning 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
brewery 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
call center 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
chemical manufacturing 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
coke oven 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
composting facility 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
concrete plant 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
construction materials landfill 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
distribution facility 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
dry cleaning processing 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
electrical generation plant 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
explosives manufacturing 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
fireworks manufacturing 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
fleet vehicle storage 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
flex space - 1 visitor space per 350 sq. ft. GFA
food processing 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
freight terminal 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
fuel dealer 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
heavy equipment repair 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
heliport, private 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
incinerator 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
industrial park 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
junk yard 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
liquid fertilizer distribution 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
manufacturing, heavy 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
manufacturing, light 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
materials recycling (type 1) 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
materials recycling (type 2) 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
materials recycling (type 3) 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
meat processing 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
metal casting 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
mining, rock or sand 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
outdoor storage 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
petroleum processing 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
printer, industrial 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
produce terminal 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
rendering plant 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
research center, general 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
research center, medical 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
rock crushing 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
sanitary landfill/refuse dump 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
saw mill 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
scrap metal yard 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
sign fabrication 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
smelting 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
5-52
Parking Standards (PK) 5
Land Use
Parking Types
Employee/Tenant Parking Visitor/Client/Customer Parking
Industrial Uses
stone cutting 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
storage tanks (hazardous) 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
storage tanks (non-hazardous) 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
telecommunication facility 2 spaces -
testing lab, electronics 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
testing lab, materials 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
tool and die shop 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
transfer station 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
utility facility, above ground 1 space per facility -
warehouse 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
welding service 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
wholesale business 1.1 spaces per employee on the largest shift 1 visitor space per 10 employees
Land Use
Parking Types
Employee/Tenant Parking Visitor/Client/Customer Parking
Residential Uses
assisted living facility 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per 3 rooms
caretakers residence 1 space per dwelling unit -
dwelling, accessory 1 space per dwelling unit 1 visitor space
dwelling, upper floor (multiple-family) 1 space per dwelling unit -
dwelling, upper floor (1 unit) 1 space per dwelling unit -
hostel 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per 3 beds
nursing home 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per 3 rooms
Article
Article 5: Development Standards 5-53
Parking Standards (PK) 5
Land Use
Parking Types
Employee/Tenant Parking Visitor/Client/Customer Parking
Retail Uses
antique shop - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of GFA
apparel shop - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of GFA
art and craft supplies - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of GFA
art and craft gallery - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of GFA.
ATV sales 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per 500 sq. ft. of GFA; 1 space per 20 outdoor units (vehicles) displayed
automobile parts sales - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. GFA
automobile sales 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per 500 sq. ft. of indoor showroom space; 1 space per 20 outdoor units (vehicles) displayed
bakery - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of GFA
boat sales 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per 500 sq. ft. of indoor showroom space; 1 space per 20 outdoor units (vehicles) displayed
book store - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of GFA
boutique - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of GFA
building supply store, over 20,000 sq. ft. - 1 space per 500 sq. ft of GFA
building supply store, under 20,000 sq. ft. - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of GFA
construction vehicle sales 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per 500 sq. ft. of indoor showroom space; 1 space per 20 outdoor units (vehicles) displayed
convenience store - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of GFA
craft gallery - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of GFA
department store - 1 space per 500 sq. ft of GFA
drug store - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of GFA
fabric shop - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of GFA
farm equipment sales 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per 500 sq. ft. of indoor showroom space; 1 space per 20 outdoor units (equipment)
displayed
fireworks sales - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of GFA
flower shop - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of GFA
furniture store - 1 space per 500 sq. ft of GFA
garden shop - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of GFA
gift shop - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of GFA
grocery/supermarket, over 20,000 sq. ft. - 1 space per 350 sq. ft of GFA
grocery/supermarket, under 20,000 sq. ft. - 1 space per 250 sq. ft. of GFA
gun sales - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of GFA
home electronics/appliance, over 20,000
sq. ft.
- 1 space per 600 sq. ft of GFA
home electronics/appliance, under 20,000
sq. ft.
- 1 space per 400 sq. ft. of GFA
hunting store - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of GFA
jewelry store - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of GFA
liquor sales - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of GFA
manufactured home sales 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. of indoor showroom space; 1 space per 20 outdoor units (homes)
displayed
meat market - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of GFA
music/media shop - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of GFA
news dealer - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of GFA
office supply store, over 10,000 sq. ft. - 1 space per 500 sq. ft of GFA
office supply store, under 10,000 sq. ft. - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of GFA
party/event store, over 10,000 sq. ft. - 1 space per 500 sq. ft of GFA
party/event store, under 10,000 sq. ft. - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of GFA
pro shop - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of GFA
semi tractor-trailer sales 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per 500 sq. ft. of indoor showroom space; 1 space per 20 outdoor units (vehicles) displayed
sexually oriented retail - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of GFA
shoe store - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of GFA
sporting good store, over 10,000 sq. ft. - 1 space per 500 sq. ft of GFA
sporting goods, under 10,000 sq. ft. - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of GFA
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
5-54
Parking Standards (PK) 5
Land Use
Parking Types
Employee/Tenant Parking Visitor/Client/Customer Parking
Retail Uses
superstore - 1 space per 500 sq. ft of GFA
tool/equipment sales 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per 500 sq. ft. of indoor showroom space; 1 space per 20 outdoor units (vehicles) displayed
variety store (large) - 1 space per 500 sq. ft of GFA
variety store (large) - 1 space per 300 sq. ft of GFA
watercraft sales 1 space per employee on the largest shift 1 space per 500 sq. ft. of GFA; 1 space per 20 outdoor units (vehicles) displayed
Article
Article 5: Development Standards 5-55
Performance Standards (PF) 5
5.54 PF-01: General Performance Standards
This Performance Standards (PF) section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Cross Reference: See Environmental Standards (EN) for standards relating to air quality, water quality, and soil
quality.
B. Nuisance Characteristics: No use shall exhibit obnoxious characteristics to the extent that it constitutes a public
health risk, public safety risk, public nuisance, or diminishment of public welfare..
1. Electrical Disturbance: No use shall cause electrical disturbance adversely affecting radio, television or other
equipment in the vicinity.
2. Noise:
a. No use shall produce noise that, when measured at any lot line, exceeds 85 dBA from 6:00 AM to 9:00 PM
for a duration of three (3) hours or greater, continuously or cumulatively; or 60 dBA from 9:00 PM to 6:00
AM for a duration of thirty (30) minutes or greater, continuously or cumulatively.
b. Public safety sirens, generators, pumps, transformers, and the like used solely for public benefit or public
safety shall be exempt from this standard.
3. Vibration: No use shall cause vibrations or concussions detectable beyond the lot lines without the aid of
instruments ten (10) times or more in a given day, or for a duration of one (1) hour or more in any given day,
whichever is the most restrictive.
4. Odor: No use shall emit across the lot lines malodorous gas or odor in such quantity as to be detectable at any
point along the lot lines for a duration of two (2) hours or greater in any given day.
5. Heat and Glare: No use shall produce heat or glare in such a manner as to be a nuisance or create a hazard
noticeable from any point beyond the lot line.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
5-56
Public Improvement (PI) 5
5.55 PI-01: General Public Improvement Standards
This Public Improvement (PI) Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Project Applicability: Public improvements shall be required when one (1) of the following conditions is met:
1. New Primary Structure: An application for an Improvement Location Permit for a new primary structure is
obtained.
2. Addition to Primary Structure: An application for an Improvement Location Permit for an addition to the
primary structure that adds fifty percent (50%) or more square footage.
B. Exceptions:
1. Pre-existing Subdivisions: A pre-existing residential subdivision that was platted without sidewalks, or that
was not required to install sidewalks shall be exempt from Section 5.55(C)(2): Public Sidewalks.
C. Adequate Public Facilities: Development is permitted only if public streets, drainage facilities and public utilities
are adequate to serve the proposed development without public expenditure.
1. Public Streets:
a. The Planning and Zoning Commission may require a traffic and street impact study to determine a
proposed development’s impact on public streets. If required, the City of Henderson shall conduct or
procure services for a traffic and street impact study at the expense of the developer.
b. Based on the results of the study, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall make a determination
as to whether the public street(s) will sufficiently accommodate the increased traffic generated by the
development.
i. If the public street(s) is (are) determined to be insufficient, the Planning and Zoning Commission may
deny the development; or
ii. The Planning and Zoning Commission may approve the development with mitigating conditions. The
Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend off-site improvements such as acceleration lanes,
deceleration lanes, passing blisters, wider shoulders or approaches, frontage streets, shared driveways
or other improvements that will provide sufficient facilities for the increased traffic caused by the
proposed development.
2. Public Sidewalks: Public sidewalks shall be required along the edge of the right-of-way, except when the
Zoning Administrator determines the development is agricultural in nature or it is unlikely the public sidewalk
will provide connectivity to future trails or sidewalks within the next seven (7) years. New public sidewalks
shall be a minimum of five (5) feet in width along major collector streets and arterial streets, and four (4) feet
wide along all other streets. Sidewalks shall closely align with existing nearby sidewalks, generally be installed
one (1) foot inside the right-of-way, and meet or exceed the City of Henderson’s Construction Standards.
3. Drainage Facilities:
a. Cross Reference: Storm drainage collection, detention, and retention facilities shall comply with
Stormwater Management Regulations.
b. Storm drainage collection, detention, and retention facilities shall have sufficient capacity to serve the
development.
c. If existing storm drainage facilities are not sufficient to serve the development, the Planning and Zoning
Commission may deny the development or approve the development with mitigating conditions. The
Planning and Zoning Commission or their advisors, or other official board or body tasked with managing
stormwater, may recommend off-site improvements that will provide sufficient facilities for the increased
runoff from the proposed development.
D. Guarantees: When mitigating conditions are required, the developer may be required to post performance and
maintenance guarantees for such improvements.
Article
Article 5: Development Standards 5-57
Setback Standards (SB) 5
5.56 SB-01: Setback Standards
This Setback Standards (SB) section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Cross Reference:
1. Environmental Feature Setbacks: See Environmental Standards (EN) for setbacks from environmental
features.
2. Parking Setbacks: See Parking Standards (PK) for setbacks for parking lots and off-street parking spaces.
3. Sign Setbacks: See Sign Standards (SI) for setbacks for free standing signs.
4. Telecommunication Facility Setbacks: See Telecommunication Facility Standards (TC) for setbacks for
telecommunication facilities.
B. Exemption: A platted subdivision (i.e. secondary plat approval) established prior to January 1, 2017 shall be
regulated using the front yard setback, side yard setback, and rear yard setback standards that were in place at the
time of platting.
C. Applicability: If a setback standard does not appear on the two-page layout for a zoning district, then the standard
does not apply to that particular zoning district.
1. Minimum Front Yard Setback:
a. The minimum front yard setback shall be as described in the applicable two-page layout in Article 2:
Zoning Districts.
2. Minimum Side Yard Setback:
a. The minimum side yard setback shall be as described in the applicable two-page layout in Article 2:
Zoning Districts.
3. Minimum Rear Yard Setback:
a. The minimum rear yard setback shall be as described in the applicable two-page layout in Article 2: Zoning
Districts.
4. Minimum Dwelling Site Front Yard Setback: The minimum dwelling site front yard setback shall be per each
two-page layout in Article 2: Zoning Districts.
5. Minimum Dwelling Site Side Yard Setback: The minimum dwelling site side yard setback shall be per each
two-page layout in Article 2: Zoning Districts.
6. Minimum Dwelling Site Rear Yard Setback: The minimum dwelling site rear yard setback shall be per each
two-page layout in Article 2: Zoning Districts.
D. Measurement: Setbacks shall be measured from the property lines of the subject lot, except for properties which
front on a private street or shared driveway. If a property is located along a private street or shared driveway, the
front yard setback shall be measured from the edge of pavement of the private street plus ten (feet) to accommodate
drainage and a sidewalk, either now or in the future.
E. Administrative Discretion: The Zoning Administrator may allow a front yard setback, side yard setback, and/or
rear yard setback, for primary structures or accessory structures, to utilize established setback standards in special
circumstances (e.g. a historic narrow lot being used for infill development). Specifically, an established setback
may be permitted when the result of applying the applicable setbacks for the subject lot would result in discontinuity
with adjacent properties in the same zoning classification; or would substantially constrain development opportunity
on the lot in a way inconsistent with adjacent properties within the same zoning classification. The Zoning
Administrator may reject requests to utilize established setbacks if the proposed architecture, massing, or building
form is inconsistent with the adjacent architecture.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
5-58
Setback Standards (SB) 5
F. Exceptions: The following types of structures or features are exempt or partially exempt from the setback standard
as stated:
1. Wall Signs: Signs mounted on the side of a building shall be exempt from the setbacks in this section, but shall
not project more than twelve (12) inches from the facade.
2. Architectural Features: Cornices, eaves, sills, canopies, or similar features shall be permitted to encroach into
a required front, side, and/or rear yard setback not more than three (3) feet. However, these items shall never
be closer than three (3) feet to the property line. This provision does not apply to the UC District.
3. Awnings: Awnings shall be permitted to encroach into a required front yard, side yard, and/or rear yard setback
not more than four (4) feet, but shall not be closer than three (3) feet to the property line. This provision does
not apply to the UC District.
4. Chimneys: Chimneys that are 100% brick masonry shall be permitted to extend into a required setback not
more than two (2) feet. However, chimneys shall never be closer than three (3) feet to a property line. This
provision does not apply to the UC District.
5. Fences and Walls: Fences and walls shall be exempt from the setbacks in this section, but shall abide by the
fence and wall standards in Fence and Wall Standards (FW).
6. Driveways: A driveway from the primary structure or a detached garage to the public right-of-way shall be
exempt from the front yard setback standard where it connects to the street. Driveway setbacks from the side
yard property line shall be zero (0) feet.
7. Sidewalks: A sidewalk from the primary structure to the public right-of-way shall be exempt from setback
standards where it connects to the right-of-way. The side yard setback for sidewalks shall be the standard for
accessory structures.
8. Utility Poles, Lines, and Junction Boxes: Utility poles, lines, and junction boxes shall be exempt from the
setbacks in this section.
9. Trash Receptacles: Trash receptacles shall meet the setback standards in Trash Receptacle Standards (TR).
10. Stairs or Landing: Stairs or an open platform or landing which does not extend above the level of the floor
elevation of the first floor of the structure shall be permitted to extend into a required front, side, and/or rear
yard setback not more than four (4) feet. However, these items shall never be closer than three (3) feet to the
side property line or ten (10) feet to the front or rear property line.
11. Parking Lots: Parking lots shall meet the setback standards in the Parking Standards (PK).
12. Light Poles: Permitted outdoor lighting shall be placed at least ten (10) feet from any property line, regardless
of the applicable accessory structure setback.
13. Landscaping: Plant material and landscaping features shall be exempt from all setback standards, but trees or
shrubs shall not be planted within two (2) feet of a property line without permission from the adjacent property
owner.
Article
Article 5: Development Standards 5-59
Sewer and Water Standards (SW) 5
5.57 SW-01: Sewer and Water Standards
This Sewer and Water Standards (SW) section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Applicability: If the below listed sewer and water standard does not appear on the two-page layout for a zoning
district, then it does not apply to that particular zoning district.
B. Sanitary Sewer: Connection to a sanitary sewer utility shall be per each two-page layout in Article 2: Zoning
Districts. Details about the terminology on the two-page layouts is as follows.
1. Required: The term “required” shall mean a connection to the City of Henderson municipal sanitary sewer
system, or other utility providing said service, shall be required.
2. Required When Available: The term “required when available” with a multiplier shall mean a connection to
the City of Henderson municipal sanitary sewer system, or other utility providing said service, shall be required
when within cost basis of the multiplier listed. The multiplier rule is described below.
3. Multiplier Rule: The following describes the multiplier rule for sanitary sewer connections:
a. On-site System Cost: The applicant shall get an estimate for installing an on-site system (e.g. septic
system), or repairing or replacing an existing on-site system, as applicable, per all applicable laws.
b. Off-site Connection Cost: The applicant shall get an estimate to connect to the nearest (or lesser cost
option if it is not the nearest) public or private sanitary sewer utility with adequate capacity. The estimate
should include materials, labor, equipment, and tap-in fees for the connection to a public or private
utility, including, any costs associated with the required abandonment of the existing septic system. A
single, legitimate bid from a reputable and qualified contractor shall be sufficient. When a sewer line is a
significant distance away or for another technical reason is clearly many times more expensive, a simple
letter from a reputable and qualified contractor or civil engineer describing why the cost would be well in
excess of the multiplier rule will suffice. Additionally, the Zoning Administrator may recognize in writing
that connecting to a sewer line would be well in excess of the multiplier rule and waive the requirement for
the calculations to be conducted or a letter be submitted.
c. Determining the Requirement: Multiply the cost of installing an on-site system (e.g. septic system) by the
assigned multiplier. If the cost of connecting to the public or private utility is less, then the improvement is
required to connect to the utility’s lines. If the cost of connecting to a public or private utility is more than
the on-site system cost times the multiplier, then an on-site system may be installed.
d. Multiple Dwelling Units: For developments with two or more lots, dwelling units, or primary structures,
the cumulative cost of installing on-site systems for each lot, dwelling unit, or primary structure shall be
used in comparison to connecting the entire project to a private or public sanitary sewer utility.
4. Subsidy: The City of Henderson or the applicable utility company may bridge the financial gap on a project
when the property owner is not required to connect to the utility using the multiplier rule. The financial
contribution only needs to lower the cost of the connection to the sanitary sewer utility to an amount that makes
the total project cost fall within the multiplier rule.
C. Water: Connection to a water utility shall be per each two-page layout in Article 2: Zoning Districts. Details about
the terminology on the two-page layouts is as follows.
1. Required: When water is stated as “required” a connection to the City of Henderson municipal water system,
or other utility providing said service, shall be required.
2. Required When Available: The term “required when available” with a multiplier shall mean a connection to
the City of Henderson municipal water system, or other utility providing said service, shall be required when
within cost basis of the multiplier listed. The multiplier rule is as described above, but shall be based on the
cost of a private well and the cost of connecting to the nearest or cheapest way to connect to the water utility..
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
5-60
Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Standards (SX) 5
5.58 SX-01: Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Standards
This Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Standards (SX) section applies to the following zoning district:
The following standards apply:
A. Applicability: Any existing primary structure that changes use to a sexually oriented entertainment business, or any
new development where a sexually oriented entertainment business is to be established shall meet the standards in
Section 5.58: Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Standards.
B. Permits: Sexually oriented entertainment businesses shall obtain an Improvement Location Permit prior to establishing
the business.
C. Measurement Rules: Separation distances shall be measured in a straight line from the closest points between
property lines, without regard to intervening structures or objects.
D. Separation: Sexually oriented entertainment businesses shall have the following separation requirements:
1. Similar Businesses: Sexually oriented entertainment businesses shall be separated from other sexually oriented
entertainment businesses by at least 1,000 feet.
2. Residential Districts: Sexually oriented entertainment businesses shall be separated from residential zoning
districts by at least 1,000 feet.
3. Public Gathering Places: Sexually oriented entertainment businesses shall be separated from public gathering
places such as schools, parks, playgrounds, libraries, places of worship, day-care centers, and public structures
by at least 750 feet.
E. Relief from Separation Standards: If the separation standards in Section 5.58(D): Separation result in no C2
District zoned properties, then the Zoning Administrator shall determine three (3) sites that best meet the intent of
the separation requirements, and that are zoned C2 District. If those sites are currently not available for purchase,
the owner of the sexually oriented entertainment business may seek a use variance from the Board of Adjustments
for another site that meets the intent of the separation standards.
F. Design:
1. Parking:
a. Parking lots shall not accommodate semi tractor trailers.
b. Overnight parking shall not be permitted.
Article
Article 5: Development Standards 5-61
Sign Standards Section (SI) 5
5.59 SI-01: General Sign Standards
This Sign Standards Section (SI) applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Applicability: The following standards only apply to commercial messages. Text, symbols, colors, shapes, and
logos use for communicating information shall not be considered a commercial message unless they’re intent is to
promote, advertise, identify or brand a business, institution, organization, or individual for monetary gain, growth in
membership, improvement in mission, or similar gains.
B. Cross Reference:
1. Home Businesses: Signs associated with a home business shall be exempt from the Sign Standards section, but
shall comply with the Home Businesses Standards (HB).
2. Lighting Standards: When illumination of signs is permitted by this Sign Standards section, all illumination
and lighting associated with signs shall meet the glare, light trespass, and any other applicable regulations in
the Lighting Standards (LT) section.
C. Freedom of Speech: Any permanent sign or standard temporary sign permitted by the Sign Standards may be used
for freedom of speech (i.e. the expression of opinions not including commercial messages) for any length of time.
D. Permits:
1. Improvement Location Permit: An Improvement Location Permit shall be required for all signs located,
erected, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, moved, or altered, except as follows:
a. Signs undergoing periodic or routine maintenance shall be allowed without a permit; including: painting,
repainting, cleaning and changing burnt-out light elements. Maintenance does not include increasing the
intensity or brightness of internal or external lighting.
b. Changing of the sign’s message (i.e. content) shall be allowed without a permit; assuming the sign area,
projection from a wall face, dimension, materials (e.g. changing a non-electronic sign to a LED sign), and
other “time, place, and manner” standards are not changed.
c. Standard Temporary Signs shall be allowed without a permit, as may be permitted in each zoning district;
but shall still comply with all applicable standards.
d. Permitted and legally complying temporary signs that are replaced due to storms, mowing, or site maintenance,
and when intentionally removed and replaced at a later time (e.g. at the end of business hours and
replaced at the beginning of business hours) shall be allowed without a permit.
e. Permanent and legally complying signs damaged by accident or mother nature shall be allowed without a
permit; when replaced with an predominantly identical sign.
E. Interim Sign:
1. Qualification: Any new businesses may install an interim sign if their permanent sign is not able to be installed
on or before the official occupancy date; or any business that has lost a pre-existing, legally established permanent
sign due to fire, automobile accident, or act of mother nature may install an interim sign while a permanent
sign is being fabricated to replace the lost sign. Under all circumstances, the following conditions shall be met:
a. Proposal for Interim Sign: The property owner shall make a request for an interim sign, including the
material, location, anchoring method, proposed installation date, and other information that may be
requested by the Zoning Administrator.
b. Approval of Permanent Signs: A sign permit for one (1) or more permanent signs shall be fully approved
prior to any interim signs being installed. If the permanent sign was pre-existing, evidence that the sign
was legally established may need to be confirmed before installing the interim sign.
c. Proof of Purchase: Proof shall be provided to the Zoning Administrator that the approved permanent sign
has been officially commissioned or purchased from a sign manufacturer.
d. Size and Height: An interim sign shall not be larger in sign area or mounted higher than the corresponding
approved permanent sign.
e. Location: The interim sign shall generally be in the general location as the approved permanent sign if
possible.
f. Quantity: No more than one (1) interim sign per approved (or lost) permanent sign shall be installed, with
a maximum of two (2) interim signs in total.
g. Time Limitation: An interim sign may be in place for up to ninety (90) days. If evidence that unforeseen
circumstances has prevented the permanent sign from being installed, the Zoning Administrator can grant
up to an additional one-time forty-five (45) day extension.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
5-62
Sign Standards Section (SI) 5
h. Building Inspector: An inspection of the interim sign is not required. However, if the Building Official
becomes aware of any safety concerns, those concerns shall be addressed to his/her satisfaction within a
time-frame consistent with the safety concern.
i. Maintenance: The interim sign shall be kept in good repair.
j. Removal: The interim sign shall be removed upon delivery and installation of the permanent sign(s).
F. Changeable Copy: If changeable copy is allowed and used on a site, it shall be an integrated component of the sign
and shall only include cyclical or static messages, regardless if the sign is capable of flashing messages.
G. Exempt Devices: The following devices, as described, are not considered commercial messages and shall therefore
be exempt from the Sign Standards because they are not “signs”. However, the below described exemptions shall
still meet Vision Clearance Standards (VC) and other non-sign standards in the Zoning Ordinance when applicable.
Devices that do not meet the below description and that are used as part of, or fully as, a commercial message shall
be regulated as a commercial sign.
1. Flags: A flag or insignia of any nation, state, municipality, or other political unit is exempt. However, when
a flag or insignia of any nation, state, municipality, or other political unit is used as an integral component of a
commercial message, it shall comply with the sign standards for the applicable zoning district. For example, an
American Flag integrated into a corporation’s brand or logo.
2. Political Signs: Political campaign signs shall be exempt.
3. Public Safety Message: Posting of a public safety or privacy message by a private property owner shall be
exempt, provided that no individual posting exceeds four (4) square feet. Examples include “Beware of Dog,”
“Private Property,” “No Trespassing,” “Weight Limit,” “Video Surveillance,” and “No Turnaround.”
4. Operational Limitations or Information: Posting of operational limitations and information shall be exempt,
provided the letters are not greater than twelve (12) inches in height. Examples include hours of operation,
admittance requirements, “Employees Only,” “Men,” “Women,” “Visitor Parking,” and “No deliveries.”
5. Indoor Commercial Messages: Commercial messages displayed inside a building that cannot be viewed legibly
by pedestrians or drivers outside the building shall be exempt. Examples include a commercial message on a
scoreboard inside a gymnasium, a wall clock inside a restaurant with a branded logo, or product signs hanging
or mounted on the wall of a retail store.
6. Miniscule Commercial Messages: Miniscule commercial messages displayed on or near a primary entrance,
on a gas pump, or other incidental location on a site shall be exempt, provided that the area of each miniscule
commercial message does not exceed thirty (30) square inches and the cumulative area of all miniscule
commercial messages does not exceed two (2) square feet per primary entrance, or one (1) square foot per
gas pump. Examples include “Visa,” “Master Card,” “Diner’s Club,” “ATM Inside,” and corporate logos of
products sold inside.
7. Price Tags: A price tag in conjunction with outdoor merchandise shall not be considered a sign if less than
twenty (20) square inches.
8. Addresses: Posting of a street address on a mailbox, building, or other prominent location to provide adequate
property identification shall be exempt. However, when a street address is more than four times (4X) the
minimum required address size required by the International Fire Code as amended and as recognized by the
City, or integrates graphics that convey a commercial message, then it shall be regulated as a commercial sign.
For example, an address posted on a sign illustrated with bottles of wine for a wine shop would not be exempt.
Property Address
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Article
Article 5: Development Standards 5-63
Sign Standards Section (SI) 5
9. Residential Nameplate: Posting of the occupant’s name in a single-family residential districts when the text is
not greater than twelve (12) inches in height is exempt (e.g. “Smith Family” or “Jones Place”).
10. Property Name: A name given to a property and posted by the owners, and that does not exceed six (6) square
feet in sign area is exempt. For example “Dream Cottage” or “Wild Wind Farm.” However, if the sign is
related to the property’s use for identification for a commercial operation (e.g. a home business, bed and
breakfast, vacation rental, or has agricultural tourism) the property name sign shall not be exempt.
11. Required Postings: Messages required by a State agency, State law, federal agency, or federal law shall be
exempt, provided the area of the message and height of posting are consistent with the requirement by the
agency or by law.
12. Historical Identification: Words and numbers used to describe a historic building, structure, site, landmark or
event as part of a designation by a Federal, State or local governments shall be exempt.
13. Integral Signs: Name of building, date of erection, monumental citations, commemorative tablets and the like
when carved into stone, concrete or similar material or made of bronze, aluminum, or other permanent type
construction and made an integral part of the structure.
14. Religious Symbols: Religious symbols (e.g. Cross, Star of David, or Star and Crescent) incorporated into
a building’s architecture, places of worship site, or location occupied by a religious organizations shall be
exempt. Logos, brands, or slogans used by religious organizations shall not be considered religious symbols.
15. Murals: A mural shall be exempt, provided it conveys no commercial message. Murals with a commercial
message shall be regulated as a wall sign.
16. Commercial Messages on a Permanent Display Board: A commercial message attached to and contained
within the sign area of a legally established permanent display board sign shall be exempt.
17. Limited Audience: Any advertising or sponsor signs mounted on an outdoor scoreboard, dugout, press box,
fence, bleachers, concession stand, restroom, or similar structures used in conjunction with a legally-established
arena, amphitheater, sport field, sport court, or similar shall be exempt if designed to be predominantly seen by
the audience. However, if the advertising is visible from a public street and contains a commercial message
intended for the non-attending public, it shall comply with the sign standards for the applicable zoning district.
18. Directional Devices: Directional devices used to mark the entrance or exit of an establishment for vehicle
safety and information purposes that does not exceed the following limitations shall be exempt:
a. Applicable Zoning Districts: The commercial, M2, M3, institutional, parks and recreation, or industrial
zoning districts may utilize directional devices.
b. Device Area: Directional devices shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area per face.
c. Device Height: Directional devices shall not exceed three (3) feet in height.
d. Quantity: Two (2) directional devices may be installed per street frontage in which the property has legally
established curb cuts; with an absolute maximum of four (4).
e. Location: Directional devices shall be subject to Section 5.59(J): Prohibited Locations.
f. Message: Directional devices shall either contain the words “In,” “Enter,” “Entrance,” “Out,” “Exit,”
“Do Not Enter,” or similar; and/or have directional arrows indicating desired traffic movement. Further,
directional devices may include corporate colors or a corporate logo as long as the corporate logo does not
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the device area.
19. Wayfinding System Signs: Wayfinding systems may be permitted for large developments that encompass
multiple lots or multiple buildings, provided the following conditions are met.
a. Wayfinding systems shall be used to direct vehicular and pedestrian traffic to specific neighborhood,
amenity, or other major destinations.
b. Wayfinding systems shall be required to have signs of consistent size, scale, and appearance.
c. Wayfinding signs shall not exceed six (6) feet in height and two (2) square feet in sign area.
d. Proposals for wayfinding systems shall be reviewed and approved at the discretion of the Zoning
Administrator. The Zoning Administrator may take into account the need for the wayfinding system, the
size and complexity of the development, quantity and location of signs, number of entrances and exits, and
the appearance of signs.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
5-64
Sign Standards Section (SI) 5
H. Prohibited Signs: The following type of signs shall be prohibited unless clearly permitted by a section in this
Zoning Ordinance or by variance.
1. Animated: Signs that gain attention through animation shall not be permitted, including any of the following.
a. Signs that utilize any motion picture or animation from an LED display, LED projector, film projector,
video projector, or the like.
b. Signs that emit audible sound, odor, or visible matter.
c. Signs that have blinking, flashing, scrolling, or fluttering lights; or changing light intensity, brightness, or
color; or that give such illusion.
2. Message-casting Signs: Signs that “shoot” laser light, “cast” intense or visible light beams, or cast laser or
projector-created light images onto the ground, sidewalk, wall or other visible surface.
3. Vehicle Signs: Vehicles with signs greater than eight (8) square feet in cumulative area shall not be permitted
to be parked for the primary purpose of displaying the sign. Prohibited vehicle signs shall not be construed to
include vehicles with signs on them that:
a. Are lawfully parked overnight or during non-business hours in a discreet location.
b. Are making deliveries, sales calls, transporting persons or property, or conducting customary practices
relating to operating the business.
c. Are used in conjunction with customary construction operations on a construction site.
4. Sky-casting Lights: Strobe lights, search lights, beacons, or any light that rapidly flashes, projects light in
visible beams skyward, or projects light horizontally shall not be permitted regardless if the light is part of or
independent of a sign.
5. Signs with Moving or Movable Parts: Signs or devices with visibly moving parts shall not be permitted.
6. Driver Hazard: Signs that emulate emergency service vehicles or common traffic signs or signals shall not be
permitted. For example, a sign that uses “Stop,” “Slow,” “Caution,” “Danger,” “Warning,” or similar words
mounted on a sign using similar shape, scale, color, and location resulting in driver confusion or otherwise
creating an unsafe condition.
7. Non-Permitted: Any sign type not specifically permitted or that isn’t clearly meeting the intent of the Sign
Standards shall be prohibited.
I. Prohibited Content: The following content shall not be displayed on a sign.
1. Fighting Words: Signs that contain “fighting words” as defined by the “fighting words doctrine” established by
the US Supreme Court in Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire (1942) shall not be permitted on any sign;
2. Obscene, Indecent or Profane Content: Obscene, indecent or profane content not permitted on broadcast
television or radio during 6:00 AM to 10:00 PM, according to the Obscene, Indecent and Profane Broadcasts
Guide published by the FCC, or similar guidelines upheld by Federal Court, shall not be permitted on any sign;
3. Obscene or Profane Words or Violent Images: Content that would result in an NC-17 rating by the Motion
Picture Association of America shall not be permitted on any sign; and
4. Pornographic Images: Content determined to be “internet pornography” or otherwise considered to be adult
material by the Children’s Internet Protection Act (CIPA) of 2000, as upheld by the US Supreme Court, shall
not be permitted on any sign.
Article
Article 5: Development Standards 5-65
Sign Standards Section (SI) 5
J. Prohibited Locations: Signs regardless of type, shall not be permitted in any of the following locations, except as
may be expressly permitted elsewhere in this Zoning Ordinance:
1. Vision Clearance: Signs shall not be permitted in areas prohibited by Vision Clearance Standards (VC).
2. Right-of-way: Signs shall not be permitted in any right-of-way unless authorized by the City Council, except as
previously authorized by City Council and allowed in Section 5.64: Urban Commercial Sign Standards.
3. Poles: Signs shall not be permitted on any traffic control device, street sign, construction sign, or utility pole.
4. Fences: Signs shall not be permitted on any fence, except as exempted on sport facility fences in Section
5.59(G)(17): Limited Audience.
5. Trees: Signs shall not be permitted to be attached to any tree, shrub, or other natural object.
6. Benches: Signs shall not be permitted to be attached to or integrated into any bench in the public right-of-way
or private sidewalk.
7. Towers: Signs shall not be permitted to be attached to or integrated into any telecommunication antennae,
telecommunication tower, television antennae, or similar towers.
8. Roofs: Signs shall not be permitted to be placed on, set upon, attached to, or be perceived to be attached to the
roof of a structure. This provision includes signs integrated into the roofing material.
9. Fire Safety Devices: Signs shall not be permitted on a fire escape or in a manner that substantially blocks view
from the right-of-way to a fire door.
10. Obstructs Circulation: Signs that obstruct or interfere with safe internal or external movement of vehicular,
bicycle or pedestrian traffic shall not be permitted.
11. Artificial Elevation: Signs shall not be permitted to be installed on a berm, mound, or otherwise raised portion
of the site unless the sign height is measured from the elevation at the base of the berm, mound, or raised
portion of the site.
12. Wall Signs over Windows: No permanent wall sign shall be installed such that it covers windows in the
building.
K. Maintenance: All signs and sign components shall be kept in good repair, in safe condition, and working condition.
If landscaping is required around the base of a sign, it shall be maintained in living condition, consistent in
character with the approval, and not allowed to get overgrown. Landscaping shall be designed and maintained to be
in compliance with the visibility restrictions for signs.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
5-66
Sign Standards (SI) 5
5.60 SI-02: Agricultural Sign Standards
This Sign Standards (SI) section applies to the following zoning district:
The following standards apply:
A. Permitted Sign Types
Sign Types Specific Regulations Permit Required
Wall Sign See Section 5.60(C): Wall Sign Yes
Yard Sign See Section 5.60(D): Yard Sign Yes
Standard Temporary Sign See Section 5.60(E): Standard Temporary Sign Yes
Special Temporary Sign See Section 5.60(F): Special Temporary Sign Yes
Temporary Marker Sign See Section 5.60(G): Temporary Marker Sign Yes
B. Cumulative Cap for All Permanent Signs
Regulation Category Sign Regulation
The maximum sign area of all
permitted permanent signs in
combination on a site shall be:
40 square feet
C. Wall Sign
Regulation Category Sign Regulation
Maximum Quantity 1
Maximum Sign Area 25 square feet
Cumulative Cap Counts toward cumulative cap
Maximum Projection From Building 4 inches
Illumination Wall signs shall not be illuminated
D. Yard Sign
Regulation Category Sign Regulation
Maximum Quantity 1
Maximum Sign Area 15 square feet
Cumulative Cap Counts toward cumulative cap
Changeable Copy not permitted
Height above Ground 4 feet maximum
Location At least 10 feet from any proposed right-of-way, edge of pavement, or property line; whichever is greater
Illumination Yard signs shall not be illuminated
Article
Article 5: Development Standards 5-67
Sign Standards (SI) 5
E. Standard Temporary Signs
Regulation Category Sign Regulation
Permitted Temporary Sign Types Yard signs
Maximum Quantity 2 per lot as long as the 2 signs are at least 80 feet apart from one another
Maximum Sign Area 9 square feet for single-sided signs, or 9 square feet per side for double-sided signs
Height Above Ground 5 feet maximum
Location At least 5 feet from any proposed right-of-way, edge of pavement, or property line; whichever is greater
Illumination Standard temporary signs shall not be illuminated
Duration A standard temporary sign may stay in place for the duration of the temporary event. The standard temporary sign
may be put in place up to 5 days prior to the temporary event. All standard temporary signs shall be taken down
within 7 days after the standard temporary sign's purpose no longer exists
F. Special Temporary Signs
Regulation Category Sign Regulation
Permitted Temporary Sign Forms Yard signs, banners, or portable A-frame signs
Maximum Quantity 1 per lot with a primary structure or temporary use
Maximum Sign Area 32 square feet
Height Above Ground 15 feet maximum
Location At least 10 feet from any edge of pavement or property line; whichever is greater
Illumination Special temporary signs shall not be illuminated
Duration A special temporary sign may stay in place for 7 continuous days, but no lot shall have a special temporary signs
for more than 14 total days in any calendar year
G. Temporary Marker Signs
Regulation Category Sign Regulation
Prerequisite Temporary marker signs shall only be permitted on a lot with planted crops
Permitted Temporary Sign Types Yard signs (e.g. seed signs)
Maximum Quantity 1 per 5 rows of planted crops
Maximum Sign Area 2 square feet
Height Above Ground 8 feet maximum
Location At least 5 feet from any proposed right-of-way, edge of pavement, or property line; whichever is greater
Illumination Temporary marker signs shall not be illuminated
Duration A temporary marker sign may stay in place for the duration of the temporary event (e.g. planting through harvest).
All temporary marker signs shall be taken down within 15 days after the temporary marker sign’s purpose no
longer exists.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
5-68
Sign Standards (SI) 5
5.61 SI-03: Single-family and Two-family Residential Sign Standards
This Sign Standards (SI) section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Cross Reference:
1. Wall Sign: Wall Signs may be permitted in applicable Home Business Standards (HB).
2. Ground Signs: Ground signs may be permitted in applicable Home Business Standards (HB).
B. Permitted Sign Types
Sign Types Specific Regulations Permit Required
Entry Feature Sign See Section 5.61(C): Entry Feature Sign Yes
Standard Temporary Sign See Section 5.61(D): Standard Temporary
Sign
No
C. Entry Feature Sign
Regulation Category Sign Regulation
Applicability Residential developments with internal streets and a minimum of 4 lots may establish an entry feature sign.
Sign Type Double-sided or single-sided ground sign
Maximum Quantity Up to 2 single-sided entry feature signs flanking the entrance, or 1 double-sided sign shall be permitted per
vehicular entrance.
Maximum Sign Area The identification portion (i.e. the text and logo) of the entry feature sign shall be 32 square feet or less per side for
the primary entrance and 16 square feet or less per side for each additional vehicular entrance.
Height Above Ground No part of the identification portion (i.e. the text and logo) of an entry feature sign shall be more than 6 feet above
the ground. All other portions of an entry feature sign shall be limited to 8 feet in height.
Placement An entry feature sign shall be located at vehicular entrances to a development in common area or an easement,
but shall not be located within any right-of-way.
Location An entry feature sign shall be located a minimum of 10 feet from the right-of-way, or edge of pavement associated
with a street or driveway, whichever is greater.
Materials The entry feature sign shall be wood, stone, metal, masonry, or other similar and durable materials.
Landscaping The area around the entry feature sign shall be landscaped to create a positive aesthetic for the overall entrance
into the subdivision or development.
Illumination The entry feature sign may be illuminated by external ground lighting.
Maintenance The entry feature sign shall be maintained by an owners association or similar legal entity.
D. Standard Temporary Signs
Regulation Category Sign Regulation
Permitted Temporary Sign Types Yard signs
Maximum Quantity a. 1 standard temporary sign shall be permitted for lots with frontage on 1 street.
b. 2 standard temporary signs shall be permitted for lots with frontage on 2 or more streets if they have a minimum
of 300 feet of combined street frontage, or if they have a lake yard.
c. However, no 2 standard temporary signs shall be closer than 80 feet to one another.
Maximum Sign Area 9 square feet for single-sided signs, or 9 square feet per side for double-sided signs
Height Above Ground 5 feet maximum
Location At least 5 feet from any edge of pavement or property line; whichever is greater
Illumination Standard temporary signs shall not be illuminated
Duration A standard temporary sign may stay in place for the duration of the temporary event. The standard temporary sign
may be put in place up to 5 days prior to the temporary event. All standard temporary signs shall be taken down
within 7 days after the standard temporary sign's purpose no longer exists
Article
Article 5: Development Standards 5-69
Sign Standards (SI) 5
5.62 SI-04: Multiple Family Residential Sign Standards
This Sign Standards (SI) section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Permitted Sign Types
Sign Types Specific Regulations Permit Required
Entry Feature Sign See Section 5.62(B): Entry Feature Sign Yes
Standard Temporary Sign See Section 5.62(C): Standard Temporary
Sign
No
Special Temporary Sign See Section 5.62(D): Special Temporary Sign Yes
B. Entry Feature Sign
Regulation Category Sign Regulation
Applicability Multiple-family developments with internal streets may establish an entry feature sign.
Permitted Sign Type Double-sided or single-sided ground sign.
Maximum Quantity Up to 2 single-sided entry feature signs flanking the entrance, or 1 double-sided sign shall be permitted per
vehicular entrance.
Maximum Sign Area 25 square feet per side
Height above Ground No part of the identification portion (i.e. the text and logo) of an entry feature sign shall be more than 6 feet above
the ground. All other portions of an entry feature sign shall be limited to 8 feet in height.
Placement An entry feature sign shall be located at vehicular entrances to a development in common area or an easement,
but shall not be located within any right-of-way.
Location An entry feature sign shall be located a minimum of 10 feet from the right-of-way, or edge of pavement associated
with a street or driveway, whichever is greater.
Materials The entry feature sign shall be wood, stone, metal, masonry, or other similar and durable materials.
Landscaping The area around the entry feature sign shall be landscaped to create a positive aesthetic for the overall entrance
into the development.
Illumination The entry feature sign may be illuminated by external ground lighting.
Maintenance The entry feature sign shall be maintained by the owner or property management company.
C. Standard Temporary Signs
Regulation Category Sign Regulation
Permitted Temporary Sign Types Yard sign
Examples Sale of property
Maximum Quantity 2 per development, per street frontage. For corner lots, no 2 standard temporary signs on separate frontages shall
be closer than 150 feet, measured using the shortest tangent.
Maximum Sign Area 16 square feet per side
Height Above Ground 5 feet maximum for sign content and 6 feet for sign structure
Location At least 10 feet from any right-of-way or edge of pavement associated with a street or driveway, whichever is
greater.
Illumination Standard temporary signs shall not be illuminated
Duration A standard temporary sign may stay in place for the duration of the temporary event. The standard temporary sign
may be put in place up to 5 days prior to the temporary event. All standard temporary signs shall be taken down
within 7 days after the standard temporary sign's purpose no longer exists
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
5-70
Sign Standards (SI) 5
D. Special Temporary Signs
Regulation Category Sign Regulation
Permitted Temporary Sign Types Yard sign, banner, or portable A-frame sign
Maximum Quantity 1 per development under 30 units; 2 per development 30 units or greater
Maximum Sign Area 32 square feet per side
Height Above Ground 5 feet maximum for sign content and 6 feet for sign structure if a yard sign or A-frame sign; 15 feet maximum for
sign content if a banner mounted to a building.
Location At least 10 feet from any edge of pavement or property line; whichever is greater
Illumination Special temporary signs shall not be illuminated
Duration The use of special temporary signs shall not exceed 30 continuous days and cumulatively 90 days in any calendar
year
Miscellaneous Pennants, streamers, and strings of flags without commercial messages or branding may be used in any quantity
and at any height on the site in addition to the special temporary signs listed above. However, the duration shall
comply with the duration provision above.
Article
Article 5: Development Standards 5-71
Sign Standards (SI) 5
5.63 SI-05: Institutional Sign Standards
This Sign Standards (SI) section applies to the following zoning district:
The following standards apply:
A. Permitted Sign Types
Sign Types Specific Regulations Single-tenant
Building
Multiple-tenant
Building
Permit
Required
Wall Sign See Section 5.63(C): Wall Sign Permitted Permitted Yes
Ground Sign See Section 5.63(D): Ground Sign Permitted Not Permitted Yes
Gateway Sign See Section 5.63(E): Gateway Sign Not Permitted Permitted Yes
Awning Sign See Section 5.63(F): Awning Sign Permitted Permitted Yes
Standard Temporary Sign See Section 5.63(G): Standard
Temporary Sign
Permitted Permitted No
Special Temporary Sign See Section 5.63(H): Special Temporary
Sign
Permitted Permitted Yes
B. Cumulative Cap for All Permanent Signs
Regulation Category Single-tenant Building Sign Regulation Multiple-tenant Building Sign Regulation
The maximum sign area of all
permitted permanent signs in
combination on a site shall be:
1 square feet per every lineal foot of front facade or 100
square feet; whichever is less
1 square feet per lineal foot of front facade; however, no
single tenant's signs shall exceed 40 square feet
C. Wall Sign
Regulation Category Single-tenant Building Sign Regulation Multiple-tenant Building Sign Regulation
Maximum Quantity 2 per side of building; not to exceed 3 total 1 per tenant space with an exterior entrance
Maximum Sign Area 2 square feet per lineal foot of front facade; maximum of
60 square feet
2 square feet per lineal foot of front facade; maximum of
40 square feet
Cumulative Cap Counts toward cumulative cap Counts toward cumulative cap
Changeable Copy Up to 40% of the sign area of any single sign may be
changeable copy
Not permitted
Maximum Projection From Building 9 inches 9 inches
Illumination Wall signs may be illuminated internally or externally
Consistency of Signs not applicable All wall signs within the development shall be consistent
in type (e.g. reverse channel or box) and be mounted
consistently on the facade of the building in order to
create a uniform appearance
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
5-72
Sign Standards (SI) 5
D. Ground Sign
Regulation Category Single-tenant Building Sign Regulation
The following standards do not apply to multiple-tenant buildings
Maximum Quantity 1 per street frontage
Maximum Sign Area 1 square foot per lineal foot of front facade; maximum 40 square feet
Cumulative Cap Counts toward cumulative cap
Changeable Copy If changeable copy is used, it shall be integrated into the ground sign and shall only include cyclical or static
messages, regardless if the sign is capable of flashing messages
Changeable Copy Ratio Up to 60% of the sign area of any single sign may be changeable copy, but no single sign shall exceed 20 square
feet of changeable copy
Height Above Ground 7 feet maximum
Location At least 5 feet from any proposed right-of-way, edge of pavement, or front property line; whichever is greater; 20
feet from side property line
Landscaping Landscaping shall be installed around the base of a ground sign as follows:
a. Quantity: At least 1 shrub per 2 lineal feet of ground sign base shall be installed
b. Location: All required plants shall be located within 5 feet of the ground sign base
c. Double-sided Ground Signs: Any double-sided ground sign shall have landscaping on both sides
Illumination A ground sign may be illuminated internally or by externally-mounted ground lighting
E. Gateway Sign
Regulation Category Multiple-tenant Building Sign Regulation
The following standards do not apply to single-tenant buildings
Prerequisite Gateway signs shall be permitted for multiple-tenant buildings that have a minimum of four (4) tenants and a
minimum of 8,000 square feet of main floor area
Maximum Quantity 1
Maximum Sign Area 1 square foot per lineal foot front facade; maximum of 60 square feet
Cumulative Cap Counts toward cumulative cap
Maximum Tenant Sign Area 15 square feet
Changeable Copy If changeable copy is used, it shall be integrated into the gateway sign and shall only include cyclical or static
messages, regardless if the sign is capable of flashing messages
Changeable Copy Ratio Up to 40% of the sign area of any gateway sign may be changeable copy, but no single sign shall exceed 50
square feet of changeable copy
Height above Ground 8 feet maximum
Location At least 5 feet from any proposed right-of-way, edge of pavement, or front property line; whichever is greater; 20
feet from side property line
Landscaping All landscaping shall be installed around the base of a gateway sign as follows:
a. Quantity: At least 1 shrub per 2 lineal feet of gateway sign base shall be installed
b. Location: All required plants shall be located within 5 feet of the gateway sign base
c. Double-sided Gateway Signs: Any double-sided gateway sign shall have landscaping on both sides
Illumination A gateway sign may be illuminated internally
F. Awning Sign
Regulation Category Single-tenant Building Sign Regulation Multiple-tenant Building Sign Regulation
Maximum Quantity 2 per building 1 per tenant
Maximum Sign Area 20 square feet total; per awning sign 20 square feet per tenant; per awning sign
Cumulative Cap Counts toward cumulative cap Counts toward cumulative cap
Maximum Projection From Building 6 feet 6 feet
Illumination Awning signs may be illuminated internally or externally
Article
Article 5: Development Standards 5-73
Sign Standards (SI) 5
G. Standard Temporary Signs
Regulation Category Single-tenant Building Sign Regulation Multiple-tenant Building Sign Regulation
Permitted Temporary Sign Forms Sandwich board, yard sign, or a window panel
Maximum Quantity 2 per lot as long as the 2 signs are at least 80 feet apart
from one another
1 per tenant
Maximum Sign Area 12 square feet for single-sided signs, or 12 square feet per side for double-sided signs
Cumulative Cap Does not count toward cumulative cap
Height Above Ground 6 feet maximum, or 8 feet maximum if in a first floor window
Location At least 5 feet from any edge of pavement or front property line; whichever is greater; at leas 10 feet from side and
rear property lines
Illumination Standard temporary signs shall not be illuminated
Duration A standard temporary sign may stay in place for the duration of the temporary event. The standard temporary sign
may be put in place up to 30 days prior to the temporary event. All standard temporary signs shall be taken down
within 7 days after the standard temporary sign's purpose no longer exists
H. Special Temporary Signs
Regulation Category Single-tenant Building Sign Regulation Multiple-tenant Building Sign Regulation
Permitted Temporary Sign Forms Inflatable signs, air dancers, banners, yard signs, window panels and sandwich boards
Maximum Quantity 1 per lot 1 per development
Maximum Sign Area 40 square feet
Cumulative Cap Does not count toward cumulative cap
Height Above Ground 15 feet maximum
Location At least 5 feet from any edge of pavement or front property line; whichever is greater; at least 10 feet from side and
rear property lines
Illumination Special temporary signs shall not be illuminated
Duration The use of special temporary signs shall not exceed 30 total days in any calendar year
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
5-74
Sign Standards (SI) 5
5.64 SI-06: Urban Commercial Sign Standards
This Sign Standards (SI) section applies to the following zoning district:
The following standards apply:
A. Permitted Sign Types
Sign Types Specific Regulations Single-tenant
Building
Multiple-tenant
Building
Permit
Required
Wall Sign See Section 5.64(C): Wall Sign Permitted Permitted Yes
Projecting Sign Sign See Section 5.64(D): Projecting Sign Permitted Permitted Yes
Awning Sign See Section 5.64(E): Awning Sign Permitted Permitted Yes
Window Sign See Section 5.64(F): Window Sign Permitted Permitted No
Display Board Sign See Section 5.64(G): Display Board Sign Permitted Permitted Yes
Standard Temporary Sign See Section 5.64(H): Standard
Temporary Sign
Permitted Permitted No
Special Temporary Sign See Section 5.64(I): Special Temporary
Sign
Permitted Permitted Yes
B. Cumulative Cap for All Permanent Signs
Regulation Category Single-tenant Building Sign Regulation Multiple-tenant Building Sign Regulation
The maximum sign area of all
permitted permanent signs in
combination on a site shall be:
1½ square feet per every lineal foot of front facade or
70 square feet; whichever is less
1½ square feet per every lineal foot of front facade or
70 square feet; whichever is less
C. Wall Sign
Regulation Category Single-tenant Building Sign Regulation Multiple-tenant Building Sign Regulation
Maximum Quantity 1 per facade, not to exceed 2 1 per tenant space with an exterior entrance
Maximum Sign Area 1 square foot per linear foot of front facade; maximum of
60 square feet; per wall sign
1 square foot per linear foot of front facade; maximum of
40 square feet; per wall sign
Cumulative Cap Counts toward cumulative cap Counts toward cumulative cap
Changeable Copy If changeable copy is used, it shall be integrated into the wall sign and shall only include cyclical or static
messages, regardless if the sign is capable of flashing messages
Changeable Copy Ratio Up to 50% of the sign area of any single wall sign may
be changeable copy
Up to 50% of the sign area of any single tenant's wall
sign may be changeable copy
Height Above Ground 15 feet maximum 15 feet maximum
Maximum Projection From Building 8 inches 8 inches
Illumination Wall signs may be illuminated internally or by externally-mounted lights
Consistency of Signs Not applicable All wall signs within the development shall be consistent
in type (e.g. reverse channel or box) and be mounted
consistently on the facade of the building in order to
create a uniform appearance.
added Pole and Ground sign regulations
October 9, 2018 See section 5.64 (J) and
5.64 (K) page 5-76A
EXCLUDING the Historical District
Article
Article 5: Development Standards 5-75
Sign Standards (SI) 5
D. Projecting Sign
Regulation Category Single-tenant Building Sign Regulation Multiple-tenant Building Sign Regulation
Maximum Quantity 1 2; minimum of 20 feet apart
Maximum Sign Area 10 square feet 10 square feet per sign
Cumulative Cap Counts toward cumulative cap Counts toward cumulative cap
Changeable Copy Not applicable Not applicable
Changeable Copy Ratio Not applicable Not applicable
Height Above Ground 8 feet minimum; 12 feet maximum 8 feet minimum; 12 feet maximum
Maximum Projection From Building 36 inches; however, under no circumstances shall a projecting sign project over a driveway or street
Illumination Wall signs may be illuminated by externally-mounted lights
E. Awning Sign
Regulation Category Single-tenant Building Sign Regulation Multiple-tenant Building Sign Regulation
Maximum Quantity 2 1 per tenant
Maximum Sign Area 20 square feet total; per awning sign 20 square feet per tenant; per awning sign
Cumulative Cap Counts toward cumulative cap Counts toward cumulative cap
Height Above Ground Shall be no more than 12 feet or less than 9 feet above
the ground, measured to the bottom edge of the awning
structure
Shall be no more than 12 feet or less than 9 feet above
the ground, measured to the bottom edge of the awning
structure
Maximum Projection From Building 6 feet 6 feet
Illumination Awning signs may be illuminate with externally-mounted lights, but shall not be illuminated with backlighting
F. Window Sign
Regulation Category Single-tenant Building Sign Regulation Multiple-tenant Building Sign Regulation
Maximum Quantity 1 window sign is permitted on each facade, maximum of
3 per building
1 window sign is permitted on each facade, maximum of
3 per building
Maximum Sign Area 20 square feet in area or 30% of the window's glass
area, whichever is less; per window sign
20 square feet in area or 30% of the window's glass
area, whichever is less; per window sign
Cumulative Cap Counts toward cumulative cap Counts toward cumulative cap
Height Above Ground 5 feet maximum 5 feet maximum
G. Display Board Signs
Regulation Category Single-tenant Building Sign Regulation Multiple-tenant Building Sign Regulation
Maximum Quantity 1 1 per tenant
Maximum Sign Area 10 square feet 10 square feet per tenant
Cumulative Cap Counts toward cumulative cap Counts toward cumulative cap
Height Above Ground 8 feet maximum 8 feet maximum
Design The display board sign shall be framed with wood, metal, or other durable material and be permanently attached to
the building; be a designated window on the single-tenant building; or consist of hardware permanently affixed to
the single-tenant or multiple-tenant building for display of a consistent size posting
Postings Postings on the display board sign shall not exceed the size of the display board sign. Postings shall not be
required to obtain any type of permit
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
5-76
Sign Standards (SI) 5
H. Standard Temporary Signs
Regulation Category Single-tenant Building Sign Regulation Multiple-tenant Building Sign Regulation
Permitted Temporary Sign Forms Sandwich board, yard sign, or a window panel Sandwich board, yard sign or a window panel
Maximum Quantity 2 per lot as long as the 2 signs are at least 80 feet apart
from one another
1 per tenant
Maximum Sign Area 9 square feet for single-sided signs, or 9 square feet per side for double-sided signs; per standard temporary sign
Cumulative Cap Does not count toward cumulative cap
Height Above Ground 5 feet maximum, or 8 feet maximum if in a first floor window
Location Provide at least 4 feet of clear sidewalk width and at least 1 foot away from the curb face
Illumination Standard temporary signs shall not be illuminated
Duration A standard temporary sign may stay in place for the duration of the temporary event. The standard temporary sign
may be put in place up to 5 days prior to the temporary event. All standard temporary signs shall be taken down
within 7 days after the standard temporary sign's purpose no longer exists
I. Special Temporary Signs
Regulation Category Single-tenant Building Sign Regulation Multiple-tenant Building Sign Regulation
Permitted Temporary Sign Forms Inflatable signs, banners, yard signs, window panels
and sandwich boards
Inflatable signs, banners, yard signs, window panels
and sandwich boards
Maximum Quantity 1 per lot 1 per tenant
Maximum Sign Area 40 square feet
Cumulative Cap Does not count toward cumulative cap
Height Above Ground 15 feet maximum
Location Provide at least 4 feet of clear sidewalk width and at least 1 foot away from the curb face
Illumination Special temporary signs shall not be illuminated
Duration The use of special temporary signs shall not exceed 30 total days in any calendar year
J. Pole Sign
Regulation Category Single Tenant Multi-Tenant
Max Quantity 1 1 per tenant
Max Sign Area 15 square feet per side
Cumulative Cap Counts toward cumulative cap
Changeable Copy If changeable copy is used, it shall be integrated into the permanent
pole sign and shall only include cyclical or static messages, regardless
if the sign is capable of flashing messages
Changeable Copy Ratio Up to 40% of the sign area of any single sign may be changeable copy
Height above ground Pole signs shall be no more than 15 feet above the ground
Location At least 5 feet from any proposed ROW edge of pavement, or front
property line, whichever is greater, 20 feet from the side property line
Illumination Pols signs may be illuminated internally or by externally-mountedlights
K. Ground Sign
Regulation Category Single-tenant Building Sign Regulations
The following standards do not apply to multiple-tenant buildings
Maximum Quantity 1
Maximum Sign Area 1 s q u are foot per lineal foot of front facade; maximum 40 square feet
Cumulative Cap C o u nts toward cumulative cap
Changeable Copy I f c h angeable copy is used, it shall be integrated into the ground sign and
shall only include cyclical or static messages, regardless if the sign is
capable of flashing messages
Changeable Copy Ratio Up to 60% of the sign area of any single sign may be changeable copy, but
no single sign shall exceed 20 square feet of changeable copy
Height Above Ground 7 feet maximum
Location At least 5 feet from any proposed ROW edge of pavement, or front
property line, whichever is greater, 20 feet from the side property line
Landscaping Landscaping shall be installed around the base of a ground sign as
follows:
a. Quantity: AT least 1 shrub per 2 liner feet of the ground sign base
shall be installed
b. Location: All required plants shall be located within 5 feet of the
ground sign base
c. Double-sided Ground Signs: Any double-sided ground sign shall
have landscaping on both sides.
Illumination A ground sign may be illuminated internally or by externally-mounted
ground lighting
amendment adding to page 5-76 A - U C si gn secti on Octob er 2018
EXCLUDING the Historical District
EXCLUDING the Historical District
Article
Article 5: Development Standards 5-77
Sign Standards (SI) 5
5.65 SI-07: Moderate Intensity Commercial Sign Standards
This Sign Standards (SI) section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Permitted Sign Types
Sign Types Specific Regulations Single-tenant
Building
Multiple-tenant
Building
Permit
Required
Wall Sign See Section 5.65(C): Wall Sign Permitted Permitted Yes
Ground Sign See Section 5.65(D): Ground Sign Permitted Not Permitted Yes
Gateway Sign See Section 5.65(E): Gateway Sign Not Permitted Permitted Yes
Pole Sign See Section 5.65(F): Pole Sign Permitted Not Permitted Yes
Awning Sign See Section 5.65(G): Awning Sign Permitted Permitted Yes
Standard Temporary Sign See Section 5.65(H): Standard
Temporary Sign
Permitted Permitted No
Special Temporary Sign See Section 5.65(I): Special Temporary
Sign
Permitted Permitted Yes
B. Cumulative Cap for All Permanent Signs
Regulation Category Single-tenant Building Sign Regulation Multiple-tenant Building Sign Regulation
The maximum sign area of all
permitted permanent signs in
combination on a site shall be:
2.5 square feet per every lineal foot of front facade or
400 square feet; whichever is less
2.5 square feet per lineal foot of front facade; however,
no single tenant's signs shall exceed 80 square feet
C. Wall Sign
Regulation Category Single-tenant Building Sign Regulation Multiple-tenant Building Sign Regulation
Maximum Quantity 2 per side of building; not to exceed 4 total 1 per tenant space with an exterior entrance, or 2 for
corner tenants
Maximum Sign Area 2 square feet per lineal foot of front facade, maximum of
100 square feet, whichever is less
2 square feet per lineal foot of front facade; maximum
of 100 square feet on front facade or 50 square feet on
side or rear facade, whichever is less
Cumulative Cap Counts toward cumulative cap Counts toward cumulative cap
Changeable Copy Up to 40% of the sign area of any single sign may be
changeable copy
Not permitted
Maximum Projection From Building 12 inches 12 inches
Illumination Wall signs may be illuminated internally or externally
Consistency of Signs not applicable All wall signs within the development shall be consistent
in type (e.g. reverse channel or box) and be mounted
consistently on the facade of the building in order to
create a uniform appearance
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
5-78
Sign Standards (SI) 5
D. Ground Sign
Regulation Category Single-tenant Building Sign Regulation
The following standards do not apply to multiple-tenant buildings
Maximum Quantity 1; or 2 for corner lots with a minimum of 200 feet of combined street frontage
Maximum Sign Area 1.5 square foot per lineal foot of front facade; maximum 120 square feet per side, whichever is less
Cumulative Cap Counts toward cumulative cap
Changeable Copy If changeable copy is used, it shall be integrated into the ground sign and shall only include cyclical or static
messages, regardless if the sign is capable of flashing messages
Changeable Copy Ratio Up to 80% of the sign area of any ground sign may be changeable copy
Height Above Ground 8 feet maximum
Location At least 10 feet from any proposed right-of-way, edge of pavement, or front property line; whichever is greater.
20 feet from side property line
Landscaping Landscaping shall be installed around the base of a ground sign as follows:
a. Quantity: At least 1 shrub per 2 lineal feet of ground sign base shall be installed
b. Location: All required plants shall be located within 5 feet of the ground sign base
c. Double-sided Ground Signs: Any double-sided ground sign shall have landscaping on both sides
Illumination A ground sign may be illuminated internally or by externally-mounted ground lighting
E. Gateway Sign
Regulation Category Multiple-tenant Building Sign Regulation
The following standards do not apply to single-tenant buildings
Prerequisite Gateway signs shall be permitted for multiple-tenant buildings that have a minimum of two (2) tenant spaces
Maximum Quantity 1
Maximum Sign Area 1 square foot per lineal foot front facade; maximum of 160 square feet per side
Cumulative Cap Counts toward cumulative cap
Maximum Tenant Sign Area 40 square feet
Changeable Copy If changeable copy is used, it shall be integrated into the gateway sign and shall only include cyclical or static
messages, regardless if the sign is capable of flashing messages
Changeable Copy Ratio Up to 50% of the sign area of any gateway sign may be changeable copy
Height above Ground 8 feet maximum for a 3 tenant building, plus 1 foot for each additional tenant over 3
Location At least 10 feet from any proposed right-of-way, edge of pavement, or front property line; whichever is greater; 20
feet from side property line
Landscaping All landscaping shall be installed around the base of a gateway sign as follows:
a. Quantity: At least 1 shrub per 2 lineal feet of gateway sign base shall be installed
b. Location: All required plants shall be located within 5 feet of the gateway sign base
c. Double-sided Gateway Signs: Any double-sided gateway sign shall have landscaping on both sides
Illumination A gateway sign may be illuminated internally
Article
Article 5: Development Standards 5-79
Sign Standards (SI) 5
F. Pole Sign
Regulation Category Single-tenant Building Sign Regulation
Maximum Quantity 1
Maximum Sign Area 60 square feet per side
Cumulative Cap Counts toward cumulative cap
Changeable Copy If changeable copy is used, it shall be integrated into the permanent pole sign and shall only include cyclical or
static messages, regardless if the sign is capable of flashing messages
Changeable Copy Ratio Up to 40% of the sign area of any single sign may be changeable copy
Height Above Ground Pole signs shall be at least 15 feet above the ground, but no part of the sign shall exceed 25 feet above the ground
Location Pole signs shall be at least 15 feet from any proposed right-of-way, edge of pavement, or property line; whichever
is greater
Illumination Pole signs may be illuminated internally or by externally-mounted lights
G. Awning Sign
Regulation Category Single-tenant Building Sign Regulation Multiple-tenant Building Sign Regulation
Maximum Quantity 4 per side of building, total cap of 6 2 per tenant
Maximum Sign Area 20 square feet total; per awning sign 20 square feet per tenant; per awning sign
Cumulative Cap Counts toward cumulative cap Counts toward cumulative cap
Maximum Projection From Building 8 feet 6 feet
Illumination Awning signs may be illuminated internally or externally
H. Standard Temporary Signs
Regulation Category Single-tenant Building Sign Regulation Multiple-tenant Building Sign Regulation
Permitted Temporary Sign Forms Sandwich board, yard sign, or a window panel
Maximum Quantity 2 per lot as long as the 2 signs are at least 80 feet apart
from one another
1 per tenant
Maximum Sign Area 12 square feet for single-sided signs, or 12 square feet per side for double-sided signs
Cumulative Cap Does not count toward cumulative cap
Height Above Ground 6 feet maximum, or 8 feet maximum if in a first floor window
Location At least 5 feet from any edge of pavement or front property line; whichever is greater; at leas 10 feet from side and
rear property lines
Illumination Standard temporary signs shall not be illuminated
Duration A standard temporary sign may stay in place for the duration of the temporary event. The standard temporary sign
may be put in place up to 30 days prior to the temporary event. All standard temporary signs shall be taken down
within 7 days after the standard temporary sign's purpose no longer exists
I. Special Temporary Signs
Regulation Category Single-tenant Building Sign Regulation Multiple-tenant Building Sign Regulation
Permitted Temporary Sign Forms Inflatable signs, air dancers, banners, yard signs, window panels and sandwich boards
Maximum Quantity 1 per lot 1 per development
Maximum Sign Area 40 square feet
Cumulative Cap Does not count toward cumulative cap
Height Above Ground 15 feet maximum
Location At least 5 feet from any edge of pavement or front property line; whichever is greater; at least 10 feet from side and
rear property lines
Illumination Special temporary signs shall not be illuminated
Duration The use of special temporary signs shall not exceed 30 total days in any calendar year
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
5-80
Sign Standards (SI) 5
5.66 SI-08: Office Commercial Sign Standards
This Sign Standards (SI) section applies to the following zoning district:
The following standards apply:
A. Permitted Sign Types
Sign Types Specific Regulations Single-tenant
Building
Multiple-tenant
Building
Permit
Required
Wall Sign See Section 5.66(C): Wall Sign Permitted Permitted Yes
Ground Sign See Section 5.66(D): Ground Sign Permitted Not Permitted Yes
Gateway Sign See Section 5.66(E): Gateway Sign Not Permitted Permitted Yes
Awning Sign See Section 5.66(F): Awning Sign Permitted Permitted Yes
Standard Temporary Sign See Section 5.66(G): Standard
Temporary Sign
Permitted Permitted No
Special Temporary Sign See Section 5.66(H): Special Temporary
Sign
Permitted Permitted Yes
B. Cumulative Cap for All Permanent Signs
Regulation Category Single-tenant Building Sign Regulation Multiple-tenant Building Sign Regulation
The maximum sign area of all
permitted permanent signs in
combination on a site shall be:
2 square feet per every lineal foot of front facade or 80
square feet; whichever is less
60 square feet per business use
2 square feet per lineal foot of front facade; however, no
single tenant's signs shall exceed 40 square feet
C. Wall Sign
Regulation Category Single-tenant Building Sign Regulation Multiple-tenant Building Sign Regulation
Maximum Quantity 2 per side of building; not to exceed 3 total 1 per tenant space with an exterior entrance
Maximum Sign Area 2 square feet per lineal foot of front facade; maximum of
60 square feet
2 square feet per lineal foot of front facade; maximum of
40 square feet
Cumulative Cap Counts toward cumulative cap Counts toward cumulative cap
Changeable Copy Up to 40% of the sign area of any single sign may be
changeable copy
Not permitted
Maximum Projection From Building 12 inches 12 inches
Illumination Wall signs may be illuminated internally or externally
Consistency of Signs not applicable All wall signs within the development shall be consistent
in type (e.g. reverse channel or box) and be mounted
consistently on the facade of the building in order to
create a uniform appearance
Article
Article 5: Development Standards 5-81
Sign Standards (SI) 5
D. Ground Sign
Regulation Category Single-tenant Building Sign Regulation
The following standards do not apply to multiple-tenant buildings
Maximum Quantity 1
Maximum Sign Area 1 square foot per lineal foot of front facade; maximum 40 square feet
Cumulative Cap Counts toward cumulative cap
Changeable Copy If changeable copy is used, it shall be integrated into the ground sign and shall only include cyclical or static
messages, regardless if the sign is capable of flashing messages
Changeable Copy Ratio Up to 60% of the sign area of any single sign may be changeable copy, but no single sign shall exceed 20 square
feet of changeable copy
Height Above Ground 7 feet maximum
Location At least 5 feet from any proposed right-of-way, edge of pavement, or front property line; whichever is greater; 20
feet from side property line
Landscaping Landscaping shall be installed around the base of a ground sign as follows:
a. Quantity: At least 1 shrub per 2 lineal feet of ground sign base shall be installed
b. Location: All required plants shall be located within 5 feet of the ground sign base
c. Double-sided Ground Signs: Any double-sided ground sign shall have landscaping on both sides
Illumination A ground sign may be illuminated internally or by externally-mounted ground lighting
E. Gateway Sign
Regulation Category Multiple-tenant Building Sign Regulation
The following standards do not apply to single-tenant buildings
Prerequisite Gateway signs shall be permitted for multiple-tenant buildings that have a minimum of four (4) tenants and a
minimum of 8,000 square feet of main floor area
Maximum Quantity 1
Maximum Sign Area 1 square foot per lineal foot front facade; maximum of 60 square feet
Cumulative Cap Counts toward cumulative cap
Maximum Tenant Sign Area 15 square feet
Changeable Copy If changeable copy is used, it shall be integrated into the gateway sign and shall only include cyclical or static
messages, regardless if the sign is capable of flashing messages
Changeable Copy Ratio Up to 40% of the sign area of any gateway sign may be changeable copy, but no single sign shall exceed 50
square feet of changeable copy
Height above Ground 8 feet maximum
Location At least 5 feet from any proposed right-of-way, edge of pavement, or front property line; whichever is greater; 20
feet from side property line
Landscaping All landscaping shall be installed around the base of a gateway sign as follows:
a. Quantity: At least 1 shrub per 2 lineal feet of gateway sign base shall be installed
b. Location: All required plants shall be located within 5 feet of the gateway sign base
c. Double-sided Gateway Signs: Any double-sided gateway sign shall have landscaping on both sides
Illumination A gateway sign may be illuminated internally
F. Awning Sign
Regulation Category Single-tenant Building Sign Regulation Multiple-tenant Building Sign Regulation
Maximum Quantity 2 per building 1 per tenant
Maximum Sign Area 20 square feet total; per awning sign 20 square feet per tenant; per awning sign
Cumulative Cap Counts toward cumulative cap Counts toward cumulative cap
Maximum Projection From Building 6 feet 6 feet
Illumination Awning signs may be illuminated internally or externally
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
5-82
Sign Standards (SI) 5
G. Standard Temporary Signs
Regulation Category Single-tenant Building Sign Regulation Multiple-tenant Building Sign Regulation
Permitted Temporary Sign Forms Sandwich board, yard sign, or a window panel
Maximum Quantity 2 per lot as long as the 2 signs are at least 80 feet apart
from one another
1 per tenant
Maximum Sign Area 12 square feet for single-sided signs, or 12 square feet per side for double-sided signs
Cumulative Cap Does not count toward cumulative cap
Height Above Ground 6 feet maximum, or 8 feet maximum if in a first floor window
Location At least 5 feet from any edge of pavement or front property line; whichever is greater; at leas 10 feet from side and
rear property lines
Illumination Standard temporary signs shall not be illuminated
Duration A standard temporary sign may stay in place for the duration of the temporary event. The standard temporary sign
may be put in place up to 30 days prior to the temporary event. All standard temporary signs shall be taken down
within 7 days after the standard temporary sign's purpose no longer exists
H. Special Temporary Signs
Regulation Category Single-tenant Building Sign Regulation Multiple-tenant Building Sign Regulation
Permitted Temporary Sign Forms Inflatable signs, banners, yard signs, window panels and sandwich boards
Maximum Quantity 1 per lot 1 per development
Maximum Sign Area 40 square feet
Cumulative Cap Does not count toward cumulative cap
Height Above Ground 15 feet maximum
Location At least 5 feet from any edge of pavement or front property line; whichever is greater; at least 10 feet from side and
rear property lines
Illumination Special temporary signs shall not be illuminated
Duration The use of special temporary signs shall not exceed 30 total days in any calendar year
Article
Article 5: Development Standards 5-83
Sign Standards (SI) 5
5.67 SI-09: Industrial Sign Standards
This Sign Standards (SI) section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Permitted Sign Types
Sign Types Specific Regulations Single-tenant
Building
Multiple-tenant
Building
Permit
Required
Wall Sign See Section 5.67(C): Wall Sign Permitted Permitted Yes
Ground Sign See Section 5.67(D): Ground Sign Permitted Not Permitted Yes
Gateway Sign See Section 5.67(E): Gateway Sign Not Permitted Permitted Yes
Standard Temporary Sign See Section 5.67(F): Standard
Temporary Sign
Permitted Permitted No
Special Temporary Sign See Section 5.67(G): Special Temporary
Sign
Permitted Permitted Yes
B. Cumulative Cap for All Permanent Signs
Regulation Category Single-tenant Building Sign Regulation Multiple-tenant Building Sign Regulation
The maximum sign area of all
permitted permanent signs in
combination on a site shall be:
2 square feet per every lineal foot of front facade or 80
square feet; whichever is less
60 square feet per business use
2 square feet per lineal foot of front facade; however, no
single tenant's signs shall exceed 40 square feet
C. Wall Sign
Regulation Category Single-tenant Building Sign Regulation Multiple-tenant Building Sign Regulation
Maximum Quantity 2 per side of building; not to exceed 3 total 1 per tenant space with an exterior entrance
Maximum Sign Area 2 square feet per lineal foot of front facade; maximum of
60 square feet
2 square feet per lineal foot of front facade; maximum of
40 square feet
Cumulative Cap Counts toward cumulative cap Counts toward cumulative cap
Changeable Copy Up to 40% of the sign area of any single sign may be
changeable copy
Not permitted
Maximum Projection From Building 12 inches 12 inches
Illumination Wall signs may be illuminated internally or externally
Consistency of Signs not applicable All wall signs within the development shall be consistent
in type (e.g. reverse channel or box) and be mounted
consistently on the facade of the building in order to
create a uniform appearance
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
5-84
Sign Standards (SI) 5
D. Ground Sign
Regulation Category Single-tenant Building Sign Regulation
The following standards do not apply to multiple-tenant buildings
Maximum Quantity 1
Maximum Sign Area 1 square foot per lineal foot of front facade; maximum 40 square feet
Cumulative Cap Counts toward cumulative cap
Changeable Copy If changeable copy is used, it shall be integrated into the ground sign and shall only include cyclical or static
messages, regardless if the sign is capable of flashing messages
Changeable Copy Ratio Up to 60% of the sign area of any single sign may be changeable copy, but no single sign shall exceed 20 square
feet of changeable copy
Height Above Ground 7 feet maximum
Location At least 5 feet from any proposed right-of-way, edge of pavement, or front property line; whichever is greater; 20
feet from side property line
Landscaping Landscaping shall be installed around the base of a ground sign as follows:
a. Quantity: At least 1 shrub per 2 lineal feet of ground sign base shall be installed
b. Location: All required plants shall be located within 5 feet of the ground sign base
c. Double-sided Ground Signs: Any double-sided ground sign shall have landscaping on both sides
Illumination A ground sign may be illuminated internally or by externally-mounted ground lighting
E. Gateway Sign
Regulation Category Multiple-tenant Building Sign Regulation
The following standards do not apply to single-tenant buildings
Prerequisite Gateway signs shall be permitted for multiple-tenant buildings that have a minimum of four (4) tenants and a
minimum of 8,000 square feet of main floor area
Maximum Quantity 1
Maximum Sign Area 1 square foot per lineal foot front facade; maximum of 60 square feet
Cumulative Cap Counts toward cumulative cap
Maximum Tenant Sign Area 15 square feet
Changeable Copy If changeable copy is used, it shall be integrated into the gateway sign and shall only include cyclical or static
messages, regardless if the sign is capable of flashing messages
Changeable Copy Ratio Up to 40% of the sign area of any gateway sign may be changeable copy, but no single sign shall exceed 50
square feet of changeable copy
Height above Ground 8 feet maximum
Location At least 5 feet from any proposed right-of-way, edge of pavement, or front property line; whichever is greater; 20
feet from side property line
Landscaping All landscaping shall be installed around the base of a gateway sign as follows:
a. Quantity: At least 1 shrub per 2 lineal feet of gateway sign base shall be installed
b. Location: All required plants shall be located within 5 feet of the gateway sign base
c. Double-sided Gateway Signs: Any double-sided gateway sign shall have landscaping on both sides
Illumination A gateway sign may be illuminated internally
F. Awning Sign
Regulation Category Single-tenant Building Sign Regulation Multiple-tenant Building Sign Regulation
Maximum Quantity 2 per building 1 per tenant
Maximum Sign Area 20 square feet total; per awning sign 20 square feet per tenant; per awning sign
Cumulative Cap Counts toward cumulative cap Counts toward cumulative cap
Maximum Projection From Building 6 feet 6 feet
Illumination Awning signs may be illuminated internally or externally
Article
Article 5: Development Standards 5-85
Sign Standards (SI) 5
G. Standard Temporary Signs
Regulation Category Single-tenant Building Sign Regulation Multiple-tenant Building Sign Regulation
Permitted Temporary Sign Forms Sandwich board, yard sign, or a window panel
Maximum Quantity 2 per lot as long as the 2 signs are at least 80 feet apart
from one another
1 per tenant
Maximum Sign Area 12 square feet for single-sided signs, or 12 square feet per side for double-sided signs
Cumulative Cap Does not count toward cumulative cap
Height Above Ground 6 feet maximum, or 8 feet maximum if in a first floor window
Location At least 5 feet from any edge of pavement or front property line; whichever is greater; at leas 10 feet from side and
rear property lines
Illumination Standard temporary signs shall not be illuminated
Duration A standard temporary sign may stay in place for the duration of the temporary event. The standard temporary sign
may be put in place up to 30 days prior to the temporary event. All standard temporary signs shall be taken down
within 7 days after the standard temporary sign's purpose no longer exists
H. Special Temporary Signs
Regulation Category Single-tenant Building Sign Regulation Multiple-tenant Building Sign Regulation
Permitted Temporary Sign Forms Inflatable signs, banners, yard signs, window panels and sandwich boards
Maximum Quantity 1 per lot 1 per development
Maximum Sign Area 40 square feet
Cumulative Cap Does not count toward cumulative cap
Height Above Ground 15 feet maximum
Location At least 5 feet from any edge of pavement or front property line; whichever is greater; at least 10 feet from side and
rear property lines
Illumination Special temporary signs shall not be illuminated
Duration The use of special temporary signs shall not exceed 30 total days in any calendar year
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
5-86
Special Exception Standards (SE) 5
5.68 SE-01: Special Exception Standards
This Special Exception Standards (SE) section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Cross Reference: The approval process and criteria for Special Exceptions is in Article 7: Processes.
B. Applicable Development Standards: The development standards assigned to each zoning district are considered
appropriate for the permitted uses within that zoning district. However, the development standards may not be
appropriate for all Special Exception uses within a zoning district. For instance, some institutional uses are allowed
in residential zoning districts as Special Exceptions. In this case, residential development standards would not
necessarily be applicable.
1. Determining Appropriate Development Standards:
a. The Zoning Administrator shall determine which development standards sections within Article 5:
Development Standards shall apply to each Special Exception application. The development standards
determined to apply shall be documented in the application and approval.
b. Generally, if the Special Exception Use is a permitted use in another zoning district, the development
standards for that zoning district shall generally be used. In situations where the Special Exception Use is
not a permitted use in any other zoning district, the Board of Zoning Adjustments shall determine which
development standard sections shall be assigned to the Special Exception Use.
Article
Article 5: Development Standards 5-87
Structure Standards (ST) 5
5.69 ST-01: Structure Standards
This Structure Standards (ST) section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Applicability: The maximum allowable number of primary structures shall be one (1) unless indicated otherwise
on the applicable two-page layout in Article 2: Zoning Districts.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
5-88
Telecommunication Facility Standards (TC) 5
5.70 TC-01: Telecommunication Facility Standards
This Telecommunication Facility Standards (TC) section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Permits:
1. In the PR and AG District, an Improvement Location Permit shall be required prior to the construction,
erection, placement, modification, or alteration of a telecommunication facility.
2. In the I1 and I2 District an Improvement Location Permit shall be required prior to the modification, or alteration
of a telecommunication facility.
3. In the I1 and I2 District a Development Plan review and approval shall be required prior to the construction,
erection, or placement of a telecommunication facility.
B. Precondition: A new tower shall only be permitted if no other tower exists on which telecommunication equipment
can be collocated. A list of all towers within one (1) mile of the desired location of a new tower shall be submitted
with a detailed description of why said tower(s) is(are) not an option for collocation.
C. Location:
1. Accessory Utility Structures: Any accessory utility structure associated with a telecommunication facility shall
meet the minimum front yard setback, minimum side yard setback, and minimum rear yard setback requirements
in the applicable two-page layouts in Article 2: Zoning Districts.
2. Towers:
a. Front Yard Setback: Telecommunication towers shall be set back from any right-of-way a minimum
distance equal to the tower’s height, including all antennas and attachments.
b. Side Yard and Rear Yard Setback: Telecommunication towers shall be set back from the side and rear
property lines a minimum distance equal to seventy-five percent (75%) of the tower’s height, including all
antennas and attachments.
c. Separation From an On-site Primary Structure: Telecommunication towers shall be set back from any
on-site primary structure a minimum distance equal to seventy-five percent (75%) of the tower’s height.
d. Separation from Residential Districts: Telecommunication towers shall not be located within the boundaries
of any residential zoning district, and shall be set back from the boundaries of any residential zoning
district a minimum distance equal to one hundred ten percent (110%) of the tower’s height.
D. Design:
1. Project Applicability: Proposed or modified telecommunication towers and antennas shall meet the following
design requirements:
2. Height:
a. Telecommunication towers shall not exceed 199 feet in height above ground level.
b. All other utility structures shall meet the height standards in the appropriate two-page layouts in Article 2:
Zoning Districts and in Height Standards (HT).
3. Appearance: Towers and antennas shall be designed to blend into the surrounding environment through the
use of color, except in an instance where the color is dictated by State or federal authorities such as the Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA).
4. Monopole Design: Towers shall be of a monopole design, unless the Board of Adjustments determines an
alternative design would better blend in with the surrounding environment.
5. Collocation: Any proposed telecommunication tower shall be designed structurally, electrically, and in all
other respects to accommodate both the applicant’s antennas and comparable antennas for the following:
a. A minimum of one (1) additional user if the telecommunications tower is between sixty (60) and 100 feet
in height.
b. A minimum of three (3) additional users if the telecommunications tower is 100 feet or more in height.
c. Said required collocation opportunities shall be offered in the marketplace at competitive and a comparable
rate, specifically no greater than two percent (2%) greater than the average rate for comparable locations.
6. Accessory Utility Structures: All utility structures needed to support a telecommunications tower shall be
architecturally designed to blend in with the surrounding development or environment.
7. Fence Enclosure: Telecommunication facilities and all accessory utility structures may be protected by a
security fence that shall be at least eight (8) feet tall. Such a security fence shall be at least twenty (20) feet
from all property lines. Razor wire or similar products shall not be utilized.
8. Lighting: Telecommunication facilities shall not be illuminated by artificial means and shall not display strobe
lights, except as may be dictated by State or federal authorities such as the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).
Article
Article 5: Development Standards 5-89
Telecommunication Facility Standards (TC) 5
9. Signs: The use of any portion of a telecommunication facility for the posting of any commercial signs or
advertisements of any kind shall not be permitted.
E. Construction Standards: All telecommunication facilities shall be subject to inspection by the Building Official and
Zoning Administrator during the construction process.
1. Easements: If an easement is required for location of a telecommunication facility on the property, the
easement shall be staked by a licensed and registered land surveyor so as to provide proof the facility has been
constructed within the easement.
2. Footers: Footing inspections shall be required by the Building Official for all telecommunication facilities
having footings.
3. Electrical Standards: All telecommunication facilities containing electrical wiring shall be subject to the
provisions of the Electric Code, as amended.
F. Inspection of Towers: The following shall apply to the inspection of telecommunications facilities:
1. Frequency: Towers may be inspected at least once every five (5) years by the Zoning Administrator, Building
Official, and/or a registered, professional engineer to determine compliance with the original construction
standards.
2. Investigation: The Zoning Administrator and the Building Official may enter onto the property to conduct their
investigation and may order the appropriate action to bring the facility into compliance.
G. Abandoned Towers: Any tower unused or left abandoned for six (6) months shall be removed by the property
owner at their expense. Should the property owner fail to remove the tower after thirty (30) days from the date a
violation notice is issued, the City may remove the tower and assess the property owner for the costs of removal
and cleanup of the site.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
5-90
Temporary Use and Structure Standards (TU) 5
5.71 TU-01: General Temporary Use and Structure Standards
This Temporary Use and Structure Standards (TU) section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply.
A. Cross Reference: See Sign Standards (SI) for temporary sign standards.
B. Permits: A Temporary Improvement Location Permit shall be obtained prior to establishing the temporary use or
erecting a temporary structure unless indicated otherwise in the Temporary Use and Structure Standards.
C. Permitted Types:
1. Fund-raising Events: Fund-raising events such as barbecues, fish fries, and car washes shall be permitted and
shall be exempt from obtaining a Temporary Improvement Location Permit if the frequency is less than three
(3) times per calendar year, the duration of each event is three (3) days or less, and there is a minimum of
fourteen (14) days between any two (2) events. Signs for fund-raising events shall comply with the applicable
temporary sign standards for the subject lot.
2. Portable Storage: Portable storage units (e.g. containers used for moving belongings) shall be permitted and
shall be exempt from obtaining a Temporary Improvement Location Permit, but shall not be located outdoors
for more than fourteen (14) consecutive days, three (3) times per calendar year.
3. Construction Trailer: A construction trailer may be installed on a site that has been issued a building permit
for a project that will have a construction duration of two (2) month or more. The location of the construction
trailer shall meet all accessory structure setback standards if in a side or rear yard, or be at least five (5)
feet from the all property lines if located in the front yard. For large institutional, commercial or industrial
construction projects, the Zoning Administrator may grant up to three (3) construction trailers if evidence
supports the need for more than one (1).
4. Party or Event Tents: Any lot with adequate space for a party or event tent in its front yard, side yard, or rear
yard shall be permitted and shall be exempt from obtaining a Temporary Improvement Location Permit if the
party or event is capped at 100 guests. The temporary structure and use shall be limited to ten (10) consecutive
days, two (2) times per calendar year. If the event exceeds 100 guests, a temporary event plan shall be submitted
to the City Manager who will consult with the police department, fire department and street department to
determine if and how the event can be safely and sensitively held. Reasonable limitations may be placed on
such large events by the City Manager, Police Chief, Fire Chief, and Street Department.
D. Termination: Temporary uses shall be terminated and temporary structures removed at the end of the permitted
event period.
E. General Provisions: All temporary uses and temporary structures shall maintain clear visibility at intersections and
driveway cuts per the Vision Clearance Standards (VC) standards.
5.72 TU-02: Agricultural Temporary Use and Structure Standards
This Temporary Use and Structure Standards (TU) section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Roadside Sales of Produce: The roadside sale of farm produce shall be permitted if the following conditions are met:
1. Grown On-site: Fifty (50%) of the produce offered for sale shall be grown on the same or adjacent lot where
the roadside sale is located.
2. Duration: The roadside sale of produce shall not exceed four (4) months per calendar year.
3. Sales Stand: The sales stand shall be portable or seasonally constructed. It shall be fully removed from its
temporary location at the end of each growing season.
4. Parking: Customer parking shall be required. There is no minimum standard, but the property owner shall
be in violation if customers park on-street or unintended locations, or if parking areas become mud lots. The
roadside sale of produce shall be arranged so that parking does not block any right-of-way or pedestrian facilities.
B. Garage and Yard Sales: Garage and yard sales shall be permitted but shall obtain a Temporary Improvement
Location Permit. Garage and yard sales shall not occur more than two (2) times per calendar year, for three (3)
days or less per event, and a minimum of fourteen (14) days between any two (2) events. Signs for garage or yard
sales shall comply with the applicable temporary sign standards for the subject lot.
Article
Article 5: Development Standards 5-91
Temporary Use and Structure Standards (TU) 5
5.73 TU-03: Residential Temporary Use and Structure Standards
This Temporary Use and Structure Standards (TU) section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Model Homes: Model homes, apartments, and condominiums that contain a show room and/or sales office shall be
permitted with the following requirements:
1. Duration: The duration of a Temporary Improvement Location Permit for a model home, apartment, or
condominium shall be three (3) years and may be renewed annually after the initial three-year period.
2. Location: Model homes, apartments, and condominiums shall be on the site of the development for which the
sales are taking place.
3. Parking: The model home, apartment, or condominium shall provide a minimum of six (6) paved off-street
parking spaces.
4. Lighting: All exterior lighting shall be turned off between the hours of 11:00 PM and 6:00 AM every day. This
regulation does not apply to a standard and customary front porch light, carriage light(s), or back porch light.
5. Neighborhood Information: A maximum of one (1) neighborhood information kiosk/sign shall be permitted.
Such a device shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height, thirty-two (32) square feet in area and shall not be
illuminated.
6. Model Home Sign: A maximum of one (1) “model home” sign shall be permitted. Such a device shall not
exceed six (6) feet in height, eight (8) square feet in area and shall not be illuminated.
B. Garage and Yard Sales: Garage and yard sales shall be permitted but shall obtain a Temporary Improvement
Location Permit. Garage and yard sales shall not occur more than two (2) times per calendar year, for three (3)
days or less per event, and a minimum of fourteen (14) days between any two (2) events. Signs for garage or yard
sales shall comply with the applicable temporary sign standards for the subject lot.
5.74 TU-04: Nonresidential Temporary Use and Structure Standards
This Temporary Use and Structure Standards (TU) section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Sale of Seasonal Items: The sale of seasonal items such as Independence Day fireworks, Christmas trees, and
Halloween pumpkins shall be permitted if the following standards are met:
1. Duration: The duration of a Temporary Improvement Location Permit for the sale of seasonal items shall be no
more than forty-five (45) days per calendar year cumulatively. All unsold merchandise shall be removed within
five (5) days after the expiration of the Temporary Improvement Location Permit.
2. Location:
a. The sale of seasonal items shall be on a lot that fronts a collector or arterial street.
b. The sale of seasonal items shall be conducted at least one hundred (100) feet from residential zoning
districts, including parking areas.
3. Additional Requirements: The sale of seasonal items shall comply with all requirements of applicable State laws.
B. Roadside Sales of Produce: The roadside sale of farm produce shall be permitted if the following conditions are met:
1. Duration: The roadside sale of produce shall not exceed 120 days per calendar year.
2. Sales Stand: The sales stand shall be portable or seasonal constructed, and shall be removed entirely from the
site when not in use.
3. Parking: The roadside sale of produce shall be available in locations that do not block any right-of-way.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
5-92
Trash Receptacle Standards (TR) 5
5.75 TR-01: Trash Receptacle Standards
This Trash Receptacle Standards (TR) section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Project Applicability: Any new outdoor trash receptacle, dumpster, compactor, or similar container placed after the
effective date of this Zoning Ordinance shall be permitted, if all of the following standards are met.
B. Exemptions:
1. Construction: Outdoor trash receptacles, dumpsters, compactors, recycling containers, or similar containers
temporarily placed (i.e. construction projects) shall be exempt from the standards in this section.
2. Residential: Any trash receptacle less than 150 gallons in size used for a single-family dwelling unit in any
zoning district shall be exempt from the Trash Receptacle Standards.
C. Design:
1. Screening:
a. Outdoor trash receptacles, dumpsters, compactors, or similar containers shall be screened on all sides by a
fence or wall that is durably constructed with wood, brick, or stone, and that substantially complements the
primary structure’s architecture.
b. Outdoor trash receptacles, dumpsters, compactors, or similar containers shall be accessible by a gate.
2. Surface Materials: Outdoor trash receptacles, dumpsters, compactors, or similar containers shall be placed on
a concrete pad, curbed on three (3) sides.
D. Setbacks:
1. Front Yard: Trash receptacles shall not be located in a front yard and shall be required to meet the front yard
setback standard for a primary structure.
2. Side Yard: Trash receptacles shall be required to meet the side yard setback standard for a primary structure.
3. Rear Yard: Trash receptacles shall be required to meet the rear yard setback standard for a primary structure.
E. Maintenance: All trash receptacles and screening associated with trash receptacles shall be properly maintained and
gates kept in good working condition.
Article
Article 5: Development Standards 5-93
Vision Clearance Standards (VC) 5
5.76 VC-01: Vision Clearance Standards
This Vision Clearance Standards (VC) section applies to the following zoning districts:
The following standards apply:
A. Vision Clearance Triangle: A vision clearance triangle or sight visibility triangle shall be maintained at every intersection
of two (2) or more streets, intersection of a street and an alley, and intersection of a street and a driveway.
1. Horizontal Area:
a. Streets: The vision clearance triangle leg lengths shall be measured from the intersection of right-of-way
lines (see “A” in the illustration below). If the right-of-way lines curve, then each right-of-way line shall
be extended to form a corner point to measure from. The distances for each leg of the vision clearance
triangle shall be as follows:
i. Speed Limit 30 MPH or Less: A triangle leg that parallels a street with a speed limit of 30 MPH or
less shall be twenty-five (25) feet.
ii. Speed Limit 35 MPH to 40 MPH: A triangle leg that parallels a street with a speed limit of 35 MPH to
40 MPH shall be thirty-five (35) feet.
iii. Speed Limit 45 MPH or Greater: A triangle leg that parallels a street with a speed limit of 45 MPH or
greater shall be forty-five (45) feet.
b. Alleys and Driveways: The vision clearance triangle leg lengths shall be ten (10) feet as measured from
the right-of-way line and the intersection of a driveway or alley (see "B" in the illustration below). The
edge of pavement shall be used to measure along a driveway or alley.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Sight
Triangles
A
ROW Line
A
B
B
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
45 ft
35 ft
35 ft
35 ft
25 ft
25 ft
40 MPH 45 MPH
30 MPH 20 MPH
35 MPH
2. Vertical Area: No primary structure or accessory structure, landscaping, fence, walls or sign shall be permitted
to be placed or to project into the vision clearance triangle between the heights of two (2) feet and nine (9) feet
above the elevation of the adjacent street.
B. Exemptions: Public street signs, essential utility switch boxes, and utility poles shall be exempt from the vision
clearance standards.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
5-94
Vision Clearance Standards (VC) 5
© 2017, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Article
City of Henderson
Zoning Ordinance
6
Nonconformances
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
6-2
Nonconformance Rules 6
6.01 Intent of Nonconformance Rules
As new zoning regulations are adopted or the zoning map changes, structures, lots, and uses that were previously
compliant with zoning regulation are sometimes made noncompliant. Article 6: Nonconformances specifies the provisions
that apply to these legal nonconforming (informally referred to as “grandfathered”) structures, lots, and uses.
6.02 Distinction Between Conforming, Illegal Nonconforming, and Legal Nonconforming
Each structure, lot, and use is either “conforming” or “nonconforming.” Conforming is used to describe a structure, lot,
or use as being in full compliance with the current Zoning Ordinance. Nonconforming is used to describe a structure,
lot, or use that is in violation of the current Zoning Ordinance. A nonconforming structure, lot, or use is either “illegal
nonconforming” or “legal nonconforming.” The following sections determine the nonconforming status of a structure,
lot, or use:
A. Illegal Nonconforming:
1. Structure: A structure constructed in violation of the zoning ordinance that was in effect when the structure
was constructed and which remains in violation of the current Zoning Ordinance is an illegal nonconforming
structure.
2. Lot: A lot established in violation of the zoning ordinance that was in effect when the lot was established and
which remains in violation of the current Zoning Ordinance is an illegal nonconforming lot.
3. Use: A use that was in violation of the zoning ordinance that was in effect when the use was initiated and
which remains in violation of the current Zoning Ordinance is an illegal nonconforming use. In addition, a
use that was legally established prior to the effective date of the current Zoning Ordinance and is not permitted
under the current Zoning Ordinance, but has been abandoned or discontinued for a period of at least one (1)
year, is an illegal nonconforming use.
B. Legal Nonconforming (Grandfathered):
1. Structure: A structure that does not meet one (1) or more development standards of the current Zoning
Ordinance, but was legally established prior to the effective date of the current Zoning Ordinance shall be
deemed a legal nonconforming structure. Generally, a structure is rendered legal nonconforming by an amendment
to the zoning regulations or a zoning map change. However, a legal nonconformity may be a result of
government use of eminent domain or right‑of‑way acquisition.
2. Lot: A lot that does not meet one (1) or more lot standards of the current Zoning Ordinance, but was legally
established and recorded prior to the effective date of the current Zoning Ordinance shall be deemed a legal
nonconforming lot of record. Generally, a lot is rendered legal nonconforming by an amendment to the
zoning regulations or a zoning map change. However, a legal nonconformity may be a result of right‑of‑way
acquisition.
3. Use: The use of a structure or land (or a structure and land in combination) that was legally established prior to
the effective date of the current Zoning Ordinance and has been continuously operated since, that is no longer
permitted by the current Zoning Ordinance in the zoning district in which it is located, shall be deemed a legal
nonconforming use (i.e. is grandfathered). Generally, a use is rendered legal nonconforming by an amendment
to the zoning regulations or a zoning map change.
6.03 Illegal Nonconforming Structures, Lots, and Uses
An illegal nonconforming structure, lot, or use is subject to the enforcement procedures of the current Zoning
Ordinance. The enforcement procedures of the zoning ordinance in place at the time the violation occurred shall no
longer be in effect.
6.04 Legal Nonconforming Structures
The following provisions apply to legal nonconforming structures, structures associated with legal nonconforming uses,
and structures associated with legal nonconforming lots.
A. Legal Nonconforming Building Provisions: The provisions for legal nonconforming buildings, a subcategory of
structures, are as follows:
1. Building Expansion: A legal nonconforming building shall be permitted to expand in area and height as long
as the nonconformity is not increased and the expansion otherwise meets the current Zoning Ordinance. For
example, if a building is in violation of the maximum height standard, it can be expanded in area as long as the
new addition does not exceed the maximum height standard and is otherwise in compliance with the current
Zoning Ordinance. This provisions does not waive applicable permits.
Article
Article 6: Nonconformances 6-3
Legal Nonconforming Structures 6
2. Building Exterior Alteration: The exterior walls of a building shall not be moved except as provided in the
previous clause. Otherwise, the roof, windows, doors and exterior facade may be maintained, repaired,
re-faced, and modified, resulting in the original aesthetic character or an altered exterior character, as long as
the building’s nonconformity is not increased and the alteration otherwise meets the current Zoning Ordinance.
This provisions does not waive applicable permits.
3. Building Interior Alteration: Ordinary repair and replacement of interior finishes, heating systems, fixtures,
electrical systems, or plumbing systems; and interior wall modifications are not regulated by the Zoning
Ordinance. This provisions does not waive other applicable permits (e.g. building permit).
4. Building Relocating: A legal nonconforming building may be relocated if, by moving the building, it decreases
the legal nonconformity and the relocation otherwise meets the current Zoning Ordinance. This provisions
does not waive applicable permits.
B. Legal Nonconforming Structure Provisions: The provisions for legal nonconforming structures, excluding the
subcategory of buildings, are as follows:
1. Structure Alteration: A legal nonconforming structure shall be permitted to be altered in height, area, mass,
and time as long as the nonconformity is not increased and the alteration otherwise meets the current Zoning
Ordinance. For example, if a permanent sign is in violation of the maximum height standard, it can be altered
as long as the alteration does not increase the sign’s height and the alteration is otherwise in compliance with
Zoning Ordinance. This provisions does not waive applicable permits.
2. Structure Relocating: A legal nonconforming structure may be relocated to another location on the same lot if,
by moving the structure, it decreases the legal nonconformity and the relocation otherwise meets the current
Zoning Ordinance and any applicable commitments or conditions of a previous approval. This provisions does
not waive other applicable permits.
3. Conversion for Longevity: Converting a structural component of a legal nonconforming structure to a more
permanent material in order to prolong legal nonconformity shall not be permitted. For example, a legal
nonconforming sign would not be permitted to replace its existing wood supports with metal posts even if
dimensionally the same size. This provisions does not waive applicable permits.
C. Loss of Legal Nonconforming Structure Status: The following provisions apply to all types of legal nonconforming
structures (i.e. including buildings):
1. Condemned Structures: If a legal nonconforming structure, through lack of maintenance, is declared by an
authorized official to be condemned due to its physical or unsafe condition, it shall lose its legal nonconforming
status and become illegal nonconforming; unless the structure is restored or repaired within three (3) months of
the declaration to a standard which clearly overcomes the physical or unsafe condition as supported in writing
by the authorized official after reinspection. The Zoning Administrator may grant an appropriate extension of
time if work was started within the initial three (3) month period and reasonable attempts are being made by the
owner to remedy the condemnation.
2. Removal of Permanent Structures: If a legal nonconforming permanent structure is fully removed or razed,
it shall lose its legal nonconforming status; further, if eighty percent (80%) or more of a permanent structure
is removed or razed, the remaining permanent structure shall lose its legal nonconforming status and become
illegal nonconforming; unless by significantly removing or razing the permanent structure the remaining
permanent structure is in compliance or more in compliance with the current Zoning Ordinance.
3. Moved or Removal of Temporary Structures: If a legal nonconforming temporary structure is moved or
removed (e.g. stored inside, moved to a new on-site location, or taken off-site), the legal nonconforming
temporary structure shall lose its legal nonconforming status and become illegal nonconforming.
4. Flood: If a legal nonconforming structure is damaged from a flood, resulting in a loss of either fifty percent
(50%) of its market value or fifty percent (50%) of the physical structure, all reconstruction shall be required
to meet the current Zoning Ordinance. All other flood damaged legal nonconforming structures shall be
allowed to rebuild the structure that previously existed. This provision does not supercede FEMA or other
State of Texas or United States rules or laws that may be more strict. See Section 6.06(A): Exemption for legal
nonconforming uses.
5. Acts of Nature or Fire: If a legal nonconforming structure is damaged from an act of nature or fire, excluding
flooding, resulting in a loss of either fifty percent (50%) of its market value or fifty percent (50%) of the
physical structure, all reconstruction shall be required to meet the current Zoning Ordinance. All other structures
damaged by an act of nature or fire shall be allowed to rebuild the structure that previously existed. See
Section 6.06(A): Exemption for legal nonconforming uses.
D. Maintenance and Repair: Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the normal maintenance or repair of a
legal nonconforming structure to keep it in a safe, aesthetic, and functional condition.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
6-4
Legal Nonconforming Lots 6
6.05 Legal Nonconforming Lots
The following provisions apply to legal nonconforming lots:
A. Legal Nonconforming Lot Provisions: A legal nonconforming lot shall be permitted to be developed and utilized as
long as proposed structure(s) and use(s) meet the current Zoning Ordinance. All standards other than the minimum
lot area, maximum lot area, and lot measurement standards shall still apply.
B. Loss of Legal Nonconforming Lot Status:
1. Lots used in Combination: If a legal nonconforming lot is used in combination with an adjacent lot owned by
the same person resulting in conformity with the current Zoning Ordinance, it shall lose its legal nonconforming
status.
2. Combining Lots Results in Conformity: If a legal nonconforming lot is joined with an adjacent lot making the
combined lot conforming, the legal nonconforming lot shall permanently lose its legal nonconforming status.
3. Permanent Structure Across Property Lines: If a legal nonconforming lot is owned by the same person as an
adjacent lot, and the owner is granted permission (i.e. a variance) to construct a permanent structure across
the property line of the two (2) lots, thus permanently using the two (2) lots in combination, then the legal
nonconforming lot shall lose its legal nonconforming status at the time the permanent structure is constructed
across the property line or at the time this Zoning Ordinance was adopted if the improvement already existed;
provided the two (2) lots in combination would constitute a single conforming lot.
Article
Article 6: Nonconformances 6-5
Legal Nonconforming Use 6
6.06 Legal Nonconforming Use
The following provisions apply to legal nonconforming uses:
A. Exemptions: Due to concerns of financial institutions, a use that was legally established in a zoning district that
was subsequently changed or rezoned by the City of Henderson, resulting in it not being permitted or becoming a
Special Exception Use, shall be recognized and treated as being a legal use as if it were listed as a permitted use
(i.e. not a legal nonconforming use) in the new zoning district. However, the declaration of it being a permitted use
shall only apply to the subject lot on which the use was legally established. This exemption shall not apply if the
use is abandoned or changed as described in Section 6.06(C): Loss of Legal Nonconforming Use Status.
B. Legal Nonconforming Use Provisions: The provisions for legal nonconforming uses are as follows:
1. Utilizing Existing, Enlarged, New, or Relocated Buildings: A legal nonconforming use shall be permitted to
occupy or use an existing building, enlarge an existing building, newly construct a building, or relocate the
building, provided the building meets the current Zoning Ordinance.
2. Utilizing Existing, Altered, New, or Relocated Structures: A legal nonconforming use shall be permitted to
utilize an existing structure, alter an existing structure, newly construct a structure, or relocate a structure,
provided the structure meets the current Zoning Ordinance.
3. Utilizing Land: Any legal nonconforming use shall be permitted to utilize its lot, or lots owned in combination
upon the effective date of the current Zoning Ordinance. However, any utilization of that land area shall be in
full compliance with all applicable development standards within the current Zoning Ordinance.
4. Expansion to a Previously Owned Adjacent Lot: A legal nonconforming use shall not be expanded onto an
adjacent, vacant lot unless:
a. The lot has previously and clearly been used in conjunction with the legal nonconforming use, and
b. The lot had the same zoning district, and
c. The lot was previously and formally approved for the same legal nonconforming use, and
d. The lot was owned by the same person upon the effective date of the current Zoning Ordinance.
5. Expansion to a Newly Owned Adjacent Lot: Any lot purchased after the effective date of the current Zoning
Ordinance shall not be granted legal nonconforming use status to expand a legal nonconforming use.
6. Increase in Nonconformity: A legal nonconforming use shall not be permitted to change or increase its nonconformity,
unless in compliance with or in greater compliance with the current Zoning Ordinance. The number of
employees, changes in inventory, and changes to vehicular traffic shall not in itself increase nonconformity of
a use. For example, adding an employee shall not change the use, but adding a new or different use that is not
permitted in the current Zoning Ordinance shall not be permitted.
C. Loss of Legal Nonconforming Use Status:
1. Abandonment of Use: If a legal nonconforming use is abandoned or is discontinued for six (6) months or more
shall lose its legal nonconforming status. Any subsequent use shall conform to the provisions of the current
Zoning Ordinance. This rule shall not apply to a use that was suspended due to litigation or a forced government
action.
2. Change of Use: When a legal nonconforming use is changed, altered, or evolves by the property owner or
tenant to be in compliance or more in compliance with the current Zoning Ordinance, the legal nonconforming
use status is lost or partially lost, respectively. In either situation, the current use cannot revert back to the
original legal nonconforming use or increments thereof.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
6-6
Legal Nonconforming Use 6
© 2017, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Article
City of Henderson
Zoning Ordinance
7
Processes
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
7-2
Introduction to Processes 7
7.01 Introduction to Processes
The following process are allowed.
A. Permanent Construction, Installation, Addition, Alteration, or Relocation of a Structure: A project that involves
constructing, installing, adding onto, altering, or relocating a permanent building or structure, including primary
and accessory structures, shall utilized the following applicable process for approval.
1. Improvement Location Permits: Projects that are in full compliance with the applicable regulations shall be
issued an Improvement Location Permit authorizing the project to begin. See Section 7.02: Improvement
Location Permit for details about this process. This process section applies to the following zoning districts:
2. Development Plans: Projects that are in full compliance with the applicable regulations and that meet the
Development Plan requirements as determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be issued an
Improvement Location Permit authorizing the project to begin. See Section 7.05: Development Plan for details
about this process. This process section applies to the following zoning districts:
B. Permanent Alteration to the Land: A project that involves permanently altering the topography, drainage,
floodplain, or environmental features shall have the project reviewed for compliance with the Zoning Ordinance.
Projects determined to be in full compliance with the applicable regulations will be issued an Improvement
Location Permit authorizing the project to begin. See Section 7.02: Improvement Location Permit for details about
this process. This process section applies to all zoning districts:
C. Temporary Use of Land or Structure: A project that involves establishing a temporary use or installing a temporary
structure shall have the project reviewed for compliance with the Zoning Ordinance. Projects determined to be in
full compliance with the applicable regulations shall be issued a temporary improvement location permit authorizing
the project to begin. See Section 7.03: Temporary Improvement Location Permit for details about this process.
D. Establish a New Land Use or Change an Existing Land Use: Establishing an initial land shall require an
Improvement Location Permit or Development Plan approval. However, changing an existing land use, when an
improvement location permit or Development Plan approval is otherwise not required shall be in compliance with
the Zoning Ordinance, but shall not require a permit or review process. However, any change of use that is not
permitted shall constitute a violation of the Zoning Ordinance and enforcement measures and penalties shall apply.
E. Special Exception Use: An application for a Special Exception Use may be filed for a land use classified as a
Special Exception Use in Article 2: Zoning Districts for the subject zoning district. The Board of Adjustments shall
utilize a specific public hearing and procedural findings to determine whether the land use is appropriate for the
specific parcel named in the Application. See Section 7.10: Special Exception Use for details about this process.
F. Change to a Different Zoning District: An application for a Rezoning may be filed for a lot to be changed from its
existing zoning district to a different zoning district. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall utilize a specific
public hearing to review the proposed change in zoning. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall then forward
a recommendation to the Henderson City Council for final action. Approval or denial is the full discretion of the
Henderson City Council. See Section 7.12: Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning) for details about this process.
G. Planned Development: This elective process allows the developer to propose a site-specific regulatory ordinance
that partially replaces the Zoning Ordinance to allow greater design flexibility. Applications for Planned
Development are reviewed and approved by a combination of the Planning and Zoning Commission and City
Council, and approval or denial is the full discretion of the City Council. See Section 7.06: Planned Development;
General for details about this process. This process section only applies to the following zoning districts:
Article
Article 7: Processes 7-3
Introduction to Processes 7
H. Processes for Relief from Regulations and Administrative Decisions: This process section applies to all zoning
districts, except a Planned Development District:
1. Administrative Appeal: An application for Administrative Appeal of a decision, interpretation, order, determination,
or action of the Zoning Administrator to be overturned or corrected shall be reviewed by the Board of
Adjustments. The Board of Adjustments may allow the Zoning Administrator’s interpretation to stand or may
overturn or correct any Zoning Administrator’s decision, interpretation, order, determination, or action. See
Section 7.04: Administrative Appeal for details about this process.
2. Variance from Development Standards: An application for a Variance from Development Standards may be
filed so that an applicable development standard may be partially or fully waived by the Board of Adjustments.
The Board of Adjustments may grant a Variance from Development Standard upon making specific findings of
fact, with or without, conditions or commitments. See Section 7.11: Variance for details about this process.
3. Variance of Use: An application for a Variance of Use may be filed so that a use that is not permitted in a
district be permitted by the Board of Adjustments. The Board of Adjustments may grant a Variance of Use
upon making specific findings of fact, with or without conditions or commitments. See Section 7.11: Variance
for details about this process.
4. Administrative Interpretation: An application for an Administrative Interpretation may be filed with the Zoning
Administrator requesting an interpretation of a Permitted Use or Special Exception Use when a very similar
land use is being proposed, but is not specifically listed as either Permitted Use or a Special Exception Use.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
7-4
Improvement Location Permit 7
7.02 Improvement Location Permit
This process applies to the following zoning districts:
A. Applicability: An Improvement Location Permit shall be required prior to permanent construction, installation,
addition, alteration, or relocation of a structure; prior to permanent alteration to the land; and prior to establishment
of a new land or change an existing land use. The following are examples of projects necessitating an Improvement
Location Permit process:
• Constructing a dwelling unit • Constructing a detached garage
• Establishing an initial land use • Constructing or modifying off-street parking
• Constructing or altering a fence • Room addition on a house
• Installing a new driveway • Installation of a dwelling unit, manufactured
• Installing a swimming pool • Construction a pool house
• Constructing or installing a carport • Constructing a deck and patio over 90 square feet
• Installing a permanent sign • Installing a well or septic system
• Modifying a structure’s height • Constructing a recreation pond
• Adding impervious surface • Installation of a mini-barn over 90 square feet in area
B. Exemption from Improvement Location Permit: This exemption is only from having to obtain an Improvement
Location Permit. It is NOT an exemption from having to meet all applicable regulations (e.g. minimum setbacks
and maximum height) in the Zoning Ordinance. Any project exempt from having to acquire an Improvement
Location Permit that is in violation of the Zoning Ordinance is subject to Article 8: Enforcement. The following
instances are exempt from having to obtain an Improvement Location Permit.
1. Projects that Require a Temporary Improvement Location Permit: A project that requires a Temporary
Improvement Location Permit shall be exempt from obtaining an Improvement Location Permit.
2. Small Structures: An accessory structure that is ninety (90) square feet or less in area is exempt from obtaining
an Improvement Location Permit.
3. Softscaping and Hardscaping: Installing trees, shrubs, plants, and flowers; applying mulch or soil enhancers;
raising of planting beds around foundations; and installing accent hardscaping (e.g. stone steps, stone edging,
and small retaining walls) is exempt from obtaining an Improvement Location Permit as long as there is no
adverse affect to the flow of surface water.
4. Deck or Patio: A deck or patio installed individually or cumulatively that is ninety (90) square feet or less in
area over the entire lot is exempt from obtaining an Improvement Location Permit.
5. Sign Content Change: Sign content, including changing a sign face with the same material, may be changed
without having to receive an Improvement Location Permit.
6. Flag Pole: Flag poles may be installed without obtaining an Improvement Location Permit.
7. Play Set: Play sets may be installed without obtaining an Improvement Location Permit.
8. Type 1 Home Business: Type 1 home businesses may commence without obtaining an Improvement Location
Permit.
9. Property Maintenance: Maintenance and repairs to the existing structure or site features may commence
without obtaining an Improvement Location Permit.
10. Replacing Light Fixtures: Existing light fixtures and bulbs may be replaced without obtaining an Improvement
Location Permit. However, replacement lighting fixtures shall not violate Section 5.41: Lighting Standards,
commitments, or conditions of the development’s approval, or any other standards within the Zoning
Ordinance.
11. Agricultural Crops and Raising of Animals: Any property being solely used for agricultural crops or raising of
farm animals shall be exempt from Development Plan approval.
12. Agricultural Structures: An unoccupiable agriculture-related storage-based accessory structures under 1,000
square feet, shall be exempt from obtaining an Improvement Location Permit.
Article
Article 7: Processes 7-5
Improvement Location Permit 7
C. Cross Reference:
1. Building Permit: An Improvement Location Permit does not authorize compliance with building codes.
Concurrent to having a project reviewed for compliance with the Zoning Ordinance most projects with any
type of occupiable building will also have to be reviewed for compliance with the Building Code. The review
for compliance with the Building Code is conducted by the Building Official and is a separate process from the
Improvement Location Permit.
2. Stormwater Permit: An Improvement Location Permit does not authorize compliance with the Henderson
Stormwater Management Ordinance.
3. Other Permits: An Improvement Location Permit does not authorize compliance with any Rusk County, State
or Federal permits. It is the responsibility of the property owner to acquire any other required permits prior to
making any improvement.
D. Filing Requirements:
1. Application: Application for an Improvement Location Permit shall be made on a form provided by the Zoning
Administrator. The following information shall be provided on the application form.
a. Property owner’s name, mailing address, phone number and/or email address.
b. Applicant’s name, mailing address, phone number, and/or email address, if different than owner.
c. Written detailed description of the proposed project.
d. Date submitted and signed.
e. Signature of the applicant, testifying that they are authorized to represent the property.
f. Any other information requested on the application form.
2. For Permanent Construction, Installation, Addition, Alteration, or Relocation of a Structure: The following
supporting information, as applicable, shall be provided on a site plan, application form, or as an attachment.
a. Projects involving non-inhabitable structures not mounted on a permanent foundation. The Zoning
Administrator may waive any of the below listed submittal requirements when they clearly are not necessary
for a thorough review and proper documentation of the project on the subject property.
i. A scale drawing of the parcel with dimensions.
ii. The building envelope (i.e. the resulting developable area after applying setbacks).
iii. The location of existing structures (e.g. home, garage, sidewalk, driveway, etc.).
iv. The location of the proposed structure.
v. A calculation of the existing lot coverage, expressed in a percentage.
vi. A calculation of the lot coverage as it would be upon completing the project, expressed in a percentage.
vii. A statement indicating whether the proposed structure is located partially or fully within a floodplain
or easement.
b. Projects involving non-inhabitable structures mounted on a permanent foundation. The Zoning
Administrator may waive any of the below listed submittal requirements when they clearly are not necessary
for a thorough review and proper documentation of the project on the subject property.
i. All requirements of Section 7.02(D)(2)(a).
ii. Existing adjacent right-of-ways, street easements or alley easements, and the name of the street or
alley if applicable.
iii. Easements on the parcel or adjacent to the parcel, including the name of the easement holder and a
description of the terms of the easement.
iv. Denotation of any existing structure on adjacent parcels if within twenty (20) feet of the subject
property’s property line.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
7-6
Improvement Location Permit 7
c. Projects involving inhabitable buildings. The Zoning Administrator may waive any of the below listed
submittal requirements when they clearly are not necessary for a thorough review and proper documentation
of the project on the subject property.
i. All requirements of Section 7.02(D)(2)(a) and Section 7.02(D)(2)(b).
ii. Denotation of the location of mature trees, greater than nine (9) inches in DBH.
iii. Elevation above sea level at the location of the project prior to alteration of land.
iv. Certification by a licensed engineer or surveyor that the proposed project is not on or within thirty (30)
feet of a floodplain or wetland boundary.
v. Denotation of adjacent zoning districts if different than the subject property.
vi. Certification by a licensed engineer that the soils are suitable to support the weight of the structure.
vii. Location of existing or proposed drainage swales, ditches or underground tile.
viii. Denotation of where utilities lines will be run to the building and whether they are above or below
grade.
ix. Location of an existing septic system, reserved area for a replacement septic system, existing well, or
existing or new geothermal loop.
x. Denotation of any existing structure on adjacent parcels if within fifty (50) feet of the subject parcel’s
property line.
d. Complex or Unique Projects: The Zoning Administrator may require any additional information if reasonably
necessary to determine if a complex or unique project complies with the provisions of this Zoning
Ordinance.
3. For Permanent Alteration to the Land: The following supporting information, when applicable, shall be
provided on a site plan, application form, or as an attachment. The Zoning Administrator may waive or reduce
any of the below listed submittal requirements when they clearly are not necessary for a thorough review and
proper documentation of the project on the subject property.
a. Projects that involve disturbing more than five percent (5%) of a parcel’s area on a parcel less than five
(5) acres in area, or disturbing any portion of a site greater than five (5) acres, or that results in more than
9,000 cubic feet of soil being disturbed (cumulative of soil added from one area and soil removed from
another, not the net of soil added and removed).
i. A scale drawing of the subject property with dimensions.
ii. The location of existing structures (e.g. building, sidewalk, driveway).
iii. Denotation of existing mature trees, greater than nine (9) inches in DBH.
iv. Denotation of floodplains, wetlands, natural lakes, streams, regulated drains, retention ponds, detention
ponds, known drainage tile, inlets, outlets, monuments or markers, and drainage swales on the parcel
and within fifty (50) feet of the parcel’s property lines.
v. Two-foot contour lines of the existing parcel.
vi. Two-foot contours showing the parcel’s contours as it would be upon completing the proposed project.
vii. Erosion control methodology, devices, locations, and maintenance strategy.
viii. Drainage evaluation of the existing parcel and as it would be upon completion of the proposed project
with a characterization of the change to drainage onto adjacent properties, into drainage tile, or into
surface water ways.
ix. Design cross-section of recreational ponds.
4. For Establishment of an Initial Land Use: The following supporting information shall be provided on a site
plan, application form or as an attachment. The Zoning Administrator may waive or reduce any of the below
listed submittal requirements when they clearly are not necessary for a thorough review and proper documentation
of the project on the subject property.
a. Description of the proposed initial land use.
b. Detailed description of how the initial land use will affect parking, average daily trips, currier service,
building alterations inside and outside, use of outdoor areas, use of accessory structures and number of
employees.
5. Deadline: Applications for an Improvement Location Permit may be filed at any time.
Article
Article 7: Processes 7-7
Improvement Location Permit 7
6. Fees: The applicable fee from the City’s Master Fee Schedule shall be paid at the time the application for
Improvement Location Permit is filed. An application without the appropriate application fee shall not be
considered substantially complete. Technical expertise necessary to review an Improvement Location Permit
application that the City of Henderson does not have adequate proficiency may constitute hiring a professional
to conduct the review or portions thereof at the expense of the applicant and as per the City’s Master Fee
Schedule.
E. Permit Procedure:
1. Substantially Complete Application: An application for an Improvement Location Permit shall not be reviewed
for approval until it is determined to be substantially complete by the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning
Administrator shall first verify that the application form and any required supplemental information has been
submitted correctly, and the applicable application fee has been paid.
2. Review the Project’s Compliance: After the application has been verified as being substantially complete, the
Zoning Administrator shall review the project to determine whether it complies with the Zoning Ordinance.
The Zoning Administrator may consult with other Henderson staff, or any other person, department, or group
to determine if the project complies with all of the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. During the review
process, the Zoning Administrator may:
a. Request Additional Information: During the process of rendering a decision, the Zoning Administrator
may request additional information deemed necessary to determine whether the project complies with the
Zoning Ordinance.
b. Exercise Discretion: Some provisions within the Zoning Ordinance allow the Zoning Administrator to
apply discretion to a decision. If such discretion is exercised, the Zoning Administrator shall describe the
decision and cite the authority for that discretion.
c. Interpret the Zoning Ordinance: Because the Zoning Ordinance cannot address every possible unique
situation, project features, or land use, the Zoning Administrator may interpret the intent of the Zoning
Ordinance when a situation is not specifically addressed.
3. Render a Decision: The Zoning Administrator shall render a “decision to deny” or “decision to approve” based
on the information submitted, project review, discretion exercised and interpretations made.
4. Issuing an Improvement Location Permit: If the proposed project complies with the Zoning Ordinance, the
Zoning Administrator shall render a decision to approve, document the terms of the approval on the permit,
and then issue an Improvement Location Permit. The Zoning Administrator shall also issue a placard to the
applicant. The placard is to be posted in a conspicuous place on the subject property for the duration of the
project.
5. Decision to Deny an Improvement Location Permit: If the proposed project does not comply with the
Zoning Ordinance, the Zoning Administrator shall not issue an Improvement Location Permit. The Zoning
Administrator shall document the reasons for not issuing an Improvement Location Permit and send that
information to the applicant by email or US Mail, or by telephone. If an email is used to communicate denial,
documentation that the email was received shall be included in the file. Similarly, if a phone call is used to
communicate denial, documentation of the phone call shall be included in the file.
6. Allowance for Revision Prior to a Decision: At the discretion of the Zoning Administrator, deficiencies may
be communicated to the Applicant and then the Applicant may be permitted to modify the site plan, application
form, or attachments prior to a decision by the Zoning Administrator.
7. Allowance for Revision After a Decision: After a decision to deny, the applicant may promptly revise the site
plan, application form, and/or attachment in order to comply with the Zoning Ordinance without terminating
the process. The Applicant may submit revisions up to two (2) times within thirty (30) days from the decision
to deny, after said limitation, a full reapplication would be required.
8. Pursuit of Relief: After a decision to deny, the applicant may promptly pursue an Administrative Appeal,
Variance from Development Standards, Special Exception or Variance of Use. During an appeal for relief, the
application for Improvement Location Permit shall be suspended until the Board of Adjustments rules on the
matter.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
7-8
Improvement Location Permit 7
F. Duration:
1. Procedural Expiration: An application for an Improvement Location Permit shall expire and be void after the
Applicant is notified of a decision to deny unless the applicant makes revisions to the application or pursues
relief through the Board of Adjustments within thirty (30) days from notification.
2. Commencement: After an Improvement Location Permit is issued, the project shall commence within twelve
(12) months of the issuance date or the Improvement Location Permit shall become null and void.
3. Expiration: After an Improvement Location Permit is issued, the project shall be completed within two (2)
years of the issuance date or the Improvement Location Permit shall become null and void.
4. Extensions: Upon request by the Applicant, an Improvement Location Permit may be extended one (1) time for
up to twelve (12) months. The Zoning Administrator may grant the requested extension if reasonable attempts
are being made to complete the project. Both the request for the extension and the Zoning Administrator’s
decision concerning the extension shall be made part of the Improvement Location Permit file.
G. Modification After Issuance of an Improvement Location Permit: At the discretion of the Zoning Administrator, an
Improvement Location Permit may be modified if:
1. Warranted: Warranted due to discoveries during construction or other significant finding, and
2. Requested Prior to Initiation: Requested prior to construction, installation, addition, alteration, or relocation of
a structure; prior to alteration to the land; and prior to establishment of a new land or change an existing land use.
or if:
1. Warranted: Warranted due to discoveries during construction or other significant finding,
2. Component is Not Completed: Requested prior to the applicable component of the project being completed,
and
3. Not Correcting a Violation: The modification is not an attempt to correct a violation.
H. Modifications: If a modification is allowed, the Zoning Administrator shall request any necessary information, shall
review the modification for its compliance to the Zoning Ordinance, and then render a decision. If the proposed
modification meets the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance the Improvement Location Permit may be amended
and filed. If the modification is denied for non-compliance with the Zoning Ordinance, the modification shall be
disallowed.
I. Record of Improvement Location Permit: Records of Improvement Location Permits that were approved or denied
pursuant to this section shall be kept on file and shall be available as public record.
Article
Article 7: Processes 7-9
Temporary Improvement Location Permit 7
7.03 Temporary Improvement Location Permit
This process applies to the following zoning districts:
A. Applicability: A Temporary Improvement Location Permit shall be required prior to establishment of a temporary
use of land or structure. The following are examples of projects necessitating a Temporary Improvement Location
Permit process:
• Temporary sign • Tent sale
• Sidewalk sale • Construction trailer
• Model home
B. Filing Requirements:
1. Application: Application for a Temporary Improvement Location Permit shall be made on a form provided
by the Zoning Administrator. Supporting information shall be submitted as per all applicable requirements
described below.
2. Establishment of a Temporary Use of Land or Temporary Structure: The following application and supporting
information, when applicable, shall be provided on a site plan, application form, or as an attachment. The
Zoning Administrator may waive or reduce any of the below listed submittal requirements when they clearly
are not necessary for a thorough review and proper documentation.
a. Property owner’s name, mailing address, phone number and/or email address.
b. Applicant’s name, mailing address, phone number, and/or email address, if different than owner.
c. Written detailed description of the proposed activity and/or structure.
d. Date submitted and signed.
e. Signature of the applicant, testifying that they are authorized to represent the property.
f. Any other information requested on the application form.
g. A drawing of the subject property with dimensions.
h. The location of existing structures (e.g. building, parking lot, sidewalk, driveway, etc.).
i. The location of the proposed temporary structure
j. The applicable setbacks shown on drawing of the subject property.
k. Description of the desired duration of the temporary structure and/or land use.
l. An affidavit stating the proposed temporary structure will not impede drainage, sight visibility, vehicular
circulation, pedestrian circulation or an emergency exit.
3. Deadline: Applications for a Temporary Improvement Location Permit may be filed any time.
4. Fees: The applicable fee from the City’s Master Fee Schedule shall be paid at the time the application for
Temporary Improvement Location Permit is filed. An application without the appropriate application fee shall
not be considered substantially complete. Technical expertise necessary to review a Temporary Improvement
Location Permit application that the City of Henderson does not have adequate proficiency may constitute
hiring a professional consultant to conduct the review or portions thereof at the expense of the Applicant and as
per the City’s Master Fee Schedule.
C. Permit Procedure:
1. Substantially Complete Application: An application for a Temporary Improvement Location Permit shall not
be reviewed for approval until it is determined to be substantially complete by the Zoning Administrator. The
Zoning Administrator shall first verify that the application form and required supplemental information has
been submitted correctly, and the applicable application fee is paid.
2. Review the Project’s Compliance: After the application is verified as being substantially complete, the Zoning
Administrator shall review the project to determine whether it complies with the Zoning Ordinance. The
Zoning Administrator may consult with other Henderson staff, or any other person, department, or group
to determine if the project complies with all of the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. During the review
process, the Zoning Administrator may:
a. Request Additional Information: During the process of rendering a decision, the Zoning Administrator
may request additional information to be added to the site plan, application form, or attachments.
b. Exercise Discretion: Some provisions within the Zoning Ordinance allow the Zoning Administrator to
apply discretion to a decision. If such discretion is exercised, the Zoning Administrator shall describe the
decision and cite the authority for that discretion.
c. Interpret the Zoning Ordinance: Because the Zoning Ordinance cannot address every possible unique
situation, project features or land use, the Zoning Administrator may interpret the intent of this Zoning
Ordinance when not specifically addressed
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
7-10
Temporary Improvement Location Permit 7
3. Render a Decision: The Zoning Administrator shall render a “decision to deny” or “decision to approve” based
on the information submitted, project review, discretion exercised and interpretations made.
4. Issuing a Temporary Improvement Location Permit: If the proposed project complies with this Zoning
Ordinance the Zoning Administrator shall render a decision to approve, document the terms of the approval on
the permit (e.g. maximum time frame) and then issue a Temporary Improvement Location Permit.
5. Decision to Deny: If the proposed project does not comply with the Zoning Ordinance, the Zoning
Administrator shall not issue a Temporary Improvement Location Permit. The Zoning Administrator shall
internally document the reasons for not issuing a Temporary Improvement Location Permit and send that
information to the applicant by email, US Mail or by telephone. If an email is used to communicate denial,
documentation that the email was received shall be included in the file. Similarly, if a phone call is used to
communicate denial, documentation of the phone call shall be included in the file.
6. Allowance for Revision Prior to a Decision: Not applicable.
7. Allowance for Revision After a Decision to Deny: After a decision to deny, the Applicant may promptly revise
the site plan, application form, and/or attachment in order to comply with the Zoning Ordinance without
terminating the process.
8. Pursuit of Relief: After a decision to deny, the Applicant may promptly pursue an Administrative Appeal
or Variance from Development Standards or Variance from Use Standards. During an appeal for relief, the
Application for a Temporary Improvement Location Permit shall be suspended until the Board of Adjustments
rules on the matter.
D. Duration:
1. Procedural Expiration: An Application shall expire and be void after the Applicant is notified of a decision to
deny unless the applicant makes revisions to the application or pursues relief from the Board of Adjustments
within 30 days from notification.
2. Commencement: After a Temporary Improvement Location Permit is issued, the permit shall expire after the
last approved date for the temporary use and/or temporary structure.
3. Permit Expiration: A Temporary Improvement Location Permit shall be issued for the dates requested by the
Applicant and per the Zoning Ordinance limits as described in Sections 5.71 through 5.74 Temporary Use and
Structure Standards. The permitted dates shall be displayed on the Temporary Improvement Location Permit.
4. Extensions: Not applicable.
E. Modification After Issuance of a Temporary Improvement Location Permit: Not applicable.
Article
Article 7: Processes 7-11
Administrative Appeal 7
7.04 Administrative Appeal
A. Applicability: An Administrative Appeal applies to an applicant or interested party that wants a decision, interpretation,
order, determination, or action of the Zoning Administrator or Enforcement Official to be overturned or
corrected by the Board of Adjustments. Any decision, interpretation, order, determination, or action of the Planning
and Zoning Commission shall not be the subject of an Administrative Appeal.
B. Filing Requirements:
1. Application: An Application for Administrative Appeal shall be made on a form provided by the Zoning
Administrator. Supporting information shall be submitted as per the requirements described below.
2. Information to be Submitted: The following information shall be provided on the Application form.
a. Applicant’s name, mailing address, phone number, and/or email address.
b. Applicant’s standing (i.e. legal right to initiate an Application).
c. The Zoning Administrator or Enforcement Official that rendered the decision, interpretation, order determination,
or action.
d. Written statement describing the administrative decision, interpretation, order, determination or action; and
the reason and facts supporting action by the Board of Adjustments.
e. Date submitted and signed.
f. Signature of the Applicant.
g. Any other information requested on the Application form.
3. Deadline: An Application for an Administrative Appeal shall be filed with the Board of Adjustments within
thirty (30) days of the decision, interpretation, order, determination, or action that is the subject of the appeal.
4. Suspension of Work: Work related to the decision, interpretation, order, determination or action being appealed
shall be suspended until the Administrative Appeal is complete, or until the Board of Adjustments authorizes
full or partial work to resume prior to a Board of Adjustments decision.
5. Fees: The applicable fee shall be paid at the time the Application for Administrative Appeal is filed.
C. Appeal Procedure:
1. Substantially Complete Application: An Application for an Administrative Appeal shall not be issued a case
number or be scheduled for hearing before the Board of Adjustments until it is determined to be substantially
complete by the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall verify that the Application form and
required supplemental information has been submitted correctly, and the applicable Application fee is paid.
2. Assignment: Once an Application for an Administrative Appeal has been determined substantially complete,
the Zoning Administrator shall assign a case number and place the appeal on the agenda of the Board of
Adjustments. The Zoning Administrator shall inform the Applicant, in writing, of the date and time of the
Board of Adjustments meeting at which the appeal is to be heard.
3. Public and Interested Party Notice: The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for providing public notice
in accordance with the Board of Adjustments Rules of Procedure.
4. Transfer of Information:
a. The Zoning Administrator shall provide the Applicant for an Administrative Appeal any information which
is being conveyed to the Board of Adjustments in preparation for the meeting.
b. The Zoning Administrator or Enforcement Official that is the subject of the appeal shall transmit the
documents, plans, and papers constituting the record regarding the case to the Board of Adjustments.
c. The Zoning Administrator or the Enforcement Official that is the subject of the appeal may provide a
written report explaining the final decision or action related to the case.
5. Review: The Board of Adjustments shall hear the Administrative Appeal at a regularly scheduled public
meeting. The Board of Adjustments may consider information conveyed to them in writing and testimony
during the hearing in making a decision.
6. Decision: Following the hearing and review, the Board of Adjustments may affirm, overturn, or modify the
decision, interpretation, order, determination, or action of the Zoning Administrator or Enforcement Official.
The Board of Adjustments may also add conditions to its decision when warranted.
7. Appeal: Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Adjustments may appeal such decision to a
court of jurisdiction.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
7-12
Development Plan 7
7.05 Development Plan
A. Applicability: This process applies to the following zoning districts:
1. General: Development Plan approval shall be required prior to an Improvement Location Permit being issued
for:
a. Permanent construction, installation, addition, alteration, or relocation of a structure,
b. Establishment of an initial land use, and
c. Permanent alteration to the land.
B. Exemptions from Development Plan:
1. Single-family detached residential: Any lot being developed for a single-family detached residence or its
accessory structures shall be exempt from Development Plan approval. Only the Improvement Location Permit
process shall apply.
2. Temporary Use or Temporary Structure: Any permitted temporary use or temporary structure shall be exempt
from Development Plan approval. Only the Improvement Location Permit process shall apply.
3. Changing an Existing Land Use: Changing an existing land use shall be exempt from Development Plan
approval. Only an Administrative interpretation shall be required.
C. Filing
Requirements:
1.
Application:
Application
for
Development
Plan
approval
shall
be
made
on
a
form
provided
by
the
Zoning
Administrator.
The
following
information
shall
be
provided
on
the
application
form.
a.
Property
owner’s
name,
mailing
address,
phone
number
and/or
email
address.
b. Applicant’s
name,
mailing
address,
phone
number,
and/or
email
address,
if
different
than
owner.
c.
Written
detailed
description
of
the
proposed
project.
d. Date
submitted
and
signed.
e. Signature
of
the
applicant,
testifying
that
they
are
authorized
to
represent
the
property.
f.
Any
other
information
requested
on
the
application
form.
2.
For Establishing the Initial Land Use:
The
following
supporting
information,
as
applicable,
shall
be
provided
on
an
application
form
and/or
as
an
attachment.
The
Zoning
Administrator
may
waive
or
relax
any
of
the
below
listed
submittal
requirements
when
they
clearly
are
not
necessary
for
a
thorough
review
and
proper
documentation
of
the
initial
land
use
on
the
subject
property.
a.
A
detailed
description
of
the
desired
land
use.
b. Whether
the
use
is
conducted
fully
or
partially
outside
of
a
building,
and
if
so,
indicate
the
areas
the
use
will
be
limited
to
on
the
subject
lot;
on
a
scaled
drawing.
c.
Description
of
any
anticipated
ancillary
uses.
d. Recognition
that
it
is
a
violation
of
the
Zoning
Ordinance
to
modify
or
establish
a
new
land
use
that
is
not
permitted
in
the
applicable
zoning
district.
3.
For Permanent Construction, Installation, Addition, Alteration, or Relocation of a Structure:
The
following
supporting
information,
as
applicable,
shall
be
provided
on
a
Site
Plan,
application
form,
and/or
as
an
attachment.
a.
Projects
involving
non-inhabitable
structures
not
mounted
on
a
permanent
foundation.
The
Zoning
Administrator
may
waive
or
relax
any
of
the
below
listed
submittal
requirements
when
they
clearly
are
not
necessary
for
a
thorough
review
and
proper
documentation
of
the
project
on
the
subject
property.
i.
A
scale
drawing
of
the
subject
property
with
dimensions.
ii.
Where
the
property
gains
access
to
a
public
street.
iii.
The
subject
property’s
building
envelope
(i.e.
the
resulting
developable
area
after
applying
all
minimum
setbacks).
iv.
The
location
of
existing
structures
(e.g.
home,
garage,
sidewalk,
fence
or
driveway).
v.
The
location
of
the
proposed
structure.
vi.
A
calculation
of
the
existing
lot
coverage,
expressed
in
a
percentage.
vii.
A
calculation
of
the
lot
coverage
as
it
would
be
upon
completing
the
project,
expressed
in
a
percentage.
viii.
A
statement
indicating
whether
the
proposed
structure
is
located
partially
or
fully
within
a
floodplain
or
easement.
4. Additions or alterations: to a commercial structure 50% or less of the existing square footage.
Article
Article 7: Processes 7-13
Development Plan 7
b. Projects involving non-inhabitable structures mounted on a permanent foundation. The Zoning
Administrator may waive or relax any of the below listed submittal requirements when they clearly are not
necessary for a thorough review and proper documentation of the project on the subject property.
i. All requirements of Section 7.05(C)(3)(a).
ii. Existing adjacent right-of-ways, street easements or alley easements and the name of the street.
iii. Easements on or adjacent to the subject property, including the type of easement holder, what entity
uses the easement, and a description of the limitations the easement applies.
iv. Depiction of any existing structure on adjacent parcels if within fifty (50) feet of the subject property’s
property line.
c. Projects involving inhabitable buildings. The Zoning Administrator may waive or relax any of the below
listed submittal requirements when they clearly are not necessary for a thorough review and proper documentation
of the project on the subject property.
i. All requirements of Section 7.05(C)(3)(b).
ii. Location of mature trees, greater than nine (9) inches DBH.
iii. Elevation above sea level at the location of the building prior to alteration of land.
iv. Certification by a licensed engineer or surveyor that the proposed project is not on or within fifty (50)
feet of a floodplain or wetland boundary.
v. Identification of adjacent property’s zoning districts if different than the subject property.
vi. Certification by a licensed engineer or surveyor that the soils are suitable to properly support the
weight of the structure and its intended use.
vii. Location of existing or proposed drainage swales, ditches or underground tile.
viii. Denotation of where utilities lines will be run to the building and whether they are above or below grade.
ix. Location of an existing septic system, existing well, or existing or new geothermal loop.
x. Denotation of any existing structure on adjacent parcels if within seventy-five (75) feet of the subject
parcel’s property line.
d. Complex or Unique Projects: The Zoning Administrator may require any additional information if reasonably
necessary to determine if a complex or unique project complies with the provisions of this Zoning
Ordinance.
4. For Permanent Alteration to the Land: The following supporting information, as applicable, shall be provided
on a site plan, application form and/or as an attachment. The Zoning Administrator may waive or relax any of
the below listed submittal requirements when they clearly are not necessary for a thorough review and proper
documentation of the project on the subject property.
a. Projects that involve disturbing more than five percent (5%) of a parcel’s area on a parcel less than five
(5) acres in area, or disturbing any portion of a site greater than five (5) acres, or that results in more than
9,000 cubic feet of soil being disturbed (cumulative amount of soil added from one area and soil removed
from another, not the net of soil added and removed).
i. A scale drawing of the subject property with dimensions.
ii. The location of existing structures (e.g. building, sidewalk, driveway, lighting or fencing).
iii. Location of mature trees, greater than nine (9) inches DBH.
iv. Location of floodplains, wetlands, rock formations, natural ponds, streams, regulated drains, retention
ponds, detention ponds, known drainage tile, inlets, outlets, monuments or markers and drainage
swales on the subject property and within seventy-five (75) feet of the parcel’s property lines.
v. Two-foot contour lines of the pre-development subject property.
vi. Two-foot contours showing the property’s contours as it would be upon completing the proposed
project.
vii. Stormwater and erosion control methodology, devices, locations and maintenance strategy during the
alteration process.
viii. Post-improvement stormwater strategy, design and devices and as it would be upon completion of
the proposed project with a characterization of the change to drainage onto adjacent properties, into
drainage tile, or into surface water ways.
ix. Design cross-section of recreational ponds.
5. Deadline: Two (2) hard copies of the application for Development Plan approval; two (2 ) h ard c opies o f a ll
supporting information; one (1) digital copy of the application for Development Plan approval and supporting
information in .pdf (portable document format); and one (1) digital copy of any drawings or plans in .dwg
format shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator at least twenty-one ( 21) d ays p rior to th e p ublic
meeting at which the improvement is first to be considered by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
7-14
Development Plan 7
6. Fees: The applicable fee from the City’s Master Fee Schedule shall be paid at the time the application for
Development Plan approval is filed. An application without the appropriate application fee shall not be
considered substantially complete. Technical expertise necessary to review a Development Plan that the City
of Henderson does not have adequate proficiency may constitute hiring a professional consultant to conduct the
review or portions thereof at the expense of the applicant and as per the City’s Master Fee Schedule.
D. Review Procedure:
1. Assignment: Development Plans which are determined to be substantially complete and in proper form by the
Zoning Administrator, shall be assigned a case number and placed on the first available Planning and Zoning
Commission agenda that occurs at least twenty-one ( 21) d ays a fter th e s ubstantially c omplete a pplicationfo r
Development Pla n wa s sub mitted. Th e Zon ing Ad ministrator sha ll not ify the app licant of t he dat e of t he
meeting.
2. Internal Review: Upon assignment of a case number and hearing date, the Zoning Administrator shall review
the application for a Development Plan and all supporting information. The Zoning Administrator may forward
any part of the Development Plan submittal and any other relevant information to the City Manager, Planning
and Zoning Commission, legal counsel, Fire Department, Police Department, Utility Departments, city advisors
and/or any other applicable departments or agencies for review and comment. The Zoning Administrator
may submit a written report to the Planning and Zoning Commission stating any facts concerning the physical
characteristics of the area involved in the Development Plan, the surrounding land use, public facilities available
to service the area and/or any other pertinent facts. The written report may also contain opinions of the
Zoning Administrator concerning the Development Plan and comment from any other person who has reviewed
the Development Plan. A copy of such report shall be made available to the Applicant and any other interested
party.
3. Public Notice: The following public notice standards apply to an application for Development Plan approval.
All costs associated with providing public notice shall be borne by the applicant.
a. The Zoning Administrator shall notify all interested parties of the public hearing by regular US Mail a
minimum of ten (10) days before the public hearing. Notice shall be given to all known property owners
within 200 feet of the boundary of the subject site. The measurement shall include any property that is
wholly or partially within the 200 foot distance regardless if a street, river, railroad, or other physical
barrier exists between them.
b. The Zoning Administrator shall publish legal notice in a newspaper of general circulation a minimum of
ten (10) days before the public hearing.
c. The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for providing proof of published notice to the Planning and
Zoning Commission and including proof in the case file.
4. Attendance: The applicant shall be present at the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting to address
questions and discuss comments and concerns posed by the Planning and Zoning Commission, city advisors
and/or the general public. Failure to appear may result in the dismissal of the application for Development Plan
approval.
5. Public Hearing: A public hearing shall be held in accordance with Section 7.09: Public Hearing.
6. Review: At a regularly scheduled public meeting, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall review:
a. The application for Development Plan approval.
b. All supporting information including the site plan, access and circulation, elevations, etc.
c. The testimony of the Applicant.
d. Information presented in writing or verbally by the Zoning Administrator and/or other applicable department
or agency.
e. Input from the public during the public hearing.
f. Any applicable provisions of this Zoning Ordinance.
g. Any other information as may be required by the Planning and Zoning Commission to evaluate the
application.
7. Decision: The Planning and Zoning Commission shall make findings of fact and take final action or continue
the application for Development Plan approval to a defined future meeting date.
a. Findings of Fact: The Planning and Zoning Commission shall make the following findings of fact.
Approval of findings may be in the form of a general statement. Disapproval of findings shall specify the
portion of this Zoning Ordinance with which there is not compliance.
i. The Development Plan is consistent with the intent of the City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance.
ii. The Development Plan does not cause a hazard or unsafe conditions for neighbors, drivers or pedestrians.
iii. The Development Plan does not cause existing or proposed streets to exceed their capacity or cause
traffic congestion.
Article
Article 7: Processes 7-15
Development Plan 7
iv. The Development Plan dedicates the necessary right-of-way for future expansion of adjacent streets or
as indicated on the City’s Thoroughfare Plan.
v. The Development Plan creates a safe environment for pedestrians to safely move about the development
and to connect to perimeter pedestrian facilities.
vi. The Development Plan arranges buildings and structures appropriately for function and aesthetic
appeal.
vii. The Development Plan locates utility junctions, meters and equipment, HVAC equipment, and trash
collection bins or receptacles where they will not cause a nuisance or hazard, or where they will
visually diminish the property’s aesthetic.
viii. The Development Plan is compatible with surrounding uses, buildings and zoning districts; or is
designed to effectively and appropriately buffer or transition to those uses, buildings or zoning districts
to which it is in conflict.
ix. The Development Plan satisfies the applicable development standards of Article 02: Zoning Districts.
x. The Development Plan satisfies the applicable development standards of Article 05: Development
Standards.
xi. The Development Plan satisfies all other applicable provisions of this Zoning Ordinance.
b. Final Action: Based on the findings of fact, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall approve, approve
with conditions, or deny the application for Development Plan approval.
c. The findings of fact and final action shall be signed by the President of the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
d. The Zoning Administrator shall provide the applicant a copy of the decision.
E. Duration:
1. Procedural Expiration: An application for a Development Plan shall expire and be void after the Planning and
Zoning Commission’s decision to deny unless the Applicant makes revisions to the application or pursues relief
through the Board of Adjustments within thirty (30) days from notification.
2. Commencement: After a Development Plan is issued, the project shall commence within eighteen (18) months
of the issuance date or the Development Plan shall become null and void.
3. Expiration: After a Development Plan is issued, the project shall be completed within three (3) years of the
issuance date or the Development Plan shall become null and void.
4. Extensions: Upon request by the Applicant, a Development Plan may be extended one (1) time for up to twelve
(12) months. The Zoning Administrator may grant the requested extension if reasonable attempts are being
made to complete the project. Both the request for the extension and the Zoning Administrator’s decision
concerning the extension shall be made part of the Development Plan file.
F. Modification After Issuance of a Development Plan: At the discretion of the Planning and Zoning Commission, a
Development Plan may be modified if:
1. Warranted: Warranted due to discoveries or other significant finding before construction begins, and
2. Requested Prior to Initiation: Requested prior to the improvement being started or established.
or if:
1. Warranted: Warranted due to discoveries or other significant finding during construction,
2. Improvement is Not Completed: Requested prior to the applicable component of the project being completed,
and
3. Not Correcting a Violation: The modification is not an attempt to correct a violation.
G. Modifications: If a modification is permissible, the Planning and Zoning Commission or Zoning Administrator
shall request any necessary information, shall review the modification for its compliance with the Zoning
Ordinance, and then render a decision at a regularly scheduled meet or per the Planning and Zoning Commission’s
Rules and Procedures. If the proposed modification meets the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance the Development
Plan may be amended and filed. If the modification is denied for non-compliance with the Zoning Ordinance, the
modification shall be disallowed.
H. Record of a Development Plan: Records of a Development Plan that were approved or denied pursuant to this
section shall be kept on file and shall be available as public record.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
7-16
Planned Development; General 7
7.06 Planned Development; General
A. Purpose and Intent:
1. Generally: A Planned Development zoning district may be used to provide for:
a. Greater flexibility in mixed-used development,
b. Innovative approaches to meet the demands of the housing, commercial and business markets, and
c. The establishment of creative and unique developments that would not otherwise be able to be developed
under the provisions of Henderson’s standard zoning district regulations.
2. Process Outline: The two (2) steps of the Planned Development process are listed below and explained in
detail in the following sections.
a. Section 7.07: Planned Development; Step 1
b. Section 7.08: Planned Development; Step 2
Article
Article 7: Processes 7-17
Planned Development: Step 1 7
7.07 Planned Development: Step 1
Planned Development Step 1 includes adoption of a Planned Development District Ordinance and Establishment Plan.
A. Purpose and Intent:
1. Planned Development District Ordinance: The purpose of the Planned Development District Ordinance is to:
a. Rezone a parcel of land as a Planned Development zoning district.
b. Specify a use or a range of uses permitted in the Planned Development zoning district, including permitted
uses per sub-district within the development when applicable.
c. Specify development standards applicable to development in the Planned Development zoning district,
including development standards per sub-district within the development when applicable.
d. Specify that a Development Plan is required for review and approval prior to any development within the
Planned Development District.
e. Specify any limitations or prerequisites applicable to the Planned Development District.
f. Regulate how the development will meet or exceed the intent of the Henderson Zoning Ordinance.
g. Regulate how the development will meet or exceed the intent of the Henderson Subdivision Control
Ordinance.
h. Specify how the development will mitigate monotony and result in a better product than would have
resulted from the application of the Zoning Ordinance and/or Subdivision Control Ordinance.
2. Establishment Plan: The purpose of a Establishment Plan is to present a draft portrayal of the development’s
design; conceptual building designs; identify the target land uses for each building, or sub-area within the
development; address vehicular and pedestrian circulation; present a storm water management plan; and
specify how the development will transition to adjacent properties and streets.
B. Project Applicability: The subject property shall be zoned a district that allows a rezoning to a Planned
Development District, and any application for a Planned Development shall follow the below process and meet the
standards of this section.
C. Prerequisites:
1. Ownership: A Planned Development shall be initiated by the owner of the land involved in the development or
the owner’s authorized agent. If an authorized agent files an application, a signed and notarized consent form
from all owners shall accompany the application.
2. Pre-application Meeting: Prior to submitting an application for a Planned Development, the applicant shall
meet with the Zoning Administrator to review the zoning classification of the site, review regulatory ordinances
and materials, review the procedures and examine the proposed use and development of the property.
D. Filing Requirements:
1. Application: Application for a Planned Development shall be made on a form provided by the Zoning
Administrator.
2. Supporting Information: The application for a Planned Development shall be accompanied by the following
information.
a. Survey and legal description of the proposed site of the Planned Development.
b. An Establishment Plan that, at a minimum, conceptually delineates the basic physical elements of the
Planned Development, including land use, general location and height of buildings, architectural character,
location of parking lots, internal streets, pedestrian circulation, public amenities, preservation areas,
stormwater management strategy, transitions to neighboring properties, and perimeter buffers.
c. A Planned Development District Ordinance that includes the proposed development standards, Permitted
Uses, Special Exception Uses, and process for assuring compliance with the Planned Development regulations
in Article 4: Planned Development.
d. Any other information requested in writing by the Planning and Zoning Commission or Zoning
Administrator.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
7-18
Planned Development: Step 1 7
3. Quantity of Submittals: Two ( 2) h ard c opies o f t he a pplication f or a P lanned D evelopment; t wo (2 ) ha rd
copies of all supporting information; one (1) digital copy of the application for a Planned Development and all
supporting information in .pdf (portable document format); and one (1) digital copy of any drawings in .dwg
file format shall be submitted.
4. Deadline: A complete application shall be submitted twenty-one ( 21) d ays p rior to th e p ublic h earing a t
which the Planned Development is first to be heard by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
5. Fees: The applicable fee from the City’s Master Fee Schedule shall be paid at the time the application for a
Planned Development is filed. An application without the appropriate application fee shall not be considered
substantially complete. Technical expertise necessary to review a Planned Development that the City of
Henderson does not have adequate proficiency may constitute hiring a professional consultant to conduct the
review or portions thereof at the expense of the applicant and as per the City’s Master Fee Schedule.
E. Formal Procedure:
1. Assignment: An application for a Planned Development, which is determined to be complete and in proper
form by the Zoning Administrator, shall be assigned a case number and placed on the first Planning and Zoning
Commission agenda that occurs twenty-one ( 21) d ays o r g reater a fter th e P lanned D evelopment a pplication
was submitted in its entirety. The Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant of the date of the meeting.
2. Internal Review: Upon assignment of a case number and hearing date, the Zoning Administrator shall
review the application for a Planned Development and all supporting information. The Zoning Administrator
may forward any part of the Planned Development submittal and any other relevant information to the City
Manager, Planning and Zoning Commission, legal counsel, Fire Department, Police Department, Utility
Departments, city advisors, and/or any other applicable departments or agencies for review and comment. The
Zoning Administrator may submit a written report to the Planning and Zoning Commission sharing information
about the development, whether it complies with regulations, what surrounds the development, availability
of public facilities and services and/or any other pertinent information. The written report may also contain
opinions of the Zoning Administrator concerning the Planned Development and information from any other
persons that reviewed the Planned Development. A copy of such report shall be made available to the applicant
and all interested parties.
3. Public Notice: The following public notice standards apply to an application for a Planned Development. All
costs associated with providing public notice shall be borne by the applicant.
a. The Zoning Administrator shall notify all interested parties of the public hearing by regular US Mail a
minimum of ten (10) days before the public hearing. Notice shall be given to all known property owners
within 200 feet of the boundary of the subject site. The measurement shall include any property that is
wholly or partially within the 200 foot distance regardless if a street, river, railroad, or other physical
barrier exists between them.
b. The Zoning Administrator shall publish legal notice in a newspaper of general circulation a minimum of
ten (10) days before the public hearing.
c. The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for providing proof of published notice to the Planning and
Zoning Commission and including proof in the case file.
4. Attendance: The Applicant shall be present at the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting to explain the
proposed Planned Development, to address questions, and to discuss comments and concerns posed by the
Planning and Zoning Commission, city representatives and/or the general public. Failure to appear may result
in the dismissal of the application for a Planned Development.
5. Public Hearing: A public hearing shall be held in accordance with Section 7.09: Public Hearing.
Article
Article 7: Processes 7-19
Planned Development: Step 1 7
6. Review: At their regularly scheduled public meeting, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall review:
a. Application for a Planned Development.
b. Planned Development District Ordinance draft.
c. Establishment Plan.
d. Current conditions and the character of current structures and uses in the area.
e. The most desirable use for which the land in the area is adapted.
f. The preservation or enhancement of property values throughout the surrounding area.
g. Responsible development and growth.
h. The testimony of the applicant.
i. Relevant evidence presented by other persons.
j. The limitations, standards, and requirements of Article 04: Planned Developments.
k. Any applicable provisions of this Zoning Ordinance.
l. The Zoning Administrator’s report or any other documents provided by other departments or agencies.
m. Any other additional information as may be required by the Planning and Zoning Commission to evaluate
the application.
7. Decision: The Planning and Zoning Commission shall take final action or continue the application for a
Planned Development to a defined future meeting date.
a. Final Action: The Planning and Zoning Commission shall certify and forward the application for a
Planned Development to the City Council with:
i. A favorable recommendation.
ii. A favorable recommendation and with recommendations for commitments and/or conditions.
iii. An unfavorable recommendation.
iv. No recommendation.
b. Revisions: If revisions are necessary, the Planning and Zoning Commission may continue the meeting
in order to review requested or identified revisions; or may take final action with requested or identified
revisions to be made prior to City Council consideration. If final action is taken, with revisions, the
Applicant shall work with the Zoning Administrator to make sure the necessary revisions to the Planned
Development District Ordinance and/or Establishment Plan are made correctly before being distributed to
the City Council. Any disagreement between the Applicant and Zoning Administrator as to the direction
given by the Planning and Zoning Commission shall require the matter be taken up by the Planning and
Zoning Commission at an official meeting.
8. Commitments and Conditions: In conjunction with its recommendation to the City Council, the Planning and
Zoning Commission may recommend written commitments and/or conditions for approval. If supported by
and included in its adoption of a Planned Development District Ordinance and Establishment Plan, the commitments
and/or conditions shall be legally recorded with the property’s deed within thirty (30) days of the City
Council’s approval. The applicant shall deliver a copy of the recorded commitments and/or conditions to the
Zoning Administrator before proceeding with Planed Development: Step 2 and filing a Planned Development
Detailed Development Plan.
F. Duration: If Step 2, a Planned Development Detailed Development Plan, has not been filed within one (1) year of
the date the City Council approved the Planned Development District Ordinance and the Establishment Plan, the
approval expires and a new application for a Planned Development shall be submitted.
G. Requested Modification:
1. Planned Development District Ordinance: Any requested modification to the text of the Planned
Development District Ordinance shall require to reapply for a new Planned Development if substantial, or
the process for a Zoning Ordinance Text Amendment; per the Zoning Administrator’s discretion.
2. Establishment Plan: Any requested modification to an Establishment Plan shall be addressed in Step 2:
Detailed Development Plan review and approval process if minor, or be required to reapply for a new
Planned Development if the modification is substantial; per the Zoning Administrator’s discretion.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
7-20
Planned Development; Step 2 7
7.08 Planned Development; Step 2
Planned Development Step 2 includes Detailed Development Plan Application and Review Process.
A. Purpose and Intent: The Detailed Development Plan shall provide the Planning and Zoning Commission with the
opportunity to review the details of the Planned Development’s implementation and determine compliance with the
Planned Development District Ordinance.
B. Project Applicability: Any land rezoned to a Planned Development shall follow the below process and meet the
standards of this section to be able to build out each building, modify existing buildings, modify existing developed
sites, or to develop any phase of the development.
C. Prerequisites:
1. Planned Development District Ordinance and Establishment Plan: The Planned Development District
Ordinance and Establishment Plan shall be approved by the Henderson City Council and in effect prior to
submitting a Planned Development Detailed Development Plan. If approval included commitments and/or
conditions, those commitments and/or conditions shall be attached with the property’s deed.
D. Filing Requirements:
1. Application: Application for a Detailed Development Plan shall be made on a form provided by the Zoning
Administrator.
2. Supporting Information: The following information shall be submitted for the Detailed Development Plan
review process.
a. A Site Plan, drawn to scale, that includes the following items. The Zoning Administrator may waive any
below requirement if it is clearly not necessary for a thorough review.
i. North arrow.
ii. Graphic scale.
iii. Address of the site.
iv. Name of the Planned Development.
v. Area map insert showing the general location of the site referenced to major streets.
vi. Boundary lines of the site including all dimensions of the site.
vii. Names, center lines, and right-of-way widths of all streets, alleys, and easements adjacent to the
subject lot.
viii. Layout, lot number, dimension, and area of the subject lot and adjacent lots, if also within the Planned
Development District.
ix. Location and dimensions of all existing and proposed structures on the subject lot, including paved
areas, entryway features and signs.
x. Location of all floodway, floodway fringe areas and wetlands within or adjacent to the subject lot.
xi. Use of each structure by labeling including approximate density or size of all proposed uses and
structures on the site (e.g. parking - number of parking spaces provided; office - floor area).
xii. Distance of all structures from front, rear, and side lot lines.
xiii. Areas reserved for park, recreation, conservation, wetland, common area, lake, trails or other similar
uses, if applicable.
xiv. Proposed landscaping buffers or landscaped areas.
xv. Any other information necessary to support a thorough review of the project and as requested by the
Planning and Zoning Commission and/or the Zoning Administrator.
Article
Article 7: Processes 7-21
Planned Development; Step 2 7
b. Representative building elevations, drawn to scale, for facades of residential and non-residential primary
structures shall be drawn to scale and include the following items. The Zoning Administrator may waive
any below requirement if it is clearly not necessary for a thorough review.
i. Name of the Planned Development.
ii. Graphic scale.
iii. Specification of the type and color of building materials to be used for wall, window, roof, and other
architectural features.
iv. Placement, size, color and illumination details for any proposed wall sign.
v. Any other information necessary to support a thorough review of the project and as requested by the
Planning and Zoning Commission and/or the Zoning Administrator.
c. A Site Access and Circulation Plan, drawn to scale, shall be required, but may be incorporated into the
required Site Plan or may be submitted as a separate plan. The Zoning Administrator may waive any
below requirement if it is clearly not necessary for a thorough review.
i. North arrow.
ii. Graphic scale.
iii. Address of site.
iv. Name of the Planned Development.
v. Names, center lines and right-of-way widths of all existing and proposed streets, alleys and easements
within 100 feet of the site.
vi. Location of any proposed or existing driveways onto a street or alley and its width at the lot line.
vii. All improvements to the street system on-site and off-site.
viii. Measurement of curb radius and/or flares.
ix. Location of proposed and existing sidewalk or sidepath.
x. Any other information necessary to support a thorough review of the project and as requested by the
Planning and Zoning Commission and/or the Zoning Administrator.
d. A Stormwater and Utility Plan, drawn to scale, including the following items. The Zoning Administrator
may waive any below requirement if it is clearly not necessary for a thorough review.
i. Location of all existing and proposed utility easements.
ii. Location and size of all existing and proposed utility components including, but not limited to sanitary
sewer components, water components, storm water components, electric, gas, fiber, telephone, and
cable.
iii. Location and illumination capacity of all lights.
iv. Names of ponds, retention, detention, legal ditches and streams in or adjacent to the site.
v. Contours sufficient to illustrate storm water runoff.
vi. Storm water management plan including all necessary calculations for holding and filtration.
vii. Any other information necessary to support a thorough review of the project and as requested by the
Planning and Zoning Commission and/or the Zoning Administrator.
e. Traffic Impact Study.
i. A Traffic Impact Study shall be required when a proposed development meets or exceeds 150 or more
dwelling units; 15,000 square feet or more of retail space; 35,000 or more square feet of institutional or
office space; 70,000 square feet or more square feet of industrial space; 120 or more occupiable rooms;
46,000 or more square feet of medical space; or any mixed use development which generates 100 or
more peak hour trips in the peak direction.
ii. A registered professional engineer shall prepare and certify the Traffic Impact Study. The Traffic
Impact Study shall evaluate the impact of present and future traffic generated by the proposed development
on the adjacent roadway system. Prior to commencement, the applicant shall meet with the
Zoning Administrator and engineer representing the City of Henderson to determine an appropriate
scope for the Traffic Impact Study.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
7-22
Planned Development; Step 2 7
f. Statement of Development Build-out: The applicant shall indicate, either on the required Site Plan or in
writing, a statement of:
i. The order of development of the major infrastructure elements of the project.
ii. Project phase boundaries, if any.
iii. The order and content of each phase.
iv. An estimate of the time frame for build-out of the project.
g. Landscape Plan: The applicant shall indicate, either on the required Site Plan or on a separate landscape
plan, existing and proposed green space and landscaping on the subject lot showing how the proposed
landscaping meets or exceeds the intent of any buffering standards, if the side were developed using
standard zoning districts.
3. Deadline: Two ( 2) h ard c opies o f t he a pplication f or a D etailed D evelopment P lan; t wo (2 ) ha rd co pies of al l
sup porting inf ormation; one (1) dig ital cop y of the app lication for a D e tailed De velopment Pla n and all
supporting information in .pdf (portable document format); and one (1) digital copy of any drawings in .dwg
file format shall be submitted twenty-one ( 21) d ays p rior to th e p ublic m eeting a t w hich it is fi rst to b e h eard
by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
4. Fees: The applicable fee from the City’s Master Fee Schedule shall be paid at the time the application for a
Detailed Development Plan is filed. An application without the appropriate application fee shall not be considered
substantially complete. Technical expertise necessary to review a Detailed Development Plan that the City
of Henderson does not have adequate proficiency may constitute hiring a professional consultant to conduct the
review or portions thereof at the expense of the Applicant and as per the City’s Master Fee Schedule.
E. Formal Procedure:
1. Assignment: A Detailed Development Plan Application, which is determined to be complete and in proper
form by the Zoning Administrator, shall be assigned a case number and placed on the first Planning and Zoning
Commission agenda that occurs twenty-one ( 21) d ays o r la ter a fter th e D etailed D evelopment P lan w as
submitted in its entirety. The Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant of the meeting date.
2. Internal Review: Upon assignment of a case number and hearing date, the Zoning Administrator shall review
the Application for a Detailed Development Plan and all supporting information. The Zoning Administrator
may forward any part of the Detailed Development Plan submittal and any other relevant information to the
City Manager, Planning and Zoning Commission, legal counsel, Fire Department, Police Department, Utility
Departments, city advisors, and/or any other applicable departments or agencies. The Zoning Administrator
may submit a written report to the Planning and Zoning Commission stating information related to the Detailed
Development Plan. The written report may also contain opinions of the Zoning Administrator concerning the
Detailed Development Plan and information from any other persons that reviewed the Detailed Development
Plan. A copy of such report shall be made available to the applicant and all interested parties.
Article
Article 7: Processes 7-23
Planned Development; Step 2 7
3. Public Notice: The following public notice standards apply to a Detailed Development Plan. All costs associated
with providing public notice shall be borne by the Applicant.
a. The Zoning Administrator shall notify all interested parties of the public hearing by regular US Mail a
minimum of ten (10) days before the public hearing. Notice shall be given to all known property owners
within 200 feet of the boundary of the subject site. The measurement shall include any property that is
wholly or partially within the 200 foot distance regardless if a street, river, railroad, or other physical
barrier exists between them.
b. The Zoning Administrator shall publish legal notice in a newspaper of general circulation a minimum of
ten (10) days before the public hearing.
c. The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for providing proof of published notice to the Planning and
Zoning Commission and including proof in the case file.
4. Attendance: The applicant shall be present at the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting to address questions
and discuss comments and concerns posed by the Planning and Zoning Commission, city staff, and/or the
general public. Failure to appear may result in the dismissal of the Detailed Development Plan.
5. Public Hearing: A public hearing shall be held in accordance with Section 7.09: Public Hearing.
6. Review: At a regularly scheduled public meeting, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall review:
a. The original application for a Planned Development.
b. Approved Planned Development District Ordinance.
c. Approved Establishment Plan.
d. All supporting information including the Site Plan, Site Access and Circulation Plan, Elevations,
Stormwater Management and Utility Plan, statement of development build-out, Landscape Plan, and, if
applicable, Traffic Impact Study.
e. The testimony of the Applicant.
f. Information presented in writing or verbally by the Zoning Administrator, or other applicable department
or agency.
g. Input from the public during the public hearing.
h. Any applicable requirements of the City of Henderson.
i. The limitations, standards, and requirements of Article 04: Planned Developments.
j. Any applicable provisions of this Zoning Ordinance.
k. The Zoning Administrator’s report or any other documents provided by other departments or agencies.
l. Any other additional information as may be required by the Planning and Zoning Commission to evaluate
the application.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
7-24
Planned Development; Step 2 7
7. Decision: The Planning and Zoning Commission shall make findings of fact and take final action or continue
the Detailed Development Plan to a defined future meeting date.
a. Findings of Fact: The Planning and Zoning Commission shall make the following findings of fact.
Approval of findings may be in the form of a general statement. Disapproval of findings shall specify the
portion of the Planned Development District Ordinance, Establishment Plan or this Zoning Ordinance with
which there is not compliance.
i. The Detailed Development Plan is consistent with the intent of the City of Henderson’s Zoning
Ordinance.
ii. The Detailed Development Plan is consistent with Article 04: Planned Developments.
iii. The Detailed Development Plan satisfies the development standards of the approved Planned
Development District Ordinance.
iv. The Detailed Development Plan is consistent with the approved Establishment Plan.
b. Final Action: Based on the findings of fact, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall approve, approve
with conditions, or deny the Detailed Development Plan. If conditions are required, the conditions
shall be recorded within thirty (30) days of the Planning and Zoning Commission’s approval of the
Detailed Development Plan. The applicant shall deliver a copy of the recorded conditions to the Zoning
Administrator before filing a Final Development Plan.
c. The findings and final decision shall be signed by the President of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
d. The Zoning Administrator shall provide the applicant a copy of the final decision.
F. Duration: An approved Detailed Development Plan shall be valid for two (2) years from the date the Planning
and Zoning Commission granted approval. The Zoning Administrator may grant one (1) six-month extension.
The applicant shall submit the request for extension in writing, and the Zoning Administrator shall make a written
determination regarding the decision. Both the request and the determination shall be made part of the Detailed
Development Plan record. If development of the project has not commenced by the end of the two (2) year period
(or by the end of the six-month extension), the approval expires and a new Application for a Planned Development
(District Ordinance and Establishment Plan) shall be required.
G. Requested Modification:
1. Minor Amendments: A minor amendment to an approved Detailed Development Plan which does not involve
an increase in height, area, bulk or intensity of land uses; a different land use; a reduction in setbacks; the
addition of driveways or access points; or a reduction in the amount of parking may be authorized by the
Zoning Administrator without a public hearing, if the requested minor amendment does not adversely impact
the purpose or intent of the overall development. Minor amendments authorized by the Zoning Administrator
shall be reported, in writing, to the Planning and Zoning Commission at the next regular meeting of the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
2. Major Amendments: If the Zoning Administrator determines that the proposed modification may adversely
impact the purpose or intent of the overall development in any way, the applicant shall be required to file a new
Detailed Development Plan Application.
Article
Article 7: Processes 7-25
Public Hearing 7
7.09 Public Hearing
Whenever a public hearing is required by this Zoning Ordinance or by State law, the following public hearing procedure
shall apply:
A. Preemption: If the Board of Adjustments or Planning and Zoning Commission adopt and maintain Rules and
Procedures independent of the Zoning Ordinance, those documents shall preempt the below Public Hearing
standards.
B. Setting the Hearing: When the Zoning Administrator determines that an application is complete and that a public
hearing is required, the Zoning Administrator shall place the item on the next agenda with space available, or per
the Rules and Procedures of the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Board of Adjustments, when applicable.
C. Conduct of Public Hearing:
1. Rights of All Persons: Any person may appear at a public hearing and submit evidence, either individually or
as a representative of an organization. Each person who appears at a public hearing may be required to identify
themselves, state their physical address, and if appearing on behalf of an organization, state the name of the
organization and its physical location.
2. Due Order of Proceedings: Hearings shall be conducted pursuant to Rules and Procedures adopted by the
hearing authority or by a version of Robert’s Rules of Order.
3. Continuance of Public Hearing or Meeting: The body or officer conducting the public hearing or meeting
may continue the public hearing or meeting to a fixed date, time and place without additional publication or
individual notice.
4. Withdrawal of Application: An applicant/Applicant shall have the right to withdraw an application at any time
prior to action on the application/Application by the decision-making body or officer.
5. Record of Public Hearing or Meeting: The transcript of testimony, minutes, application, supporting information,
Applicant/applicant’s statements, exhibits, Zoning Administrator reports, and the decision of the decisionmaking
body, as applicable and available, shall constitute the record. The record shall be maintained for public
inspection in Zoning Administrator’s office.
D. Actions by Decision-making Bodies and Officers: All decisions shall include a brief summary of the matter being
acted upon, and a clear statement of approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval. Conditions of approval
shall be clearly stated and enumerated.
1. Action by Board of Adjustments: Action by the Board of Adjustments shall be final.
2. Action by Planning and Zoning Commission: In the instance where the Planning and Zoning Commission has
final authority, action by the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be final. When the Planning and Zoning
Commission action is advisory to the City Council, the Zoning Administrator shall certify the Planning and
Zoning Commission recommendation to the City Council. When the Planning and Zoning Commission action
is advisory to any other body or agency, the Zoning Administrator shall forward such recommendation to that
body or agency.
3. Action by City Council: The City Council shall act on any Application forwarded by the Planning and Zoning
Commission within the time period specified and in the manner set forth in law or within sixty (60) days,
whichever is less.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
7-26
Special Exception Use 7
7.10 Special Exception Use
A. Purpose and Intent: A Special Exception Use can only be permitted by the Board of Adjustments and is either:
1. Sometimes Not a Good Fit: A use that often is a good fit for the district, but depending on neighboring or
nearby uses or districts, may not be a good fit.
2. A Use that Necessitates Additional Regulation: A use for which certain criteria must be met before the use can
be established at a specific location.
B. Project Applicability: Uses listed as “Special Exception Use” in the two‑page layouts in Article 2: Zoning Districts
for the applicable zoning district shall be considered for approval by the Board of Adjustments.
C. Prerequisites: An application for a Special Exception Use shall be filed by the owner, the owner’s agent, or any
person having a legal or equitable interest in the subject property, but the written authorization of any owner who is
not an applicant shall be required.
D. Filing Requirements: The Zoning Administrator may waive any of the below required supporting information
requirements if they are clearly not related to or necessary for a Board of Adjustments review.
1. Application: An Application for a Special Exception shall be made on forms provided by the Zoning
Administrator.
2. Supporting Information: The following items shall accompany an application for a Special Exception.
a. A Site Plan, drawn to scale, that includes the following information.
i. North arrow.
ii. Graphic scale.
iii. Address of the site.
iv. Legal description of the site.
v. Boundary lines of the site including relevent dimensions.
vi. Names, center lines, and right-of-way widths of all adjacent streets, alleys and easements.
vii. Location and dimensions of all existing and proposed structures, including paved areas and signs.
viii. Location of all floodway, floodway fringe areas, and wetlands within the boundaries of the site.
ix. Distance of all structures from front, rear, and side lot lines.
x. Notation of the existing land use of neighboring properties, or the zoning district if the land is currently
vacant.
xi. Any other information necessary to support a thorough review of the Special Exception.
xii. Any information requested in writing by the Board of Adjustments or the Zoning Administrator.
b. Location of the site within the City; description of existing conditions of the site; proposed plans, drawings,
and/or project description that necessitates the desired Special Exception; rationale for the desired Special
Exception; and description of the desired Special Exception Use shall accompany the application. The
supporting information shall accurately and completely describe the proposed project and the need for the
requested Special Exception.
3. Deadline: An application for a Special Exception shall be filed at least twenty-eight (28) days prior to the
public meeting at which it is first to be considered by the Board of Adjustments.
4. Fees: The applicable fee from the City’s Master Fee Schedule shall be paid at the time the application for
a Special Exception is filed. An application without the appropriate application fee shall not be considered
substantially complete. Technical expertise necessary to review a Special Exception that the City of Henderson
does not have adequate proficiency may constitute hiring a professional consultant to conduct the review, or
portions thereof, at the expense of the applicant and as per the City’s Master Fee Schedule.
Article
Article 7: Processes 7-27
Special Exception Use 7
E. Formal Procedure:
1. Assignment: An application for a Special Exception, which is determined to be complete and in proper form
by the Zoning Administrator, shall be assigned a case number and placed on the first Board of Adjustments
agenda that occurs twenty-eight (28) days or greater days after the application for a Special Exception was
submitted in its entirety. The Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant of the meeting date.
2. Internal Review: Upon assignment of a case number and hearing date, the Zoning Administrator may ask
applicable departments, city advisors or utility companies to review and comment on the proposed project. The
Zoning Administrator may submit a written report to the Board of Adjustments stating any facts concerning the
physical characteristics of the area involved, the surrounding land use, public facilities available to service the
area, and/or other pertinent facts. The written report may also contain opinions of the Zoning Administrator
concerning the application for a Special Exception and/or information from other departments, city advisors
or utility companies that have reviewed the application for a Special Exception. A copy of such report shall be
made available to the applicant and all interested persons.
3. Public Notice: The following public notice standards apply to an application for a Special Exception. All costs
associated with providing public notice shall be borne by the applicant.
a. The Zoning Administrator shall notify all interested parties of the public hearing by regular US Mail a
minimum of ten (10) days before the public hearing. Notice shall be given to all known property owners
within 200 feet of the boundary of the subject site. The measurement shall include any property that is
wholly or partially within the 200 foot distance regardless if a street, river, railroad, or other physical
barrier exists between them.
b. The Zoning Administrator shall publish legal notice in a newspaper of general circulation a minimum of
ten (10) days before the public hearing.
c. The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for providing proof of published notice to the Board of
Adjustments and including said proof in the case file.
4. Attendance: The applicant shall be present at the Board of Adjustments meeting to present the application for
a Special Exception and to address questions and discuss comments and concerns. Failure to appear may result
in the dismissal of the application for a Special Exception.
5. Public Hearing: A public hearing shall be held in accordance with the Section 7.09: Public Hearing.
6. Review: At a scheduled public meeting, the Board of Adjustments shall review:
a. The application for a Special Exception.
b. Supporting information.
c. Presentation by the applicant.
d. Information presented in writing or verbally by the Zoning Administrator or other applicable department or
agency.
e. Input from the public during the public hearing.
f. Applicable provisions of this Zoning Ordinance.
g. The Board of Adjustments may take into consideration the following items as they relate to the proposed
use:
i. Topography and other natural site features.
ii. Zoning district and land use of the surrounding properties.
iii. Driveway locations, street access and vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
iv. Parking quantity, location and design.
v. Landscaping, screening and buffering.
vi. Open space and other site amenities.
vii. Noise production and hours of operation.
viii. Design, placement, architecture, and material of the subject or proposed building or structure.
ix. Placement, design, intensity, height, and shielding of lights.
x. Traffic generation.
xi. General site layout as it relates to its surroundings.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
7-28
Special Exception Use 7
7. Decision: The Board of Adjustments shall make findings of fact, and either take final action or continue the
application for a Special Exception to a defined future meeting date.
a. Findings of Fact: The Board of Adjustments shall make the following findings of fact. Approval of
findings may be in the form of a general statement. Disapproval of findings shall specify the reason for
non-compliance.
i. The proposed special exception is consistent with the intent of the zoning district.
ii. The proposed Special Exception will not be injurious to the public health, safety, morals and general
welfare of the community.
iii. The proposed Special Exception is in harmony with all adjacent land uses.
iv. The proposed Special Exception will not alter the character of the area.
v. The proposed Special Exception will not substantially impact neighboring or nearby property value in
an adverse manner.
b. Final Action:
i. If the Board of Adjustments finds all of the findings of fact in the affirmative, it shall approve or
approve with conditions and/or commitments the application for a Special Exception.
ii. If the Board of Adjustments does not find all of the findings of fact in the affirmative, it shall deny
the application for a Special Exception; or imposes conditions or use commitments that substantially
remedy the areas of concern.
c. Commitments and Conditions:
i. Commitments: The Board of Adjustments may require the owner to make a written commitment.
Commitments shall be officially recorded with the property deed. A recorded commitment shall be
binding on the owner of the land, any subsequent owner of the land, and any person who acquires
interested in the land.
ii. Conditions: The Board of Adjustments may require certain conditions for approval.
F. Duration: The granting of a Special Exception authorizes the Special Exception Use to run with the land unless
conditions to the contrary are placed on the approval. If construction of structures or occupancy of existing
structures has not commenced within two (2) years of the date the Special Exception was granted by the Board of
Adjustments, the approval shall be null and void.
G. Requested Modification: If the Zoning Administrator may consider a requested modification to a condition or
commitment if the request clearly resolves the Board of Adjustment’s concerns or enhances the benefit to adjacent
property owners. Otherwise, any request for modification to a Special Exception approval shall be processed as a
new application for a Special Exception. The owner of the subject lot shall provide the Zoning Administrator with
all the necessary information to render this determination.
1. Reporting: Modifications authorized by the Zoning Administrator shall be reported, in writing, to the Board of
Adjustments at the next regular meeting of the Board of Adjustments.
Article
Article 7: Processes 7-29
Variance 7
7.11 Variance
A. Purpose and Intent: The Board of Adjustments may vary the regulations of the Zoning Ordinance for projects that
meet the criteria set forth in this section. Variances include “Development Standards Variance” granting relief
from a development standard such as height, bulk, or area; or a “Use Variance” allowing a use that is not listed as a
permitted or Special Exception Use in a district.
B. Project Applicability:
1. Jurisdiction: Projects within the jurisdictional area of the Planning and Zoning Commission that are unable
to meet the provisions, or that wish to deviate from the regulations of the Zoning Ordinance may apply for a
Variance.
C. Prerequisites
1. Eligible Applicants: An application for a Variance may be filed by the owner, his agent, or any person having a
legal or equitable interest in the subject property.
2. Pre-application Meeting: Prior to submitting an application for a Variance, the applicant may meet with the
Zoning Administrator to review the zoning classification of the site, ordinance provisions, the application
packet, and the procedure involved.
D. Filing Requirements.
1. Application: Application for a Variance shall be made on a form provided by the Zoning Administrator.
2. Supporting Information: The Zoning Administrator may waive any of the below required supporting information
requirements if they are clearly not related to or necessary for a Board of Adjustments review.
a. A Site Plan, drawn to scale, that includes the following information.
i. North arrow.
ii. Graphic scale.
iii. Address of the site.
iv. Legal description of the site.
v. Boundary lines of the site including relevant dimensions.
vi. Names, center lines, and right-of-way widths of all adjacent streets, alleys and easements.
vii. Location and dimensions of all existing and proposed structures, including paved areas and signs.
viii. Location of all floodway, floodway fringe areas, and wetlands within the boundaries of the site.
ix. Distance of all structures from front, rear, and side lot lines.
x. Notation of the existing land use of neighboring properties, or the zoning district if the land is currently
vacant.
xi. Any other information necessary to support a thorough review of the Special Exception.
xii. Any information requested in writing by the Board of Adjustments or the Zoning Administrator.
b. Location of the site within the City; description of existing conditions of the site; proposed plans, drawings,
and/or project description that necessitates the desired variance; rationale for the desired variance; and
description of the desired use shall accompany the application for a Variance. The supporting information
shall accurately and completely describe the proposed project and the need for the requested variance.
3. Deadline: An application for a Variance shall be filed at least twenty-eight (28) days prior to the public meeting
at which it is first to be considered by the Board of Adjustments.
4. Fees: The applicable fee from the City’s Master Fee Schedule shall be paid at the time the application for a
Variance is filed. An application without the appropriate application fee shall not be considered substantially
complete. Technical expertise necessary to review a Variance that the City of Henderson does not have
adequate proficiency may constitute hiring a professional consultant to conduct the review, or portions thereof,
at the expense of the applicant and as per the City’s Master Fee Schedule.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
7-30
Variance 7
E. Formal Procedure:
1. Assignment: An application for a Variance, which is determined to be complete and in proper form by the
Zoning Administrator, shall be assigned a case number and placed on the first available Board of Adjustments
agenda that occurs twenty-eight (28) days or later after the application for a Variance is submitted in its
entirety. The Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant of the date of the meeting their Application has
been assigned. At the Zoning Administrator’s discretions, he/she may allow an application to be on a Board of
Adjustments agenda that is less than twenty-eight (28) days after the fully complete application was submitted.
2. Internal Review: Upon assignment of a case number and hearing date, the Zoning Administrator may ask
applicable departments, city advisors or utility companies to review and comment on the proposed project. The
Zoning Administrator may submit a written report to the Board of Adjustments stating any facts concerning the
physical characteristics of the area involved, the surrounding land use, public facilities available to service the
area, and/or other pertinent facts. The written report may also contain opinions of the Zoning Administrator
concerning the application for a Variance and/or information from other departments, city advisors or utility
companies that have reviewed the application for a Variance. A copy of such report shall be made available to
the applicant and all interested persons.
3. Public Notice: The following public notice standards apply to an application for a Variance. All costs associated
with providing public notice shall be borne by the applicant.
a. The Zoning Administrator shall notify all interested parties of the public hearing by regular US Mail a
minimum of ten (10) days before the public hearing. Notice shall be given to all known property owners
within 200 feet of the boundary of the subject site. The measurement shall include any property that is
wholly or partially within the 200 foot distance regardless if a street, river, railroad, or other physical
barrier exists between them.
b. The Zoning Administrator shall publish legal notice in a newspaper of general circulation a minimum of
ten (10) days before the public hearing.
c. The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for providing proof of published notice to the Board of
Adjustments and including proof in the case file.
4. Attendance: The applicant, and/or their legal representative, shall be present at the Board of Adjustments
meeting to present the application for a Variance and address questions and discuss comments and concerns.
Failure to appear may result in the dismissal of the application for a Variance.
5. Public Hearing: A public hearing shall be held in accordance with Section 7.09: Public Hearing.
6. Review: At their regularly scheduled public meeting, the Board of Adjustments shall review:
a. The application for a Variance.
b. Supporting information.
c. Presentation by the applicant.
d. Information presented in writing or verbally by the Zoning Administrator or other applicable department or
agency.
e. Input from the public during the public hearing.
f. Applicable provisions of this Zoning Ordinance.
g. Any other additional information as may be required by the Board of Adjustments to evaluate the
application.
7. Decision: The Board of Adjustments shall make findings of fact and take final action or continue the application
for a Variance to a defined future meeting date.
a. Development Standards Variance Findings of Fact: The Board of Adjustments shall make the following
findings of fact for any Development Standards Variance. Findings may be in the form of a general
statement. Disapproval of findings shall specify the reason for non-compliance.
i. The approval of the Development Standards Variance will not be injurious to the public health, safety,
morals and general welfare of the community.
ii. That the need for the Development Standards Variance arises from some condition unique to the
property involved.
iii. The approval of the Development Standards Variance is consistent with State Law.
iv. The use and value of the area adjacent to the property included in the Development Standards Variance
will not be affected in a substantially adverse manner.
v. The strict application of the terms of the Zoning Ordinance will result in a practical difficulty in the
improvement of the property for which the Use Variance is sought.
Article
Article 7: Processes 7-31
Variance 7
b. Use Variance Findings of Fact: The Board of Adjustments shall make the following findings of fact for
Use Variances. Findings may be in the form of a general statement. Disapproval of findings shall specify
the reason for non-compliance.
i. The approval of the Use Variance will not be injurious to the public health, safety, morals and general
welfare of the community.
ii. The use and value of the area adjacent to the property included in the Use Variance will not be affected
in a substantially adverse manner.
iii. The approval of the Use Variance is consistent with State Law.
iv. The strict application of the terms of the Zoning Ordinance will constitute an unnecessary hardship if
applied to the property for which the Use Variance is sought.
c. Final Action:
i. If the Board of Adjustments finds all of the findings of fact in the affirmative, it shall approve or
approve with conditions and/or commitments the application for a Variance.
ii. If the Board of Adjustments does not find all of the findings of fact in the affirmative, it shall deny the
application for a Variance; or shall find an equitable solution through commitments or conditions of
approval.
d. Commitments and Conditions:
i. Commitments: The Board of Adjustments may require the owner to make a written commitment.
Commitments shall be officially recorded with the property deed. A recorded commitment is binding
on the owner of the land, any subsequent owner of the land, and any person who acquires interested in
the land.
ii. Conditions: The Board of Adjustments may require certain conditions for approval.
F. Duration:
1. Development Standards Variance: A development standards variance granted by the Board of Adjustments
shall run with the land until such time as the property conforms with this Zoning Ordinance.
2. Use Variance: A use variance granted by the Board of Adjustments may run with the land, or with the property
owner. If the approval runs with the owner, it shall be in place until such time as:
a. The need for the use variance ends, the property is vacated or goes unused for six (6) consecutive months;
b. The use changes and becomes in conformance with the Zoning Ordinance;
c. The Zoning Ordinance changes, making the use permitted in the applicable district; or
d. The property is sold.
G. Requested Modifications:
1. Development Standards Variance: Modification of a development standards variance that makes a project
more compliant with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance may be authorized by the Zoning Administrator.
Modification of a development standards variance that makes a project less compliant with the provisions of
the Zoning Ordinance shall re-file an application for a Variance or other appropriate application.
2. Use Variance: Modification of Use Variance shall not be permitted. Any modification of an approved Use
Variance shall meet all of the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance or re-file an application for a Use Variance or
other appropriate application.
3. Reporting: Modifications authorized by the Zoning Administrator shall be reported, in writing, to the Board of
Adjustments at the next regular meeting of the Board of Adjustments.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
7-32
Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning) 7
7.12 Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning)
A. Purpose and Intent: It may become necessary to change the zoning of an area or a lot, thereby amending the
Official Zoning Map. The Planning and Zoning Commission has the authority to hear a proposal to amend
the Official Zoning Map. This process is typically known as a “rezoning” of land. The Planning and Zoning
Commission shall make a recommendation to the Henderson City Council concerning a proposal to amend the
Official Zoning Map. The City Council has the power to approve or deny a proposal to amend the Official Zoning
Map.
B. Project Applicability:
1. Jurisdiction: Areas or lots shall be located within the jurisdictional area of the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
2. Previously Denied Applications: The Zoning Administrator shall not accept the same or a significantly similar
application for a Rezoning that has been denied by the Henderson City Council within the last twelve (12)
months. However, the Zoning Administrator shall have the authority and discretion to determine that an
application for a Rezoning is either significantly novel or contains notable changes such to allow a Rezoning
application to be considered within the aforementioned twelve (12) month period.
C. Prerequisites
1. Historic District: Any application for the rezoning of a property in the City’s Historic District shall get a
recommendation from the Historic Preservation Committee to be considered a complete application. The
Historic Preservation Committee shall forward their recommendation to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
2. Eligible Applicants: An application for a Rezoning may be filed by the owner, a legally authorized agent,
or any person having a legal or equitable interest in the subject property. Also, the Planning and Zoning
Commission or City Council may act as an applicant and initiate a Zoning Map Amendment.
3. Pre-application Meeting: Prior to submitting an application for a Rezoning the applicant may meet with
the Zoning Administrator to review the current zoning district, the proposed zoning district, adjacent zoning
districts and land uses, applicable ordinance provisions, the application packet, and the procedure involved.
D. Filing Requirements.
1. Application: An Application for a Rezoning shall be made on a form provided by the Zoning Administrator.
2. Supporting Information: An Application for a Rezoning shall be accompanied by the following supporting
information:
a. A Site Plan, drawn to scale, that includes the following items.
i. North arrow.
ii. Graphic scale.
iii. Address of the site.
iv. Legal description of the site.
v. Boundary lines of the site including all relevant dimensions.
vi. Names, centerlines, and right-of-way widths of all adjacent streets, alleys and easements.
vii. Location and dimensions of all existing and proposed structures, including paved areas and signs.
viii. Location of all floodway, floodway fringe areas, and wetlands within the boundaries of the site.
ix. Use of each structure by labeling.
x. Distance of all structures from front, rear, and side lot lines.
xi. Notation of the existing land use of neighboring properties, or the zoning district if the land is currently
vacant.
xii. Any other information necessary to support a thorough review of the Special Exception.
xiii. Proposed landscaping buffers or landscaped areas.
xiv. Any other information necessary to support a thorough review of the project and as requested in
writing by the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Zoning Administrator.
b. Location of the site within the City; description of existing conditions of the site; proposed plans, drawings,
and/or project description that necessitates the desired Rezoning; rationale for the desired Rezoning; and
description of the desired use shall accompany the application for a Rezoning. The supporting information
shall accurately and completely describe the proposed project and the need for the requested variance.
3. Deadline: An Application for a Rezoning shall be filed at least twenty-eight (28) days prior to the public
meeting at which it is first to be considered by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
4. Fees: Applicable fees shall be paid at the time the Application for a Rezoning is filed.
E. Formal Procedure:
1. Assignment: An Application for a Rezoning, which is determined to be complete and in proper form by
the Zoning Administrator, shall be assigned a case number and placed on the first Planning and Zoning
Commission agenda that occurs twenty-eight (28) days after the Application for a Rezoning was submitted
Article
Article 7: Processes 7-33
Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning) 7
in its entirety. The Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant in writing of the date of the meeting and
provide the applicant with a legal notice.
2. Internal Review: Upon assignment of a case number and hearing date, the Zoning Administrator shall review
the Application for a Rezoning and all supporting information. The Zoning Administrator may forward
the Application for a Rezoning and any other relevant information to any relevant advisors. The Zoning
Administrator may submit a written report to the Planning and Zoning Commission stating facts concerning the
physical characteristics of the area involved in the Application for a Rezoning, adjacent zoning, the surrounding
land use, facilities available to service the area, and/or other pertinent facts. The written report may also
contain opinions of the Zoning Administrator concerning the Application for a Rezoning and information from
any other agency that reviewed the Application for a Rezoning. A copy of such report shall be made available
to the applicant and all remonstrators.
3. Public Notice: The following public notice standards apply to an Application for a Rezoning. All costs
associated with providing public notice shall be borne by the applicant.
a. The Zoning Administrator shall notify all interested parties of the public hearing by regular US Mail a
minimum of ten (10) days before the public hearing. Notice shall be given to all known property owners
within 200 feet of the boundary of the subject site. The measurement shall include any property that is
wholly or partially within the 200 foot distance regardless if a street, river, railroad, or other physical
barrier exists between them. If a mass Rezoning, only Section 7.12(E)(3)(b) shall apply.
b. The Zoning Administrator shall publish legal notice in a newspaper of general circulation a minimum of
ten (10) days before the public hearing.
c. The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for providing proof of published notice to the Planning and
Zoning Commission and including proof in the case file.
4. Attendance: The applicant, and/or their legal representative, shall be present at the Planning and Zoning
Commission meeting to present the proposed Rezoning and address questions and discuss comments and
concerns. Failure to appear may result in the dismissal of the application for a Rezoning.
5. Public Hearing: A public hearing shall be held in accordance with Section 7.09: Public Hearing.
6. Review: At their regularly scheduled public meeting, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall review:
a. The Application for Rezoning.
b. All supporting information.
c. Information presented in writing or verbally by the Zoning Administrator or other applicable department.
d. Input from the public during the public hearing.
e. Any applicable provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.
f. Any other information as may be required by the Planning and Zoning Commission to evaluate the
application.
7. Decision:
a. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall take final action or continue the Application for a Rezoning
to a defined future meeting date. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall pay reasonable regard to the
following factors before taking final action.
i. Current conditions and the character of current structures and uses in each district.
ii. The most desirable use for which the land in each district is adapted.
iii. The conservation of property values throughout the jurisdiction.
iv. Responsible development and growth.
b. Final Action: The Planning and Zoning Commission shall certify the amendment to the Official Zoning
Map and forward the application to the Henderson City Council with a favorable recommendation, an
unfavorable recommendation, or no recommendation. The Planning and Zoning Commission may also
recommend commitments and conditions concerning the use and/or development of the land in connection
with the application for Rezoning. The City Council shall make the final determination regarding an
application for Rezoning, may add conditions of the action, and may accept or reject commitments made
by the applicant or proposed by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
F. Duration: A rezoning shall run with the land and shall be effective from the date of its final approval by the
Henderson City Council.
G. Modification: Modification to an approved Zoning Map Amendment shall not be permitted. The only means to
modify a Zoning Map Amendment is through a new application for Zoning Map Amendment.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
7-34
Zoning Ordinance Text Amendment 7
7.13 Zoning Ordinance Text Amendment
A. Purpose and Intent: It may become necessary to amend the text of the Zoning Ordinance from time to time. The
Planning and Zoning Commission has the authority to hear a proposal to amend the text of the Zoning Ordinance.
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall make a recommendation to the Henderson City Council concerning
a proposal to amend the text of the Zoning Ordinance. The City Council has the power to approve or reject a
proposal to amend the text of the Zoning Ordinance.
B. Project Applicability: Any proposal to add, remove, or alter a provision of the Zoning Ordinance (i.e. Text
Amendment) shall follow the process outlined in this section.
C. Prerequisites:
1. Eligible Applicants: The Henderson City Council or Planing and Zoning Board shall initiate any proposal to
amend the text of the Zoning Ordinance. Any person or legal entity that owns a property in Henderson, or is
the legal representative of a property in Henderson may petition the City Council for a change or amendment to
the zoning provisions of the Zoning Ordinance if said proposed change is in relation to the subject property.
D. Filing Requirements:
1. Proposal: A proposal for an amendment to the text of the Zoning Ordinance shall be prepared by the
Zoning Administrator upon the direction of either the Henderson City Council or the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
E. Formal Procedure:
1. Assignment: The Zoning Administrator shall assign a case number and place the proposed amendment to the
text of the Zoning Ordinance on the first Planning and Zoning Commission agenda that occurs at least ten (10)
days after the proposal is prepared.
2. Internal Review: The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for preparing the amendment in its final form,
and for seeking input from interested parties, relevant advisors, departments and/or agencies.
3. Public Notice: The following public notice standards apply for a proposal to amend the text of the Unified
Development Ordinance.
a. The Zoning Administrator shall notify all interested parties of the public hearing by regular US Mail a
minimum of ten (10) days before the public hearing. Notice shall be given to all known property owners
within 200 feet of the boundary of the subject site. The measurement shall include any property that is
wholly or partially within the 200 foot distance regardless if a street, river, railroad, or other physical
barrier exists between them. If a mass change or change that relates to more than fifty (50) parcels, only
Section 7.13(E)(3)(b) shall apply.
b. The Zoning Administrator shall publish a legal notice in a newspaper of general circulation at least days
(10) before the public hearing.
c. The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for providing proof of published notice to the Planning and
Zoning Commission and including proof in the case file.
4. Public Hearing: A public hearing shall be held in accordance with Section 7.09: Public Hearing.
5. Review: In preparing and considering proposals to amend the text of the Zoning Ordinance, the Planning and
Zoning Commission and the City Council shall pay reasonable regard to:
a. Current conditions and the character of current structures and uses in each district.
b. The most desirable use for which the land in each district is adapted.
c. The conservation of property values throughout the jurisdiction.
d. Responsible development and growth.
F. Decision:
1. Final Action: The Planning and Zoning Commission shall certify the amendment to the text of the Zoning
Ordinance and forward the proposal to the City Council with a favorable recommendation, an unfavorable
recommendation, or no recommendation.
2. Effective Date:
a. Unless an amendment to the text of the Zoning Ordinance provides for a later effective date, the amendment
shall be effective when it is adopted by City Council.
b. When a provision prescribing a penalty or forfeiture for a violation is approved, it may not take effect until
fourteen (14) days after the final day on which notice of its adoption is published.
© 2017, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Article
City of Henderson
Zoning Ordinance
8
Enforcement
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
8-2
Enforcement and Penalties 8
8.01 Actionable Violations
It shall be an actionable violation of the Zoning Ordinance to:
A. Non-compliant Structure: Construct, place, or modify a structure in a manner that is not expressly permitted by the
Zoning Ordinance;
B. Structures without Permit: Construct, place, or modify a structure in a manner permitted by the Zoning Ordinance
without first being issued any permit and/or other approvals required by the Zoning Ordinance;
C. Non-compliant Exempt Structure: For structures that are exempt from needing a permit; construct, place, or modify
a structure in a manner that is not expressly permitted by the Zoning Ordinance;
D. Non-permitted Use: Establish a use that is not expressly permitted by the Zoning Ordinance in the applicable
zoning district, or by a variance of use, or special exception use, or other approval allowed under the Zoning Ordinance;
E. Establishing a Use without Permit: Utilize a property for a use expressly permitted by the Zoning Ordinance
without first being issued a permit and/or other approval required by the Zoning Ordinance;
F. Non-compliance with Approval: Fail to fully comply with procedural requirements, payment of fees, conditions, or
commitments associated with any permit and/or other approval; or
G. Non-compliance with Permit: Fail to perform an improvement as presented in an application for approval, the
material submitted that the issued permit was based upon.
H. Other Violations: Otherwise fail to comply with any of the terms or provisions of this Zoning Ordinance.
8.02 Enforcement Official
The Zoning Administrator shall be the primary Enforcement Official. However, the term Enforcement Official shall be
inclusive of any additional individual, board, or body that may be delegated such authority by the Planning and Zoning
Commission, Board of Adjustments, Mayor or Legislative Body. The enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance shall
be conducted by an Enforcement Official. When a specific type of enforcement role is assigned to a specific board,
body, or individual by Texas Law, Zoning Ordinance, or rules of procedure, then that board, body, or individual shall
participate as specified.
8.03 Discovery of Violations
An Enforcement Official may survey the jurisdiction or may investigate alleged violations in order to discover whether
a violation occurred or exists. There shall be no mandatory requirement for regular inspection of the jurisdiction or
responding to alleged violations.
8.04 Inspection of Property or Structure
A. Standard Inspections: The inspection of property or a structure may be conducted by the Enforcement Official:
1. Permission: From the property where the violation or alleged violation is located with permission from the
owner or tenant at the time of the inspection;
2. Right-of-Way: From a public right‑of‑way;
3. Aerial Media: From aerial photographs or video;
4. Aerial Observation: From aerial observation; or
5. Adjacent Property: From an adjacent property with permission from that property owner.
B. Identification: If requested, the Enforcement Official shall present identification and describe the purpose of the
inspection.
C. Denial of Access to Property: In the event the Enforcement Official is denied entry to a property or structure where
there is a violation or alleged violation, the Enforcement Official may apply to a court of jurisdiction to secure a
warrant authorizing inspection of the property or structure.
D. Surrender of Right to Deny Access: A property owner surrenders the right to deny an Enforcement Official access
to the subject property or structure upon filing for any permit or Application identified in Article 7: Processes.
The surrender to deny access shall commence upon filing a complete application and shall cease upon the Zoning
Administrator issuing a (zoning compliance certificate or certificate of occupancy) or other required final inspection.
8.05 Responsibility for Violations
The property owner or a non-owner that caused the violation may be held responsible for a violation. However, the
property owner shall ultimately be responsible for a violation of the Zoning Ordinance.
8.06 New Permits at Location Where a Violation Exists
When a violation or alleged violation of the Zoning Ordinance has been identified and notice of the violation or alleged
violation has been conveyed in writing to the violator, any new filing for a permit or Application identified in Article 7:
Processes shall be held by the Zoning Administrator until the violation or alleged violation is resolved. This provision
may be waived by the Zoning Administrator if the desired project would clearly not complicate, escalate, or add to the
violation or alleged violation.
Article
Article 8: Enforcement 8-3
Enforcement and Penalties 8
8.07 Enforcement Action Options
When a violation or alleged violation exists and when it is determined that enforcement is necessary, the type of
enforcement action will be at the discretion of the Enforcement Official and generally should reflect what is warranted
by the evidence, severity of the violation or alleged violation, and history of violations on the same property or by the same
violator. The following options, as described in subsequent sections, may be used to enforce the Zoning Ordinance:
• Request to stop work;
• Stop work order;
• Enforcement as a common nuisance;
• Request to remedy;
• Bring action to local court to invoke any legal, equitable or special remedy;
• Bring action to local court to enforce a condition, covenant or commitment;
• Bring action to local court to request a prohibitory or permanent injunction to restrain;
• Bring action to local court to request a mandatory injunction to remove a structure or other violation (e.g. junk
cars);
• Impose a fine for violations;
• Bring action to a local court to invoke a fine for violations; or
• Any remedy or actions set forth in Texas Law, common law, or other applicable State regulations.
8.08 Request to Stop Work
A. Authority: The Enforcement Official may issue a request to stop work as an independent enforcement action or
concurrent to another enforcement action.
B. Cause: A request to stop work may be issued for any violation or alleged violation of the Zoning Ordinance when
one (1) or more of the following statements apply:
1. Cost to Remedy: The violation or alleged violation is in regard to an active project, and if work is not stopped,
the cost to remedy the violation will likely increase;
2. Non-compliance: The violation or alleged violation is in regard to an active project, and if work is not stopped,
the violation will likely escalate in non-compliance;
3. Quantity of Violations: The violation or alleged violation is in regard to an active project, and if work is not
stopped, the number of violations will likely increase; or
4. Public Risk: The violation or alleged violation is in regard to an active project, and if work is not stopped, the
continuance will put the health, safety, or welfare of the public at risk; including workers on the subject property.
C. General Procedure:
1. Issue Notice: The Enforcement Official may verbally or in writing describe the violation or alleged violation to
the property owner, tenant, or person conducting the activity and request the immediate cessation of work until
the matter is resolved. If verbally or to anyone besides the property owner, the Enforcement Official should put
the notice in writing and mail it to the property owner.
2. Other Notices: The Enforcement Official may post a request to stop work in a conspicuous place on the
property. The Enforcement Official may elect to provide additional notice by US Mail, email, phone, or letter
to the property owner, developer, builder, property manager, tenant, occupant, or other interested parties to
further ensure compliance.
3. Effective: The request to stop work shall become effective upon verbal notice, written notice, or posting on the
property.
4. Conditions: The Enforcement Official may describe the conditions under which the request to stop work
will be lifted on the notice. Otherwise, it is the responsibility of the violator to schedule a meeting with the
Enforcement Official to discover the basis for the request to stop work and to determine a remedy.
5. Agreement: To lift a request to stop work, a memorandum of agreement identifying the process and steps
necessary to resolve the violation shall be signed by the property owner and the Enforcement Official; or a
court of jurisdiction shall rule on the matter; or the Enforcement Official shall rescind the request to stop work.
6. Failure to Abide: An Enforcement Official may seek a court of jurisdiction to issue a stop work order to the
violator if he/she fails to abide by the request to stop work.
7. Allowance for Civil Penalty: The issuance of a request to stop work shall in no way limit the pursuit of a civil
penalty.
8. Refusal to Sign Terms: An Enforcement Official may seek a court of jurisdiction to issue a stop work order to
the violator if he refuses to sign the terms of the memorandum of agreement, giving the Enforcement Official
time necessary to pursue other enforcement options without furtherance of the violation or alleged violation.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
8-4
Enforcement and Penalties 8
8.09 Stop Work Order
A. Authority: The Enforcement Official may bring action to a court of jurisdiction as an independent enforcement
action or concurrent to another enforcement action. A court of jurisdiction may issue a stop work order.
B. Cause: A stop work order may be issued when one or more of the following statements apply:
1. Cost to Remedy: The violation or alleged violation is in regard to an active project, and if work is not stopped,
the cost, time, or challenge to remedy the violation will likely increase;
2. Non-compliance: The violation or alleged violation is in regard to an active project, and if work is not stopped,
the violation will likely escalate in non-compliance;
3. Quantity of Violations: The violation or alleged violation is in regard to an active project, and if work is not
stopped, the number of violations will likely increase; or
4. Public Risk: The violation or alleged violation is in regard to an active project, and if work is not stopped, the
continuance will put the health, safety, or welfare of the public at risk; including workers on the subject property.
C. General Procedure:
1. Issue Notice: Before or after filing with the court, the Enforcement Official may mail a notice letter to the
violator, the property address, or to the tax record address if mail is undeliverable to the property (e.g. a vacant
site) describing the violation or alleged violation.
2. Investigation: Before or after filing with the court, the Enforcement Official may make a reasonable attempt to
investigate an alleged violation to determine if there is a violation.
3. Stop Work Order: The Enforcement Official may file for a stop work order or temporary restraining order in
the court of jurisdiction to restrain a person from violating or further violating the Zoning Ordinance.
4. Post Notice: If the court grants the stop work order, the stop work order shall be posted in a conspicuous place
on the property. A copy may also be delivered or mailed to the property owner, developer, builder, property
manager, tenant, occupant, and/or other interested parties.
5. Effective: The stop work order shall become effective per the terms of the court issuance.
6. Conditions: The court of jurisdiction may determine and describe the conditions and terms under which the
stop work order will be lifted. Otherwise, it is the responsibility of the violator to schedule a meeting with the
Enforcement Official and/or court of jurisdiction to resolve the violation.
8.10 Request to Remedy
A. Authority: The Enforcement Official may initiate a request to remedy.
B. Cause: A violation or alleged violation exists on a property.
C. General Procedure:
1. Investigation: Before or after sending a notice letter, the Enforcement Official may make reasonable attempt to
investigate an alleged violation to determine if there is a violation.
2. Issue Notice: The Enforcement Official may mail a notice letter to the violator, the property address, or to the
tax record address if mail is undeliverable to the property (e.g. a vacant site) describing the violation or alleged
violation. Formal notices shall conform with Chapter 54: Enforcement of Municipal Ordinances in Texas
Code.
3. Time Frame: The Enforcement Official may grant the violator an opportunity to provide evidence that there is
not a violation or to bring the violation into compliance; including a time frame of at least one (1) day but not
more than thirty (30) days. The time frame granted shall be reasonably tied to the time necessary to remedy the
violation (e.g. the time to remove an A-frame sign could be one day, and the time to remove a building may be
30 days).
4. Time Frame Extension: A reasonable time frame extension may be granted upon request by the Enforcement
Official if the violator is making satisfactory progress.
5. Timely Correction: If corrective measures have not been initiated in a timely manner, or corrective measures
are not effectively being conducted, or corrective measures are significantly behind schedule, or the violation
remains after the time frame given for remedy, then the Enforcement Official may choose another enforcement
option. If the violator is making satisfactory progress and will likely meet the time frame for remedy, the
Enforcement Official shall not begin another enforcement option until the time frame has expired and a violation
remains unresolved.
D. Safety from Fines: The Enforcement Official shall not impose a fine to a violator if a request to remedy is the first
enforcement action and the violation is remedied within the granted time frame.
Article
Article 8: Enforcement 8-5
Enforcement and Penalties 8
8.11 Invoke a Legal, Equitable, or Special Remedy
A. Authority: The City may bring action to a court of jurisdiction as an independent enforcement action or concurrent
to another enforcement action; except as stated in Section 8.10: Request to Remedy. A court of jurisdiction may
issue a legal, equitable, or special remedy.
B. Cause: A violation or alleged violation of the Zoning Ordinance exists on a property.
C. General Procedure:
1. Issue Notice: Before or after bringing an action to the court of jurisdiction, the City may mail a notice letter
to the violator, the property address, or to the tax record address if mail is undeliverable to the property (e.g.
a vacant site) describing the violation or alleged violation. Formal notices shall conform with Chapter 54:
Enforcement of Municipal Ordinances in Texas Code.
2. Investigation: Before or after bringing an action to the court of jurisdiction, the City may make reasonable
attempt to investigate an alleged violation to determine if there is a violation.
3. Court-imposed Remedy: The City may bring an action to the court of jurisdiction to invoke a legal, equitable or
special remedy for a violation or alleged violation.
4. Liability: Any violator found liable for a violation shall be subject to any court-imposed legal, equitable
or special remedy. The legal, equitable or special remedy will ideally force compliance with the Zoning
Ordinance or be a unique court ruling that fulfills the intent of the City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance. The
severity of the court ruling may consider the severity of the violation, impact to property values in the area,
impact to quality of life in the area, impact to the health, safety and welfare of the public, repetitiveness of
similar violations by the same violator, and/or the precedent that may be set by the ruling. If successful in the
enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance, the court of jurisdiction may award the City of Henderson recuperation
of its legal fees and administrative costs.
8.12 Enforce a Condition, Covenant, or Commitment
A. Authority: The City may bring action to a court of jurisdiction as an independent enforcement action or concurrent
to another enforcement action; except as stated in Section 8.10: Request to Remedy. A court of jurisdiction may
enforce compliance with a condition, covenant, or commitment.
B. Cause: A condition, covenant, or commitment is not in compliance with terms of an approval.
C. General Procedure:
1. Issue Notice: Before or after bringing an action to the court of jurisdiction, the City may mail a notice letter
to the violator, the property address, or to the tax record address if mail is undeliverable to the property (e.g.
a vacant site) describing the non-compliance. Formal notices shall conform with Chapter 54: Enforcement of
Municipal Ordinances in Texas Code.
2. Investigation: Before or after bringing an action to the court of jurisdiction, the City may make reasonable
attempt to investigate an alleged violation to determine if there is non-compliance.
3. Conditions: The City may bring an action to a court of jurisdiction to enforce a condition, covenant (in connection
to a plat, planned development or development plan), or commitment.
4. Court-imposed Remedy: Any non-compliance shall be subject to any court-imposed remedy. The courtimposed
remedy may include enforcing the condition, covenant, or commitment, or be a unique court ruling
that fulfills the intent of the City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance. The severity of the court ruling may
consider the severity of the non-compliance, impact to property values in the area, impact to quality of life in
the area, impact to the health, safety and welfare of the public, repetitiveness of similar violations by the same
violator, and/or the precedent that may be set by the ruling. If successful in the enforcement of the Zoning
Ordinance, the court of jurisdiction may award City of Henderson recuperation of its legal fees and administrative
costs.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
8-6
Enforcement and Penalties 8
8.13 Request a Prohibitory or Permanent Injunction to Restrain
A. Authority: The Enforcement Official may bring action to a court of jurisdiction as an independent enforcement
action or concurrent to another enforcement action; except as stated in Section 8.10: Request to Remedy. A court of
jurisdiction may issue a prohibitory or permanent injunction against a violator or potential violator.
B. Cause: A violation, alleged violation, or intent to violate the Zoning Ordinance exists.
C. General Procedure:
1. Issue Notice: Before or after bringing an action to the court of jurisdiction, the Enforcement Official may mail
a notice letter to the violator, the property address, or to the tax record address if mail is undeliverable to the
property (e.g. a vacant site) describing the violation, alleged violation, or intent to violate. Formal notices shall
conform with Chapter 54: Enforcement of Municipal Ordinances in Texas Code.
2. Investigation: Before or after bringing an action to the court of jurisdiction, the Enforcement Official may
make reasonable attempt to investigate an alleged violation to determine if there is a violation, an alleged
violation, or an intent to violate.
3. Request for Injunction: The Enforcement Official may bring an action to a court of jurisdiction to request a
prohibitory or permanent injunction to restrain a violation of the Zoning Ordinance.
4. Violation: Any violator found liable for a violation or intending to violate the Zoning Ordinance shall be
subject to prohibitory or permanent injunction to restrain. The court-imposed restraint may instead result in a
unique court ruling that fulfills the intent of the City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance. The severity of the court
ruling may consider the severity of the violation, impact to property values in the area, impact to quality of life
in the area, impact to the health, safety and welfare of the public, repetitiveness of similar violations by the
same violator, and the precedent that may be set by the ruling. If successful in the enforcement of the Zoning
Ordinance, the court of jurisdiction may award City of Henderson recuperation of its legal fees and administrative
costs.
8.14 Request a Mandatory Injunction to Remove a Structure
A. Authority: The Enforcement Official may bring action to a court of jurisdiction as an independent enforcement
action or concurrent to another enforcement action; except as stated in Section 8.10: Request to Remedy. A court of
jurisdiction may issue a mandatory injunction against a violator.
B. Cause: A structure was constructed, modified or installed in violation or alleged violation of the Zoning Ordinance.
C. General Procedure:
1. Issue Notice: Before or after bringing an action to the court of jurisdiction, the Enforcement Official may mail
a notice letter to the violator, the property address, or to the tax record address if mail is undeliverable to the
property (e.g. a vacant site) describing the violation or alleged violation. Formal notices shall conform with
Chapter 54: Enforcement of Municipal Ordinances in Texas Code.
2. Investigation: Before or after bringing an action to the court of jurisdiction, the Enforcement Official may
make reasonable attempt to investigate an alleged violation to determine if there is a violation.
3. Request for Injunction: The Enforcement Official may bring an action to a court of jurisdiction to request a
mandatory injunction to remove a structure in violation of the Zoning Ordinance.
4. Violation: If a structure is found in violation, the violator shall be subject to a mandatory injunction to remove
the structure and all costs associated with the action. The court-imposed remedy may instead result in a unique
court ruling that fulfills the intent of the City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance. The severity of the court
ruling may consider the severity of the violation, impact to property values in the area, impact to quality of
life in the area, impact to the health, safety and welfare of the public, repetitiveness of similar violations by
the same violator, and/or the precedent that may be set by the ruling. If successful in the enforcement of the
Zoning Ordinance, the court of jurisdiction may award the City of Henderson recuperation of its legal fees and
administrative costs.
Article
Article 8: Enforcement 8-7
Enforcement and Penalties 8
8.15 Impose a Fine for Violation
A. Authority: The Enforcement Official may impose a fine for violation as an independent enforcement action or
concurrent to another enforcement action; except as stated in Section 8.16: Invoke a Fine for Violation or Section
8.10: Request to Remedy.
B. Cause: A violation of the Zoning Ordinance exists.
C. General Procedure:
1. Collect Evidence: Before imposing a fine, the Enforcement Official may collect evidence to conclude there is a
violation.
2. Issue Notice: The Enforcement Official may mail a notice letter to the violator or the property address (or to
the tax record address if mail is undeliverable to the property (e.g. a vacant site)) describing the violation. The
notice letter may also include the terms of the fine, including the fine amount and the date payment is due.
Formal notices shall conform with Chapter 54: Enforcement of Municipal Ordinances in Texas Code.
3. Time Frame: If not addressed in a concurrent enforcement action, the Enforcement Official may grant the
violator an opportunity to provide evidence that there is not a violation or to bring the violation into compliance,
including a time frame of at least one (1) day but not more than thirty (30) days. The time frame granted
shall be reasonably tied to the necessary time to remedy the violation (e.g. the time to remove an A-frame sign
could be one day, and the time to remove a building may be 30 days).
4. Time Frame Extension: A reasonable time frame extension may be granted upon request by the Enforcement
Official if the violator is making satisfactory progress.
5. Financial Liability: The Enforcement Official may impose a fine in an amount not less than $50.00 or higher
than $1,000 for the first violation and not less than $50.00 or higher than $1000,00 for the second or subsequent
violations. Each unique violation from the day it was confirmed as a violation is subject to a fine; and each
new day the violation persists, excluding days granted to remedy the violation, shall constitute a separate violation
and therefore be subject to another fine. The fine for a violation shall be reasonably in proportion to the
severity of the violation, repetitiveness of similar violations by the same violator, and the costs associated with
enforcing, mitigating, administering, researching, inspecting the violation, court fees, legal fees, and the like.
6. Appeals: Fines imposed by the Enforcement Official may be appealed to the Board of Adjustments. Fines
upheld by the Board of Adjustments may be appealed to a court of jurisdiction.
8.16 Invoke a Fine for Violation
A. Authority: The Enforcement Official may bring action to a court of jurisdiction as an independent enforcement
action or concurrent to another enforcement action; except as stated in Section 8.15: Impose a Fine for Violation or
Section 8.10: Request to Remedy. A court of jurisdiction may issue a fine for violation.
B. Cause: A violation of the Zoning Ordinance exists.
C. General Procedure:
1. Collect Evidence: Before or after bringing an action to the court of jurisdiction, the Enforcement Official shall
collect evidence to conclude there is a violation.
2. Issue Notice: Before or after bringing an action to the court of jurisdiction, the Enforcement Official shall
mail a notice letter to the violator or the property address (or to the tax record address if mail is undeliverable
to the property (e.g. a vacant site) describing the violation. The notice letter may also include the terms of the
fine, including the fine amount and the date payment is due. Formal notices shall conform with Chapter 54:
Enforcement of Municipal Ordinances in Texas Code.
3. Court-imposed Fine: The Enforcement Official may bring an action to a court of jurisdiction to invoke a fine
for a violation.
4. Financial Liability: A violator found liable for a violation may be subject to a court-imposed fine. The fine for
a violation shall be reasonably in proportion to the severity of the violation, repetitiveness of similar violations
by the same violator, and the costs associated with enforcing, mitigating, administering, researching, inspecting
the violation, court fees, legal fees, and the like. Fines imposed by the court of jurisdiction shall be at the
discretion of the court of jurisdiction and per any applicable Texas law. Each unique violation from the day
it was confirmed as a violation is subject to a fine; and each new day the violation persists, excluding days
granted to remedy the violation, may constitute a separate violation and therefore be subject to another fine.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
8-8
Enforcement and Penalties 8
8.17 Other Remedy
Any action allowed by Texas Code, common law, or other applicable State regulations may be used to force a violation
to be in compliance with the Zoning Ordinance or compliance with the terms of an approval.
© 2017, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Article
City of Henderson
Zoning Ordinance
9
Definitions
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
9-2
Definitions
- Abandonment 9
9.01 General
The definitions contained in Article 9: Definitions shall be observed and applied in the interpretation of all Articles
in the Zoning Ordinance, except where the context clearly indicates otherwise. Words used in the present tense shall
include the future; words used in the singular number shall include the plural and the plural the singular; words used in
the masculine gender shall include the feminine.
9.02 Defined Words
The terms listed below shall have the meanings as written and illustrated:
Abandonment: The relinquishment of property or a cessation of the use of the property for a continuous period of one
(1) year by the owner with the intention neither of transferring rights to the property to another owner nor of resuming
the use of the property.
Accessory Building: See "Accessory Structure."
Accessory Structure: A structure which generally meets :
1. Is subordinate to a primary structure in area, intent, and/or purpose,
2. Is installed in the ground (e.g. sport court), is affixed to the ground (e.g. fence), is on a permanent foundation (e.g.
detached garage), or placed on the ground (e.g. a shed on skids);
3. Contributes to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of occupants of the primary structure or primary use,
4. Does not alter or change the interpretation of the primary use,
5. Is located on the same property as the primary structure or use,
6. Conforms to the setback, height, bulk, lot coverage, and other requirements of the Zoning Ordinance unless otherwise
provided for, and
7. Is not designed for human occupancy as a dwelling or commercial use.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Accessory
Structures
Primary
Structure
Lot
Area
Property
Line
R.O.W.
Accessory Structure, Recreation-based: A detached accessory structure placed on a lot and used for recreation,
entertainment, relaxing, and lounging. Examples of recreation-based accessory structures may include decks, docks,
gazebos, hot tubs, ground-mounted satellite dishes, piers, sport courts, and swimming pools. District-specific regulation
are described in Article 5: Development Standards. Recreation-based accessory structures do not include any enclosed
structures (e.g. a pool house or garage use for a hobby).
Accessory Structure, Storage-based: An accessory structure placed on a lot and used to store, keep, shelter or contain
material items. Examples of storage-based accessory structures include barns, carports, detached garages, greenhouses,
mini-barns, pole structures, swimming pool houses, and sheds. Generally, storage-based accessory structures are
enclosed or mostly enclosed buildings used in support of or in conjunction with a primary use or primary structure.
Accessory Structure, Support-based: A detached accessory structure placed on a lot and used to provide essential
services to a primary structure, primary land use, or another accessory structure. Examples of support-based accessory
structures include maintenance facility, mechanical structure, freestanding canopy, stand-alone restroom facilities,
storage building, enclosed vending, kiosk, or structures used in support of the primary structure.
ADA: The Americans with Disabilities Act.
Article
Article 09: Definitions 9-3
Definitions - Adjacent Property 9
Adjacent Property: Any property adjacent to or directly diagonal to the subject property. Properties across a public
right‑of‑way (R.O.W.) are also considered adjacent. The illustration below notes the properties that would be considered
adjacent to two (2) different subject properties.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Subject
Property
Subject
Property
R.O.W.
R.O.W.
R.O.W.
Administrator: See "Zoning Administrator."
Advisory Planning and Zoning Commission: See "Planning and Zoning Commission."
Agricultural District: Refers to the AG District.
Agriculture: The art or science of cultivating the ground, and raising and harvesting crops, often including feeding,
breeding, and management of livestock; tillage; husbandry; farming; in a broader sense, the science and art of the
production of plants and animals useful to man, including to a variable extent the preparation of these products for
human use and their disposal by marketing or otherwise. In this broad use, it includes farming, horticulture, forestry,
dairying, sugar making, etc. Agriculture includes feeding of farm animals for pleasure, raising animals for food, fur,
pharmaceutical, or other commodity purpose where the maximum number of animals does not meet the definition for
confined feeding.
Airport: Any area which is used or intended to be used for the taking off and landing of aircraft, including helicopters,
and any appurtenant areas which are used or intended to be used for airport structures or facilities, including open
spaces, taxiways, and tie-down areas.
Alley: A public right‑of‑way, other than a street, crosswalk, or easement, that provides secondary access for the special
accommodation of abutting property. Lots adjacent to an alley shall not be deemed to have a second front yard, or to
be determined to be a corner lot or through lot. Also, the facade that faces an alley shall not be determined to be a front
facade.
Alteration: Any act or process which changes one (1) or more of the “Exterior Architectural Features” of a structure
designated for preservation, or any structure in a district designated for preservation.
Amphitheater: A venue for performances and entertainment where the performance and spectator areas are both openair.
An amphitheater typically is used to host live performances, and cultural and entertainment activities. Structures
customarily incidental and subordinate to an amphitheater including but are not limited to: temporary or permanent
hospitality facilities, temporary generators, ticket booths, first aid stations, fencing for crowd control, and concession
stands.
Animal, Exotic: Animals raised and bred healthy and humanely for unique pets or entertainment, or animals rescued
from the wild, or from zoos. Exotic animals are primarily securely caged animals. Exotic animals do not include outdoor
pets, household pets, or farm animals. Examples of exotic animals include: lions, tigers, wolfs, coyotes, and elephants.
Animal, Farm: Animals raised and bred healthy and humanely for meat, milk, or similar food products, or for wool,
fur, or similar textiles, or for estrogen, chemical compounds or pharmaceutical products. Farm animals are primarily
pastured. Farm animals do not include outdoor pets, household pets, or exotic animals. Examples of farm animals
include: cows, horses, sheep, pigs, chickens, turkeys, and goats.
Animal Unit: The number of animals, not including offspring that have not yet been weaned.
Animated Message: The changing of any pixel, light element, sign copy, character, graphic, color, or light intensity
between every one thousandths (.001) of a second and up to, but not including, once every five (5) seconds.
Specifically, if any portion of an image changes in less than (5) seconds then it is an animated message.
Antenna: Any system of wires, poles, rods, reflecting discs, or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of
electromagnetic or radio waves.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
9-4
Definitions - Applicant 9
Applicant: The owner or legal representative of real estate who makes application to the Zoning Administrator,
Planning and Zoning Commission and/or Board of Adjustments for action by the Zoning Administrator, Planning and
Zoning Commission and/or Board of Adjustments affecting the property owned or represented by the applicant.
Arbor: A structure used to create a decorative element, or to display or support climbing vines, flowers or other plants.
Arterial, Major: See "Street, Arterial."
Arterial, Minor: See "Street, Arterial."
Assisted Living Facility: A residential facility where assistance with daily activities, such as taking medicine, dressing,
grooming, and bathing are provide for the aged or infirm, or any other reasonably independent person in need of nursing
care; and which does not contain equipment for surgical care or for treatment of disease or injury, and is not primarily
designed for patients being treated for mental illness or alcohol or drug addiction. Assisted living facilities have private
rooms that are not shared by non-related persons.
ATM: See "Automated Teller Machine."
Attached Structure: A structure that is structurally connected to another structure by a foundation, wall, bridge, or
roof line, or appears to be connected. Porch roofs, awnings, decks, entrance stairs, concrete porches, and the like are
considered attached structures and shall abide by all regulations pertaining to primary structures. Carports and garages
are sometimes attached by breezways, or partially supported by the primary structure. In these cases, the carport or
garage would be considered an attached structure.
Automated Teller Machine (ATM): An electronically operated device used to conduct financial transactions on-site,
by means of direct computerized access.
Automobile Oriented Business (Type 1): A low intensity service business that provides services rendered directly
on, to, or for motor vehicles. Vehicle service businesses that meet the characteristics listed below in Table 9-A: Limits
of Automobile Oriented Businesses. Under no circumstances is an auto salvage business, junk yard, or gas station
considered an automobile oriented business.
Automobile Oriented Business (Type 2): A moderate intensity service business that provides services rendered
directly on, to, or for motor vehicles. Vehicle service businesses that meet the characteristics listed below in Table
9-A: Limits of Automobile Oriented Businesses. Under no circumstances is an auto salvage business, junk yard, or gas
station be considered an automobile oriented business.
Automobile Oriented Business (Type 3): A high intensity service business that provides services rendered directly
on, to, or for motor vehicles. Vehicle service businesses that meet the characteristics listed below in Table 9-A: Limits
of Automobile Oriented Businesses. Under no circumstances is an auto salvage business, junk yard, or gas station
considered an automobile oriented business.
Table 9-A: Limits of Automobile Oriented Business
Characteristics
Vehicle Service Business
Types
Size/Weight of
Vehicles Serviced
Outdoor Storage
or Queuing of
Vehicles to be
Serviced
Outdoor Storage
of Serviced
Vehicles
Outdoor Storage
of Parts,
Equipment, or
Waste Products
Percentage of
Service Operation
Allowed to be
Outdoors
Maximum Height
of Outdoor
Storage
Hours of
Operation
Type 1: Low Intensity passenger vehicles
and light duty
trucks
up to 4 operable
vehicles
up to 4 operable
vehicles
not allowed none not allowed between
7 AM and 7 PM
Type 2: Moderate Intensity passenger
vehicles, light duty
trucks, and tri-axle
trucks
up to 10 operable
vehicles and/or
four inoperable
vehicles
up to 10 operable
vehicles
up to 10% of lot
area or 3,000
square feet,
whichever is more
restrictive
up to 20% up to 6 feet between
5 AM and 10 PM
Type 3: High Intensity no limit no limit no limit no limit no limit no limit no limit
Automobile Recovery Lot: A business using an outdoor storage area for motor vehicles that have been towed awaiting
recovery by the rightful owner. An automobile recovery lot is regulated as an automobile oriented business.
Average Setback: See "Setback, Established."
Bar (or Tavern): An establishment used principally for the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages on site and
that derives sixty percent (60%) or more of its annual gross revenue from the sale of alcoholic beverages. The service
of food tends to be incidental. Other names for a bar include tavern, cocktail lounge, pub, or saloon.
Article
Article 09: Definitions 9-5
Definitions - Brew Pub 9
Base Zoning District: The existing zoning district of the subject lot:
• Prior to the approval of a planned development, or
• Prior to the effects of an overlay district.
Basement: An area within a building predominantly below the finished grade. Specifically, a basement shall have no
more than ten percent (10%) of its perimeter greater than three (3) feet above grade; and no point along its perimeter
shall be greater than five (5) feet above grade (measured vertically from the bottom of the floor joists of the floor above
to the average finished grade around the building). Basements are not considered a story.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Crawl Space
A
B
If B is greater than A,
the story is a basement.
Second
Floor
First
Floor
Basement
A
B
Mezzanine Attic
If B is less than A,
the story is NOT a basement.
Bar (or Tavern): An establishment principally for the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages on site and that
derives fifty percent (50%) or more of its annual gross revenue from the sale of alcoholic beverages. The service of
food tends to be incidental. Other names for a bar include tavern, cocktail lounge, pub, or saloon. A bar shall include
ancillary uses commonly related to such a use, but shall not include video games of chance where the user can earn
credits, tokens, tickets or other form of earnings.
Bed and Breakfast: An owner occupied or employee of the owner occupied residence containing no more than six (6)
guest rooms for hire, for lodging by prearrangement for periods not to exceed three (3) consecutive weeks and providing
for occasional meals daily (usually breakfast) and not a hotel/motel.
Berm: A man-made, formed, earth mound of definite height and width used for landscaping and screening purposes,
the intent of which is to provide a transition between uses of differing intensity or to screen uses from sight.
Block: Property abutting on one (1) side of a street and lying between the two (2) nearest intersecting or intercepting
streets, intersecting railroad, intersecting waterway or the end of a dead end street.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Corner
Lot
Corner
Lot
Interior
Lot
Through
Lot
Through
Lot
R.O.W.
R.O.W.
R.O.W.
Block
Board: See "Zoning Board of Adjustments."
Board of Adjustments: See “Zoning Board of Adjustments.”
Bond: Any form of security including a cash deposit, surety bond, collateral, property or instrument of credit in an
amount and form satisfactory to the Planning and Zoning Commission. All bonds shall be approved by the Planning
and Zoning Commission wherever a bond is required by the Zoning Ordinance.
Brew Pub: An establishment principally for the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages, featuring beer brewed
on site or by the owner of the brew pub off site. Generally, a brew pub derives forty percent (40%) or more of its
annual gross revenue from the sale of beer. The service of food and other drinks shall constitute forty percent (40%) or
more of the annual gross revenue.. A brew pub shall include ancillary uses commonly related to such a use, but shall
not include video games of chance where the user can earn credits, tokens, tickets or other form of earnings.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
9-6
Definitions - Broadcast Facility 9
Broadcast Facility: A place where audio or video programing is prepared, recorded, edited, or broadcast, or where
programming is received for editing or re-broadcasting; with on-site telecommunication tower, on-site antennae, and/or
on-site commercial satellite dishes.
Broadcast Studio: A place where audio or video programing is prepared, recorded, edited, or broadcast, or where
programming is received for editing or re-broadcasting; without on-site telecommunication towers, on-site antennae, or
on-site commercial satellite dishes greater than five (5) feet in diameter. See "Broadcast Facility" for broadcast studios
with on-site towers, antennae, and/or commercial satellite dishes.
Buffer Yard: An area adjacent to front, side, and rear property lines, measured perpendicularly from adjacent property
lines and/or right‑of‑way lines, intended to provide attractive spaces, to reduce the impacts of proposed uses on adjacent
property or natural features, and to screen incompatible uses from each other and from the right‑of‑way. Buffers also
help to maintain existing trees or natural vegetation, to block or reduce noise, glare or other emissions, and to maintain
privacy. Buffer yards are in addition to (separate from) front, rear or side yard setbacks.
Buildable Lot: See "Lot, Buildable."
Building: A enclosed or predominantly enclosed structure having a roof, supported by columns or walls, for the shelter,
support, or enclosure of persons, property, or animals; often with interior spaces separated by walls from the ground
up. Car ports, although not predominantly enclosed shall be considered a building for the purposes of this Zoning
Ordinance.
Building Area: See "Floor Area, Main."
Building Code: The applicable Building Code which establishes and controls the standards for constructing all forms
of permanent structures and related matters.
Building Official: Shall mean the inspector of buildings for the City of Henderson.
Building, Detached: See "Detached Structure."
Building Envelope: The setback lines that establish an area on a lot in which building can occur.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Building
Envelope
Front Yard
Setback
Side
Yard
Setback
Rear Yard
Setback
R.O.W.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Side
Yard
Setback
Building
Envelope
R.O.W.
Front Yard
Setback
Rear Yard
Setback
Side
Yard
Setback
Buffer
Yard
Building Height: See “Structure Height.”
Building Permit: An authorization to begin construction of or modification to a structure after submitting mandatory
information and complying with construction standards contained within the applicable Building Code, and any applicable
local amendments to the Building Code.
Business: The engaging in the purchase, sale, barter or exchange of goods, wares, merchandise, services, or the
maintenance or operation of offices, recreational or amusement enterprises.
Business Districts: See "Commercial District."
Campground: Any site, lot, field or tract of land designed with facilities for short-term occupancy by recreational
vehicles and other camping equipment, but not including mobile homes.
Canopy Tree: Deciduous trees that grow to at least forty (40) feet in height and have a canopy that is round or oval in
shape. Conical, pear, or tubular shaped trees are not canopy trees.
Car Wash: A structure, or portion of a structure, containing facilities for washing one (1) or more automobiles at any
one time, using production line methods such as a chain conveyor, blower, steam cleaning device or other mechanical
devices; or providing space, water, equipment or soap for the complete or partial cleaning of such automobiles, whether
by operator or by custom. Car washes are regulated as Automobile Oriented Businesses.
Article
Article 09: Definitions 9-7
Definitions - Condition of Approval 9
Caretakers Residence: A single-family detached dwelling or a dwelling unit integrated into a non-residential primary
structure, located on public park land which is occupied by a person who is employed by the park.
Cellular Communication Equipment: Antennas and other transmitting and/or receiving device or other associated
devices used in the provision of telecommunications service.
Cemetery: Property used for interring of the dead, including a memory garden and/or mausoleum.
Certificate of Appropriateness: A certificate from the Historic Landmark Preservation Committee authorizing plans
for alteration, reconstruction, removal, or demolition of a landmark or in improvement on a historic site.
Certificate of Occupancy: A certificate stating that the location, occupancy, and use of a building or structure complies
with all applicable Zoning Ordinance provisions.
Changeable Copy (Ratio): The portion of a permitted sign that is used for cyclical messages or flashing messages.
Child Care Center: Any institution operated for the care of children, licensed pursuant to all applicable laws.
Child Care Home: An establishment providing non-overnight care, supervision, and protection of children in private
residences which is ancillary to the primary use as a residence. A residential structure in which at least six (6) children
(not including the children for whom the provider is parent, stepparent, guardian, custodian, or other relative) at any
time receive child care from a provider: (a) while unattended by a parent, legal guardian or custodian; (b) for regular
compensation; and (c) for more than four (4) hours but less than twenty-four (24) hours in each of ten (10) consecutive
days in a calendar year, excluding intervening Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays.
Child Care Institution:
• A residential facility that provides child care on a twenty-four (24) hour basis for more than ten (10) children; or
• A residential facility with a capacity of not more than ten (10) children that exceeds the definition of a group home.
A child care institution does not include a juvenile detention facility.
Children's Home: See "Child Care Institution."
Church: See “Place of Worship.”
City: The City of Henderson.
City Official: A City Council member, a Planning and Zoning Commission member, a Board of Adjustments member,
or an employee of the City of Henderson.
Clinic: See "Office, Medical."
Club or Lodge: A building used by an organized group of people for a common purpose that is social, philanthropic,
cultural, or educational in nature. A club or lodge shall include ancillary uses commonly related to such a use, but shall
not include video games of chance where the user can earn credits, tokens, tickets or other form of earnings.
Clubhouse: A structure used in association with a golf course, in which may be locker rooms, golf course administration
offices, golf cart storage and maintenance, rest rooms, lounges, meeting space, snack bar, banquet facilities and
retail sales of golf related products. Retail sales shall constitute no more than fifteen percent (15%) of the interior space
accessible to public of the clubhouse.
Collector, Major: See "Street, Collector."
Collector, Minor: See "Street, Collector."
College: See “University.”
Collocation: A space on an existing or proposed telecommunication tower that can be used for the installation and/or
mounting of antennas or radio or cellular communication equipment that operates on a different frequency from the
initial user.
Commercial District: Refers to the C1, C2, UC, and OC Districts.
Commercial Wireless Communications Service: A licensed commercial wireless telecommunications service, including
cellular, personal communication services (PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile
radio (ESMR), paging, and similar devices that are marketed to the general public.
Commission: See "Planning and Zoning Commission."
Community Center: A structure available to the public for community activities, meetings, banquets, projects, gatherings,
and the like. A community center may be able to be reserved by the public for private parties and events.
Condition of Approval: Stipulations or provisions set forth by the Board of Adjustments or Planning and Zoning
Commission required as a prerequisite for approval of an Application.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
9-8
Definitions - Condominium 9
Condominium: Buildings which are precisely divided by legal description (e.g. typically by floor and/or common
wall), and where each division is a legally transferable property. Condominiums typically are located on land owned
jointly with all other condominium owners, or on land owned by a company that maintains the land and/or building
envelope of the buildings.
Confined Feeding: The raising of animals for food, fur, or recreation in lots, pens, ponds, sheds, or buildings, where
they are confined, fed, and maintained for at least forty-five (45) days during any year, and where there is no ground
cover or vegetation present over at least one-half (½) of the animals’ confinement area.
Confined Feeding Facility: All elements of a facility used for Confined Feeding, including: animal barns/sheds/
structures, lagoons, waste management and storage facilities, animal mortalities storage facilities, animal composting
facilities, incinerators, feed storage, mechanical equipment, truck maneuvering areas, loading docks, parking lots,
medical facilities, air handling systems, accessory facilities, and other essential equipment, structures, and operational
devices.
Continuous Mound: A landscape feature used for screening in which a continuous raised section of earth is used to
block or partially block visibility from one side to the other. In particular, continuous mounds are linear with a top
elevation (crest) relatively consistent from one end to the other.
Corner Lot: See "Lot, Corner."
County: Rusk County, Texas.
Covenants: Private and legal restrictions of various kinds on the usage of lots, typically within a subdivision and
applied by the subdivider. In the case of public health, safety and welfare, covenants may be applied by the Planning
and Zoning Commission, that are recorded with the plat and deed. Covenants can also be placed on commercial and
industrial developments. Unless specifically agreed to, covenants are not enforceable by the Planning and Zoning
Commission or its designees. However, they are enforceable in civil court by interested or affected parties.
Cul-de-sac: A street having one (1) end open to traffic and being permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround at
the other end.
Cutoff Fixture: See “Fixture, Cutoff.”
Cyclical Message: The changing of any pixel, light element, sign copy, character, graphic, color, or light intensity
between once every five (5) seconds and once every one (1) hour. Specifically, no changes to the sign shall take place
for at least five (5) seconds and the sign shall change at least once within one (1) hour.
Day Care Center: See "Child Care Center."
Deciduous Tree: Any tree which sheds its leaves annually followed by regeneration of its foliage in the spring.
Deck: An accessory structure which is on the ground or is elevated from ground level and is open to the sky.
Decorative Wall: A brick, stone or landscape block masonry wall with top cap or similar design and ornamentation. A
cinder block and split-face block masonry wall, and the like, shall not be considered a decorative wall.
Dedication: The setting apart of land or interests in land for use by the municipality or public by ordinance, resolution
or entry in the official minutes as by the recording of a plat.
Demolition: The complete removal or destruction of any structure excluding its foundation.
Designed Fail Area: The area surrounding a tower in which the tower could fall should it fail as structurally designed.
The designed fail area is quantified in terms of linear distance from the tower to the perimeter of the designed fail area.
The designed fail area shall be certified by a structural engineer.
Detached Building: See "Detached Structure."
Detached Structure: A structure that has no structural connection with the primary structure.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Detached
Buildings
Property
Line
Article
Article 09: Definitions 9-9
Definitions - Dwelling, Manufactured Home 9
Detention Pond: An engineered facility used to temporarily collect storm water and outlet it over a designated period
of time or at a specific rate of release.
Developed Lot: See "Lot, Developed."
Developer: The owner or legal representative of land proposed to be developed residentially, commercially, or industrially
utilized.
Development Standards: Height, bulk, density, environmental performance standards and other standards for development
as set forth in the Zoning Ordinance, including landscaping, parking and other required improvements, excluding
those provisions which specifically regulate the use, per se, of property.
Development Standards Variance: See "Variance, Development Standards."
District: See “Zoning District.”
Domestic Pets: Animals commonly used as household pets, personal protection, companionship, and for assistance
to disabled persons. Domestic pets shall include animals that are cared for and treated humanely. Domestic pets shall
include, but not be limited to, dogs, cats, parakeets, parrots, finches, lizards, spiders, guinea pigs, hamsters, gerbils, rats,
mice, rabbits, aquarium fish, ferrets, and snakes if cared for and used in the manner described above. A domestic pet
shall not be considered a farm animal or vice-versa.
Drive, Private: See "Street, Private."
Drive-through Establishment: A place of business being operated for the sale and purchase at retail of food and other
goods, services, or entertainment, which is laid out and equipped so as to allow its patrons to be served or accommodated
while remaining in their automobiles.
Driveway: An access facility used primarily to convey motor vehicles from a public street or private street to a garage,
primary structure, parking court, parking lot, or the like. The following facilities or legal descriptions shall not be
considered a driveway:
1. Public or Private Streets: An access facility intended to provide access to three (3) or more lots, three (3) or more
condominium units, or five (5) or more dwelling units in a single multiple-family residential building shall not be
considered a driveway. These access facilities shall be established as a public or private street.
2. Public Right-of-way: An access to one (1) or more primary buildings or one (1) or more lots that is established as a
right‑of‑way shall be considered a public street and regulated as such.
3. Access to Undeveloped Land: Access to accessory buildings used exclusively for agricultural purposes, land
used exclusively for agricultural purposes, natural areas, and undeveloped forested areas shall not be considered a
driveway.
4. Construction Access: An access used temporarily for construction vehicles during a permitted and compliant
construction project shall not be considered a driveway.
5. Parking Lot or Aisle: Any parking lot or aisle within a parking lot shall not be considered a driveway.
6. Loading Dock: Any loading dock or maneuvering area used for trucks to load and unload shall not be considered a
driveway.
Dumpster: A trash receptacle larger than 100 gallons in volume used primarily by commercial, institutional, and
industrial uses, and construction projects for collection of trash. Dumpsters are generally constructed of durable metal
in box shaped vessels and designed to be easily transported off-site or emptied.
Duplex: See "Dwelling, Single-family Attached."
Dwelling: A building or structure or portion thereof, conforming to all requirements applicable to the district in which
it is located, all Building Codes, and that is used exclusively for residential occupancy, including single-family attached
dwelling units, single-family detached dwelling unit, and multiple-family dwelling units, but excluding hotels/motels.
Dwelling, Duplex: See “Dwelling, Single-family Attached.”
Dwelling, Manufactured Home: A transportable dwelling unit which is a minimum of eight (8) feet in width and
which is built on a permanent foundation or tied down with perimeter skirting when connected to the required utilities,
and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical system contained therein, and which was manufactured
either:
• Bears a seal, certifying that it was built in compliance with the Federal Mobile Home Construction and Safety
Standards.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
9-10
Definitions - Dwelling, Mobile Home 9
Dwelling, Mobile Home: See “Manufactured Home.”
Dwelling, Multiple-family: A residential structure designed to be occupied by four (4) or more families, with the
number of families in residence not exceeding the number of dwelling units provided. Each unit in a multiple-family
dwelling development are typically owned by the same company or owner.
Dwelling, Single-family: See "Dwelling, Single-family Attached" or "Dwelling, Single-family Detached."
Dwelling, Single-family Attached: An attached residential dwelling unit designed to be occupied by one (1)
family; that is attached to other similar units; and with the number of families in residence not exceeding the
number of dwelling units provided. Each unit in a single-family attached dwelling development are typically owned
independently.
Dwelling, Single-family Detached: A permanent residence designed and constructed to be occupied by one (1) family
and not physically connected to another dwelling unit, and either:
1. Recognized by the applicable Building Code as a grandfathered single-family dwelling; or
2. Constructed on-site in compliance with the applicable Building Code for single-family dwellings, and which also
complies with the following specifications:
a. The minimum width shall be twenty-three (23) feet for at least sixty percent (60%) of its dept,
b. The minimum depth shall be twenty-three (23) feet for at least sixty percent (60%) of its width; or
3. Constructed in a factory and bearing a seal certifying that it was built in compliance with the federal Manufactured
Housing Construction and Safety Standards Law (1974 USC 5401 et seq.), and which also complies with the
following specifications:
a. Was constructed after January 1, 1981, and exceeds 950 square feet of occupiable space,
b. Is attached to a permanent full-perimeter foundation of concrete or masonry construction constructed in
accordance with applicable Building Code for single family dwellings,
c. Has the wheels, axles, and towing chassis used to transport the unit to the site removed,
d. Has a pitched roof with a minimum of four vertical units to twelve horizontal units (i.e. 4:12 pitch),
e. The minimum width shall be twenty-three (23) feet for at least sixty percent (60%) of its depth, and
f. The minimum depth shall be twenty-three (23) feet for at least sixty percent (60%) of its width.
Dwelling Site: A site within a Manufactured Home Park with required improvements and utilities that is leased for the
long-term placement of a manufactured home.
Dwelling Unit: A single unit for owner occupancy or for rent/lease, physically separated from any other dwelling
units which may be in the same structure, and providing complete and independent living facilities for one (1) or more
persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, cooking, and sanitation. Examples of a dwelling, unit
include a single-family dwelling, multiple-family dwelling, manufactured home dwelling and farmstead.
Dwelling Unit Size: The overall square feet of a dwelling unit. The dwelling size does not include a garage, carport,
deck, unfinished storage, patio, or open porch.
Easement: A grant by a property owner ("grantor") to specific persons, the general public, corporations, utilities, and/or
others ("grantee" or "easement holder"), for the purpose of providing services or access to the property.
Enforcement Official: The Zoning Administrator and his/her authorized representative, the Planning and Zoning
Commission, the Board of Adjustments, code officers, legal counsel for the Planning and Zoning Commission, legal
counsel for the Board of Adjustments or any other person charged with a full or partial role in the enforcement of the
Henderson Zoning Ordinance by Board of Adjustments Rules and Procedures or official vote, Planning and Zoning
Commission Rules and Procedures or official vote, by the City Manager or by the Henderson Zoning Ordinance.
EPA: United States Environmental Protection Agency.
Erosion: The wearing away of the land surface by water, wind, ice, gravity or other geological agents.
Established Setback: See “Setback, Established.”
Exterior Architectural Feature: The architectural style design, general arrangement, and components of all outside
surfaces or an “Improvement” as distinguished from the Interior Surfaces enclosed by said exterior surfaces, including
but not limited to, the texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, lights, signs, and
other fixtures appurtenant to such “Improvement.”
FAA: Federal Aviation Administration.
Article
Article 09: Definitions 9-11
Definitions - Fixture, Cutoff 9
Fair Housing Facility (large): To prevent the discrimination of mentally or physically disabled persons, these facilities
have been identified as types of housing that are permitted in certain districts, but still must meet "nondiscriminatory"
health, fire, safety and building regulations. These facilities include:
• Group homes for children in need of service or children who have committed a delinquent act; and specifically a
facility that houses more than ten (10) children;
• Residential Facility for the Developmentally Disabled which provides residential services for more than eight (8)
developmentally disabled individuals.
Fair Housing Facility (small): To prevent the discrimination of mentally or physically disabled persons, these
facilities have been identified as types of housing that are permitted in any single-family or multiple-family residential
zoning districts, but still must meet "nondiscriminatory" health, fire, safety, and building regulations. These facilities
include:
• Group homes for children in need of service or children who have committed a delinquent act; and specifically a
facility that houses not more than ten (10) children.
• Residential Facility for the Developmentally Disabled which provides residential services for eight (8) developmentally
disabled individuals or less.
• Residential Facility for the Mentally Ill which provides residential services for mentally ill individuals.
• No two (2) Residential Facilities for the Mentally Ill shall be within 3,000 feet of one another in the zoning
jurisdiction.
Family: An individual, or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption, or a group of not more than
three (3) persons, not related by blood, marriage or adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling
unit. Persons being fostered by official placement into the home shall be permitted in all circumstances.
Farm Animal: See "Animal, Farm."
Farmstead: A single-family dwelling unit that is located on and used in connection with a farm.
FBFM: Flood Boundary and Floodway Map.
FCC: United States Federal Communications Commission.
FEMA: United States Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FHBM: Flood Hazard Boundary Map.
FIRM: Flood Insurance Rate Map.
Fixture, Cutoff: A luminaire that:
• Projects at least ninety percent (90%) of the total lamp lumens below eighty degrees (80°) from vertical;
• Does not allow more than ten percent (10%) of the total lamp lumens above eighty degrees (80°) from vertical; and
• Does not allow more than two and one-half percent (2 1⁄2 %) of the total lamp lumens above ninety degrees (90°)
from vertical.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
80° - Minimum 90% of total
lamp lumens in this zone
10° - Maximum 10% of total
lamp lumens above 80°
Maximum 2.5% of total
lamp lumens above 90°
Cutoff Fixture
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
9-12
Definitions - Fixture, Full-cutoff 9
Fixture, Full-cutoff: A luminaire that:
• Projects at least ninety percent (90%) of the total lamp lumens below eighty degrees (80°) from vertical;
• Does not allow more than ten percent (10%) of the total lamp lumens above eighty degrees (80°) from vertical; and
• Does not allow any lamp lumens above ninety degrees (90°) from vertical.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
80° - Minimum 90% of total
lamp lumens in this zone
10° - Maximum 10% of total
lamp lumens above 80°
No light above 90°
Full cutoff Fixture
Fixture, Non-cutoff: A luminaire with no control of the horizontal distribution of luminance.
Fixture, Semi-cutoff: A luminaire that:
• Projects at least eighty percent (80%) of the total lamp lumens below eighty degrees (80°) from vertical;
• Does not allow more than twenty percent (20%) of the total lamp lumens above eighty degrees (80°) from vertical; and
• Does not allow more than five percent (5%) of the total lamp lumens above ninety degrees (90°) from vertical.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
80° - Minimum 80% of total
lamp lumens in this zone
10° - Maximum 20% of total
lamp lumens above 80°
Maximum 5% of total
lamp lumens above 90°
Semi cutoff Fixture
Flood Protection Grade (FPG): The elevation of the regulatory flood plus two (2) feet at any given location in the
SFHA.
Flood, Regulatory: A flood having a peak discharge which can be equalled or exceeded on the average of once in a
100-year period, as calculated by a method and procedure which is acceptable to and approved by the State of Texas.
Further, this flood is equivalent to a flood having a one percent (1%) probability of occurrence in any given year.
Article
Article 09: Definitions 9-13
Definitions - Gas Station 9
Floodplain: The relatively flat area or low land adjoining the channel of a river or stream which has been or may be
covered by flood water. The floodplain includes the channel, floodway, and floodway fringe. Floodplain boundaries
are to be determined by using the Floodway-Flood Boundary Maps of the Federal Insurance Administration/Federal
Emergency Management Administration.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Floodplain (100 year)
Floodway Fringe Floodway Floodway Fringe
Encroachment
per DNR
Channel
Typical Water
Elevation
Unimproved
Path
Structure Located
More Than Two
Feet Above Flood
Elevation
Fill
Unoccupied
Structure
Floodplain Overlay District: Refers to the FPO District.
Floodway, Regulatory: The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplains adjoining the channel
which are reasonably required to efficiently carry and discharge peak flow of the regulatory flood of any river or stream
and, is that area covered by floodwaters in significant downstream motion or covered by significant volumes of stored
water during the occurrence of the regulatory flood.
Floor Area: The sum of all horizontal surface areas of all floors of all roofed portions of a building enclosed by
and within the surrounding exterior walls or roofs, or to the center line(s) of party walls separating such buildings or
portions thereof. The floor area of a building shall exclude exterior open balconies, screen porches and open porches.
Floor Area, Main: That portion of floor area constructed, completed, and usable for living purposes with normal living
facilities which includes sleeping, dining, cooking, working, entertainment, common space linking rooms, areas for
personal hygiene, or combination of those areas located on the first (or nearest ground level) floor of the structure. The
Main Floor Area of a primary structure does not include a garage, carport, deck, unfinished storage, patio, screen porch or
open porch.
Foundation: The supporting member of a wall, building or structure sufficient to solidly anchor it to the land on which
it sits, distribute its weight to the earth, and/or to prevent movement in the horizontal or vertical plane.
Front Building Line: With respect to a building, the foundation line that is nearest the front lot line; including any
enclosed portion of a primary structure.
Front Lot Line: See "Lot Line, Front."
Front Yard: See "Yard, Front."
Frontage: See "Lot Frontage."
Full Cutoff Fixture: See “Fixture, Full Cutoff.”
Garage: An attached or detached structure whose primary purpose is to park motor vehicles, house a trash receptacle
or store personal property for the on-site primary use, or as otherwise permitted by the Henderson Zoning Ordinance.
Garage Sale: (Also known as a yard sale, tag sale, moving sale, and by many other names) is an informal event for
the sale of used goods by private individuals, in which sellers are not required to obtain business licenses or collect
sales tax. Such sale will require a permit restricted to institutional and residential zones only; with no fee required.
Gas Station:
Any
building
or
lot
used
to
sell
fuel
to
the
general
public
to
propel
motor
vehicles.
Fuels
for
dispensing
are
inclusive
of
liquid
fuels
(e.g.
gasoline),
gas
fuels
(e.g.
natural
gas
or
hydrogen),
and
electricity.
Gas
stations
may
include
dispensing
of
fuel
for
heating
and
other
appliances
when
it
is
subordinate
to
dispensing
fuel
for
motor
vehicles.
Gas
stations
do
not
include
car
washes,
convenience
stores,
fast
food
restaurants
and
other
primary
uses
which
are
often
paired
with
a
gas
station.
For
permitted
pairing,
all
desired
uses
shall
also
be
permitted
uses
in
the
subject
zoning
district.
A
gas
station
shall
include
ancillary
uses
commonly
related
to
such
a
use,
but
shall
not
include
video
games
of
chance
where
the
user
can
earn
credits,
tokens,
tickets
or
other
form
of
earnings.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
9-14
Definitions - General Services Office 9
General Services Office: See "Office, General Services."
Geographic Information System (GIS): A computer system that stores and links non-graphic attributes or geographically
referenced data with graphic map features to allow a wide range of information processing and display operations,
as well as map production, analysis and modeling.
GFA: See "Gross Floor Area."
Gift Shop: A retail store offering a variety of small gift items, as opposed to stores offering primarily specific lines of
merchandise such as toys, clothing, or sporting goods.
GIS: See "Geographic Information System (GIS)."
Golf Course: An area of terrain on which the game of golf is played during daylight hours. A golf course includes
greens, fairways, natural areas, clubhouse, and practice greens. A golf course may also include ancillary features, such
as: a driving range when integrated with the golf course operations and hours, irrigation system, maintenance facility,
indoor storage of golf carts, event facility, on-course restrooms, vending shelter, storm shelter, a caretaker residence,
scoreboard, bridges and ponds.
Government Operations Facility: Any government use of land or land and structures in combination, which is not a
government office; typically facilities used for maintenance of vehicles, storage of equipment and machinery, treatment
of water or waste, or storage of commodities (e.g. salt storage) used to provide government services, and the like.
FPO District: Refers to the Flood Protection Overlay District.
Grade, Finished: The average elevation of the finished surface of the ground within ten (10) feet of the structure after
final grading.
Grantee: A person to whom an interest in property is granted.
Gross Floor Area: The sum of all horizontal floor area of all floors within a structure.
Ground Floor Area: See "Floor Area, Main."
Group Home: A facility that houses not more than ten (10) children that are either:
1. In need of care, physical support, emotional support, or public service; or
2. Have committed a delinquent act.
Group homes are not subject to covenants, deeds, or other instruments pertaining to the transfer, sale, lease, or use of
property that would permit the residential use of property but prohibit the use of that property as a group home as a
matter of public policy. Group homes cannot be prohibited on the grounds that they are a business, the persons living in
a group home are not related, or any other reason.
Habitable Space: Any space in a structure or building that is suitable for living, sleeping, eating or cooking purposes,
excluding such enclosed places as closets, pantries, bath or toilet rooms, hallways, laundries, storage spaces, utility
rooms, and similar spaces.
Hardship: A practical difficulty with regard to one’s ability to improve land stemming from the application of the
development standards of the Zoning Ordinance, which may or may not be subject to relief by means of Variance. In
and of themselves, self-imposed situations and claims based on a perceived reduction of or restriction on economic gain
shall not be considered hardships. Self-imposed situations include: the purchase of land with actual or constructive
knowledge that, for reasons other than physical characteristics of the property, the development standards herein will
inhibit the desired improvement; any improvement initiated in violation of the standards of the Zoning Ordinance; any
result of land division requiring Variance from Development Standards of the Zoning Ordinance in order to render that
site buildable.
Height: See "Structure Height."
High Impact District: Refers to the HI District.
Historic landmark: Any buildings, land, areas of historical, architectural archaeological or cultural importance value,
which the City Council determines shall be protected, enhanced and preserved in the Interest of the culture, prosperity,
education and welfare of the people.
Historic Landmark Preservation Committee: A committee composed of seven (7) members appointed by the
City Council. All members shall have knowledge and experience in the field of history, art, architecture or real estate
planning and development, and shall be appointed from a list of nominees.
Historic Site: A parcel or part thereof, on which is situated a “Landmark” and any abutting parcel or part thereof, used
and constituting part of the premises on which the “Landmark” is situated, and which has been designated as a “historic
site,” and which may or may not be located with a Historic Preservation District.
Article
Article 09: Definitions 9-15
Definitions - Initial User 9
Hobby Farming: The use of land for purposes, including: dairying, pasturage, apiculture, agriculture, horticulture,
floriculture, viticulture, and animal and poultry husbandry. Processing and storage of harvested produce or other end
products shall not be allowed on-site. The hobby farming use(s) shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of the land area
of the lot and shall abide by all setback regulations. Hobby farming cannot be the primary income source for the owner,
operator, or household on-site. Hobby farming shall not include feed lots, stock yards, or the commercial feeding of
garbage or offal to swine or other animals.
Home Business (Type 1): A business activity conducted completely within a dwelling unit, operated by a lawful
resident of the property, and which is predominantly incidental and secondary to the residential use. Home Business
(Type 1) is further regulated by Section 5.29: Type 1 Home Business Standards.
Home Business (Type 2): A business activity conducted completely within a dwelling unit, operated by a lawful
resident of the property, and which is significantly incidental and secondary to the residential use. Home Business
(Type 2) is further regulated by Section 5.30: Type 2 Home Business Standards.
Home Business (Type 3): A business activity conducted primarily within an accessory building, operated by a lawful
resident of the property, and which is incidental and secondary to the residential use. Home Business (Type 3) is further
regulated by Section 5.31: Type 3 Home Business Standards.
Hospital: An institution providing primary health services and medical or surgical care to persons, primarily inpatients,
suffering from illness, disease, injury, and other abnormal physical or mental conditions and including, as an integral
part of the institution, related facilities, such as laboratories, outpatient facilities, training facilities, medical offices, and
staff residences.
Hotel: A structure in which temporary lodging or board and lodging are provided and offered to the public for compensation
and in which ingress and egress to and from all rooms is made through an inside lobby or office supervised by a
person in charge at all hours. As such, it is open to the public. Compensation is usually assessed on a day-to-day basis.
Household Pets: See "Pets, Household.”
Illuminance: The total amount of visible light illuminating (incident upon) a point on a surface from all directions
above the surface (i.e. how brightly a surface is illuminated). Illuminance is measured in lux.
Impervious Surface: The horizontal area of property covered with materials that include, but are not limited to,
concrete, asphalt, rooftop, and asp halt , such that t he infilt ration of s torm water is p re vented or im pe ded.
The
total
amount of impervio us surfa ce area located on a pr opert y witho ut r eg ard to to pograph ic featu re s of
the
property
is
included. Drivew ays, stree ts, parking lo ts and o ther are as us ed f or veh icula r traffi c a re conside redim perv ious
surface
areas. Undisturbed land, tilled agricultu ral la nd, po nds, lawns and fi elds are not co nsid ered i mp ervi - ous
surface
area.
Improved Lot:
See
"Lot,
Buildable."
Improvement:
Any
permanent
structure
that
becomes
part
of,
placed
upon,
or
is
affixed
to
real
estate,
or
any
alteration
to
the
land.
Improvement (Only Applicable to the Historic District Overlay):
Any
building,
structure,
place,
parking
facility,
fence,
gate,
wall,
work
of
art,
or
other
object
constituting
a
physical
betterment
of
real
property,
or
any
part
of
such
betterment.
Improvement Location Permit:
A
permit
issued
under
the
Zoning
Ordinance
permitting
a
property
owner
to
erect,
construct,
enlarge,
alter,
move,
occupy,
use,
change
use,
improve,
remove,
convert
or
demolish
any
building
or
structure
within
its
jurisdiction,
or
permitting
a
person
to
change
the
condition
of
the
land,
as
may
be
required
by
the
Henderson
Zoning
Ordinance.
Incidental:
A
minor
occurrence
or
condition
which
is
customarily
associated
with
a
permitted
use
and
is
likely
to
ensue
from
normal
operations.
Incompatible Districts:
Any
zoning
district
that
is
not
recognized
as
an
“Appropriate
Adjacent
District”
in
the
subject
lot’s
zoning
district,
as
found
in
Article 2: Districts.
Industrial District:
Refers
to
the
I1
and
I2 Districts.
Industry, Heavy:
See
"Manufacturing,
Heavy."
Industry, Light:
See
“Manufacturing,
Light.”
Infill Lot:
See
"Lot,
Infill."
Initial User:
The
applicant,
person,
organization,
or
corporation
that
originally
applies
to
the
City
of
Henderson
for
approval
for
the
installation
of
an
antenna
or
other
radio
or
cellular
communication
equipment
or
for
approval
for
the
construction
of
a
telecommunication
tower
or
facility.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
9-16
Definitions - Institutional District 9
Institutional District: Refers to the IS District.
Interior Lot: See "Lot, Interior."
Junk: An automobile, truck, other motor vehicle, watercraft, large appliances, furniture, or like materials which have
been damaged to such an extent that they cannot be operated under their own power or used and/or will require major
repairs before being made usable. This also includes such a vehicle which does not comply with State or County
vehicle licensing or other laws or ordinances.
Junk Yard: A place, usually outdoors, where waste or discarded used property, including but not limited to automobiles,
farm implements and trucks, is accumulated and is or may be salvaged for reuse or resale. This does not include
industrial scrap metal or accumulation of organic matter.
Jurisdiction: See "Zoning Jurisdiction."
Juvenile Detention Facility: A facility that holds children or minors (typically under 18 years of age) for punishment
and/or counseling as a result of sentencing by a court of jurisdiction for criminal or antisocial behavior.
Kennel, Commercial: A commercial establishment involving boarding, breeding, buying, keeping, training, selling,
or similar services offered to owners of dogs, cats, or other domestic animals. This definition is not inclusive of a
veterinarian clinic or home enterprise kennel. Commercial kennels are not inclusive of a residential dwelling unit.
Landmark: Any “Improvement” which has a special character and/or special historic interest or value as part of
the development, heritage, or cultural characteristics of the city, state or nation, and which has been designated as a
landmark.
Landscape Areas: Places on a lot or abutting right‑of‑way that are identified for application of landscaping regulations.
Landscape areas include: street tree planting areas, parking lot planting areas, foundation planting areas, buffer yard areas,
and perimeter planting areas. The below image conceptually demonstrates the general location of each landscape area.
Street Tree Planting © 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Foundation
Planting
Landscape
Buffer Yard Bumpout
Local Street R.O.W.
Property Line
Lot Planting
Arterial R.O.W.
Business
Residence
Perimeter Landscaping
Retention
Pond
Detention and
Retention Facility
Landscaping
Parking Lot
Perimeter
Landscaping
Landscape Island
Common Area Common Area
Landscape Buffer: A continuous landscaped area designed, maintained, and used for screening and separation of uses,
lots or structures.
Landscape Material: Trees, shrubs, plants, decorative fences, retaining walls, walls, earthen mounds, irrigation
systems, flower beds, decorative rocks, edging, mulch, stakes and the like. Artificial trees, shrubs, ground cover, and
flowers are not considered landscape material.
Landscape Structure: Decorative fences, walls, retaining walls, substantive edging, trellis, arbor and the like.
Landscaping: The improvements of a lot with grass, shrubs, trees, and other vegetation and/or ornamental objects.
Landscaping may include pedestrian walks, flower beds, berms, fountains and other similar natural and man-made
objects designed and arranged to produce an aesthetically pleasing effect.
Legal Nonconforming Lot of Record: Any legally established and recorded lot in existence prior to the effective date
of the Zoning Ordinance, or its subsequent amendments, that no longer meet the lot-specific development standards.
Legal Nonconforming Sign: Any sign lawfully existing on the effective date of the Zoning Ordinance, or amendment
thereto, that does not conform to all the standards and regulations of the Zoning Ordinance.
Article
Article 09: Definitions 9-17
Definitions - Lot, Buildable 9
Legal Nonconforming Structure: Any continuously occupied, lawfully established structure in existence prior to the
effective date of the Zoning Ordinance, or its subsequent amendments, that no longer meets the development standards.
Legal Nonconforming Use: Any continuous, lawful use of structures, land, or structures and land in combination
established prior to the effective date of the Zoning Ordinance or its subsequent amendments that is no longer a permitted
use in the district where it is located.
Loading Dock: An off-street space for temporary parking of delivery and pickup vehicles.
Local Street: See “Street, Local.”
LOMA: FEMA Letter of Map Amendment.
Lot: A single tract of land intended to be used, developed or built upon. There are three types of lots identified in the
Zoning Ordinance: interior lots, corner lots, and through lots.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Corner
Lot
Corner
Lot
Interior
Lot
Through
Lot
Through
Lot
R.O.W.
R.O.W.
R.O.W.
Block
Lot Area: The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side, and rear lot lines, excepting any easement or
right‑of‑way for public streets.
Lot Depth
Lot Area
Lot Width
Property
Line
R.O.W.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Side
Lot
Line
Front
Yard
Setback
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Lot
Area
Lot Width
Lot Depth
Property
Line
Side
Lot
Line
Front
Yard
Setback
R.O.W.
Lot, Buildable: A lot upon which a structure may be constructed and occupied as a result of the fact that it has frontage
on and access to an improved street, meets minimum setback requirements, and has all necessary utilities available to
the lot such as septic, sewer, water, well, electricity, etc.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
9-18
Definitions - Lot, Corner 9
Lot, Corner: A lot situated at the intersection of two (2) streets or which fronts a street on two (2) or more sides
forming an interior angle of less than 135°.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
R.O.W.
R.O.W.
Rear Yard
Front Yard
Front Yard
Corner
Lot
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
R.O.W.
R.O.W.
Front Yard
Front Yard
C oLronter
Rear Yard
Rear Yard
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
R.O.W.
R.O.W.
Front Yard
Front Yard
Corner
L ot
Front Yard
Rear Yard
R.O.W.
Lot Coverage: The area of a lot occupied by the primary structure, any accessory structures, and impervious surfaces.
Lot Depth: The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines (See graphics for “Lot Area”).
Lot, Developed: A lot with structures situated thereon.
Lot Frontage: The length of the front lot line bordering upon a public right‑of‑way. The lot frontage is determined by
measuring the total distance in which the front lot line touches a public right‑of‑way.
Lot, Infill: A vacant, buildable lot surrounded on at least three (3) sides by preceding structures. Generally, development
on an infill lot is intended to resemble the use, design, architectural features, roof style, massing, and character of
buildings on neighboring lots.
Lot, Interior: A lot other than a corner lot or a through lot.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Rear Yard
Interior Lot
Side Yard
Side Yard
Front Yard
Front Yard
R.O.W
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Rear Yard
Interior
Lot
Side Yard
Side Yard
Front Yard
R.O.W
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Rear Yard
Interior
Lot
Side Yard
Side Yard
Front Yard
R.O.W.
Lot Line, Front (corner lot): The line marking the boundary between the lot and each of the abutting streets.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Rear Lot Line
R.O.W.
Front Yard
Front Lot Line
Rear Lot Line
Rear Yard
Rear
Yard
Front Lot Line
Front
Yard
R O W
Article
Article 09: Definitions 9-19
Definitions - Lowest Floor 9
Lot Line, Front (interior or through lot): The line marking the boundary between the lot and the abutting street,
right‑of‑way or a lake or watercourse.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Front Yard
Side
Yard
Rear Yard
R.O.W.
Side
Yard
Rear Lot Line
Front Lot Line
Side Lot Line
Side Lot Line
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Rear Lot Line
Front Yard
Side Lot Line
Side Lot Line
Rear Yard
Side
Yard
Front Lot Line
Side
Yard
Lot Line, Rear: The lot line that is opposite the front lot line and farthest from it, except that for a triangular or other
irregularly-shaped lot, the line ten (10) feet long, parallel to the front lot line, and wholly within the lot, that is farthest
from the lot line (See graphic for “Lot Line, Front”).
Lot Line, Side: A lot boundary line other than a front or rear lot line (See graphic for “Lot Line, Front”).
Lot of Record: A lot which is a part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the Rusk County Recorder, or a parcel or
lot described by metes and bounds, a description of which has been so recorded.
Lot, Subject: The property to which an action has been applied for, the property being discussed, or the property
otherwise being considered for action.
Lot, Through: A lot fronting on two (2) parallel or approximately parallel streets, or abutting two (2) streets which
do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot. Also includes lots fronting on both a street and a watercourse or lake.
Accessory structures are allowed in front yards facing watercourses or lakes. An alley shall not be used to determine if
a lot is a through lot.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
R.O.W.
R.O.W.
Front Yard
Front Yard
Through
Lot
Side Yard
Side Yard
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
R.O.W.
Rear Yard
Front Yard
Through
Lot
Side Yard
Side Yard
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
R.O.W.
Rear Yard
Front Yard
Through
Lot
Side Yard
Side Yard
Lot Width: The distance between the side lot lines as measured on the front yard setback line. Cul‑de‑sac and irregular
shaped lots shall measure their front lot widths along the front yard setback line from one side lot line to the other
(See graphic for “Lot Area”).
Lowest Floor: means the lowest elevation described among the following:
• The lowest floor of a structure.
• The basement floor.
• The garage floor, if the garage is connected to the structure.
• The first floor of a structure elevated on pilings or constructed on a crawl space.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
9-20
Definitions - Lumens 9
Lumens: A unit of luminous flux in the International System of Units (SI) equal to one candela per steradian. Used to
measure the amount of light emitted by lamps.
Lux: Unit of illuminance in the International System of Units (SI) equal to one (1) lumen per square meter.
Main Floor Area: See “Floor Area, Main.”
Maneuvering Space: An open space in a parking area which:
• Is immediately adjacent to a parking space,
• Is used for and/or is necessary for turning, backing or driving forward a motor vehicle into such parking space, but
• Is not used for the parking of or storage of motor vehicles.
Manufactured Home: See “Dwelling, Manufactured Home.”
Manufacturing, Heavy: The assembly, fabrication or processing of goods and materials using processes that ordinarily
have greater than minimal impacts on the environment, or that otherwise do not constitute light manufacturing, and
which may include open uses and outdoor storage. Heavy manufacturing generally includes processing and fabrication
of products made from extracted or raw materials. Heavy manufacturing shall not include any use that is otherwise
listed specifically in any zoning district as a Permitted Use or Special Exception Use.
Manufacturing, Light: The assembly, fabrication, or processing of goods and materials using processes that ordinarily
do not create noise, smoke, fume, odors, glare, or health or safety hazards outside of the structure or lot where such
assembly, fabrication, or processing of goods are housed entirely within an enclosed building. Light manufacturing
generally includes processing and fabrication of finished products predominantly from previously prepared materials.
Light manufacturing shall not include any use that is otherwise listed specifically in any zoning district as a Permitted
Use or Special Exception Use.
Marker (survey): A stake, pipe, rod, nail, or any other object which is not intended to be a permanent point for record
purposes.
Massage Therapist: A person licensed and certified by the National Certification Board for Therapeutic Massage and
Bodywork, or the American Massage Therapy Association, or under the direct supervision of a licensed physician).
Maximum Lot Coverage: The highest amount of impervious surface coverage permitted by the Zoning Ordinance.
Meat Processing: Any edible portion of animal tissues that is packaged, cooked, mixed, combined, ground, crushed,
de-boned, modified or similar for wholesale distribution or further processing by another facility. Meet processing does
not include rendering plants or slaughter houses.
Media Rental: An establishment that predominantly rents movies, video games, and similar media. Media rental
includes to renting and selling ancillary and complementary products.
Medical Office: See “Office, Medical.”
Meteorological Tower: A tower that hosts weather instrumentation to evaluate meteorological conditions.
Mini Warehouse: See “Self-storage Facility.”
Mobile Home: See “Dwelling, Mobile Home.”
Mobile Home Park: A parcel of land containing two (2) or more dwelling sites, with required improvements and
utilities, that are leased for the long term placement of Mobile Home Dwellings, and shall include any street used or
intended for use as part of the facilities of such Mobile Home Park. A Mobile Home Park does not involve the sales of
Mobile Home Dwellings in which unoccupied units are parked for inspection or sale.
Monument (survey): A permanent physical structure which marks the location of a corner or other survey point.
Motel: An establishment consisting of a group of attached or detached living or sleeping accommodations with
bathroom and closet space, located on a single zoning lot, and designed for use by transient automobile travelers. A
motel furnishes customary services such as maid service and laundering of linen, telephone, secretarial, or desk service,
and the use and upkeep of furniture.
Motor Home: See “Recreational Vehicle.”
Motor Vehicle: Any passenger vehicle, truck, tractor, tractor-trailer, truck-trailer, trailer, boat, recreational vehicle,
semitrailer, or any other vehicle propelled or drawn by mechanical power.
Mound: A landscape feature used for screening in which earth is piled up in irregular, round or oblong shapes.
Particularly, mounds do not have consistent crest elevations, but are irregular in form and overlapping such to emulate
a more natural landscape feature. Mounds in combination with other landscape material are used to block or partially
block visibility from one side to the other.
Multiple-family District: Refers to the M1, M2, and M3 districts.
Article
Article 09: Definitions 9-21
Definitions - Parent Tract 9
Mural: See “Sign, Mural.”
NFIP: The National Flood Insurance Program.
Night Club: An establishment for entertainment with table seating, stage, or area for musical performances and a floor
area designated for dancing. A night club shall include ancillary uses commonly related to such a use, but shall not
include video games of chance where the user can earn credits, tokens, tickets or other form of earnings.
NIT: A photometric unit of illuminative brightness equal to cd/m2 (candelas per square meter).
Noise Sensitive Land Use: The use of a structure for a purpose that would be adversely impacted by noise from
aircraft, industries, or other use. Noise Sensitive Land Uses include but are not limited to residences, schools, churches,
child care facilities, medical facilities, retirement homes, and nursing homes.
Nonconforming Building: See “Nonconforming Structure.”
Nonconforming Lot of Record: A lot which was created such that it does not conform to the regulations of the district
in which it is located.
Nonconforming Sign: A sign or portion thereof, which was designed, erected, or structurally altered such that it does
not conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located.
Nonconforming Structure: A building, structure, or portion thereof, which was designed, erected, or structurally
altered such that it does not conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located.
Nonconforming Use: A use which does not conform with the use regulations of the district in which it is located.
Non-residential Structure: A primary structure not used for a residential purpose (e.g. home or apartment building).
Nursing Home: A private home for the care of the aged or infirm, or any other person in need of nursing care, and
which does not contain equipment for surgical care or for treatment of disease or injury, and is not primarily designed
for patients being treated for mental illness or alcohol or drug addiction.
Office: A place in which business, professional and/or clerical activities are conducted. Offices shall include medical
offices, government offices and office functions which serve other off-site land uses.
Office, Construction Trade: Electrical contractor, general contractor, heating and cooling contractor, landscaping
contractor, plumbing contractor office and the like.
Office, General: An employment service, insurance office, law office, membership association, publishing corporate
office, reading clinic, real estate office, secretarial service, service organization, temporary service agency, title
company, trade office, travel agency, and the like.
Office, Medical: A medical clinic, dental clinic, optical clinic, rehabilitation clinic, veterinarian clinic, and the like.
Official Zoning Map: A map of the City of Henderson, Texas, that legally denotes the boundaries of zoning districts as
they apply to the properties within the zoning jurisdiction. There is only one Official Zoning Map, and it is kept up to
date by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the Zoning Administrator.
Official Zoning Map Copies: A map of the City of Henderson, Texas, that legally denotes the boundaries of zoning
districts as they apply to the properties within the zoning jurisdiction. These maps may be out of date.
Open Space: An area of land not covered by buildings, structures, parking structures, or accessory uses except for
recreational structures. Open space may include nature areas, streams, floodplains, meadows or open fields containing
baseball fields, football fields, soccer fields, golf courses, swimming pools, or bicycle paths. Open space does not
include street rights-of-way, platted lot area, private yard, patio areas, or land scheduled for future development.
Ornamental Tree: A deciduous tree that does not grow to over thirty (30) feet in height at maturity. Ornamental trees
typically are flowering trees.
OSHA: Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
Outdoor Pets: See “Pets, Outdoor.
Outdoor Storage: See “Storage, Outdoor.”
Owner: Any person, group of persons, firm or firms, corporation or corporations, or any other legal entity having
legal title to or sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be developed under these regulations, or their legal
representative.
Parcel: See “Lot.”
Parent Tract: A lot of record as recorded on the effective date of the Zoning Ordinance. Multiple pieces (lots) owned
by one person, persons in partnership, or a company and that are contiguous shall together be considered one parent
tract. Streets, rivers, easements, and other built or natural features shall not constitute a separation of two (2) or more
pieces of land owned by one person, persons in partnership, or a business.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
9-22
Definitions - Park, Public 9
Park, Public: A lot available to the general public for passive (e.g. trails, open fields, and nature areas) and/or active
recreation (e.g. playground, swimming pool, and sports fields), and that is owned and maintained by a not-for-profit
corporation, City, County, State or the federal government. Parks are inclusive of common and ordinary uses and
structures found in parks.
Parking Area, Public or Private: A group of parking spaces in an open area not including any part of a street or alley,
designed or used for temporary parking of motor vehicles.
Parking, Required: The minimum number of off-street parking spaces specified for a particular use or uses by the
Zoning Ordinance.
Parking Space: A horizontal surface within a public or private parking lot primarily for the temporary storage of one
(1) motor vehicle. A parking space may vary in size based on the most common size and type of vehicle intended to use
the facility.
Paved: A durable surface for parking, driving, riding or similar activities that utilizes asphalt, concrete, brick, paving
blocks or similar material. Crushed gravel, stone, rock, or dirt, sand, or grass are not permitted as a paved surface.
Performance Bond: An amount of money or other negotiable security paid by the developer or property owner or
his/her surety to the City of Henderson which guarantees that the developer will perform all actions required by the
City of Henderson regarding an approved development or in other situations as stated forth in the Zoning Ordinance
and/or as deemed by the Zoning Administrator that provides that if the developer or property owner defaults and fails to
comply with the provisions of their approval, the developer or property owner or his/her surety will pay damages up to
the limit of the bond, or the surety will itself complete the requirements of the approval.
Pergola: A structure typically used to provide shade and create an outdoor living space, usually utilizing columns to
support an open roof comprised of beams and joists; and that roof structure is at least fifty percent (50%) open for the
passage of light and air.
Permanent Foundation: A foundation (as defined) that is made from concrete or similar material, installed on or in the
ground, and that connects to a building or structure, intended to be held in place for many years.
Permitted Use: See “Use, Permitted.”
Person: A corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, unit of government, or any other group that acts as
a unit, as well as a natural person.
Personal Service: An establishment, other than an office, in which services other than health care are rendered to
consumers on an individual basis, such as barber shops and beauty parlors.
Pervious Surface: Any surface that allows the absorption of stormwater into the ground such as a lawn, woodlot, rain
garden, and the like.
Pets, Household: Domestic pets maintained healthy and humanely within the confines of the dwelling unit. Household
pets includes hobby breeding of domestic animals as long as the frequency of breeding is limited to one (1) litter per
year per household. Household pets do not include outdoor pets, farm animals, pigmy goats, potbelly pigs, or rabbits.
Examples of household pets include: dogs, cats, mice, snakes, hamsters, ferrets, and birds.
Pets, Outdoor: Domestic pets maintained healthy and humanely within the confines of the lot. Outdoor pets includes
hobby breeding of domestic animals as long as the frequency of breeding is limited to one (1) litter per year per household.
Outdoor pets do not include farm animals, rabbits, mice, snakes, hamsters, ferrets, or birds. Examples of outdoor
pets include: dogs and cats.
Place of Worship: A building, outdoor structure, and/or outdoor space used for public worship (e.g. church, temple, or
mosque).
Plan Commission: See “Planning and Zoning Commission.”
Planned Development: A large-scale unified development meeting the requirements for zoning approval under the
provisions of Article 4: Planned Development District. Generally a planned development consists of a parcel or parcels
of land, controlled by a single landowner, to be developed as a single entity which does not correspond in size of lots,
bulk or type of buildings, density, lot coverage, and required open space to the regulations established in any district of
the Zoning Ordinance. This may result in more attractive and affordable development than conventional developments
would allow. Clustered housing (dwellings built in innovative lot arrangements around common open space) and zero
lot line housing (dwellings built immediately adjacent to lot lines) are possible as part of planned developments. A
planned development requires approval through a zoning map amendment.
Planning and Zoning Commission: The Henderson Planning and Zoning Commission. The Henderson Planning and
Zoning Commission is an Advisory Planning and Zoning Commission.
Article
Article 09: Definitions 9-23
Definitions - Recreation Center/Play Center 9
Planning Administrator: See “Zoning Administrator.”
Planning Director: See “Zoning Administrator.”
Ponding: A state of temporary flooding in depressed areas or in areas where drainage is being impeded.
Pool, Swimming: See “Swimming Pool.”
Porch: A roofed-over structure projecting out from the wall or walls of a primary structure and predominantly open to
the weather.
Practical Difficulty: A difficulty with regard to one’s ability to improve land stemming from regulations of the Zoning
Ordinance. A practical difficulty is not a “hardship,” rather it is a situation where the owner could comply with the
regulations within the Zoning Ordinance, but would like a variance from development standards to improve his site in
a practical manner. For instance, a person may request a variance from a side yard setback due to a large tree which is
blocking the only location that would meet the development standards for a new garage location.
Primary Arterial: See “Street, Arterial.”
Primary Structure: The structure in which the primary use of the lot is located or conducted. With respect to residential
uses, the primary structure shall be the main dwelling.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Accessory
Structures
Primary
Structure
Lot
Area
Property
Line
R.O.W.
Primary Structure Footprint: The area defined by the outside edge of the primary structure’s foundation including an
attached garage, screen porch, but not including a deck, patio, open porch and other appurtenances.
Primary Use: See “Use, Primary.”
Principal Use: See “Use, Primary.”
Private Street: See “Street, Private.”
Prohibited Use: A use that is not a permitted use or special exception in this Zoning Ordinance.
Public Improvements: Any storm drainage facility, street, highway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrian-way, tree, lawn,
off-street parking area, lot improvement, utility, or other facility for which the local government may ultimately assume
the responsibility for maintenance and operation, or which may affect an improvement for which local government
responsibility is established.
Private Parking Area: See “Parking Area, Public or Private”
Public Parking Area: See “Parking Area, Public or Private”
Public Place: Any area on public or private property that is easily accessible and clearly visible to the general public.
If located on private property, the area must be open to the general public and clearly visible from adjacent public
property such as a street or other public thoroughfare or sidewalk.
Public Street: See “Street, Public.”
Public Utility: See “Utility, Public.”
Public Way: Highways, streets, avenues, boulevards, lanes, or alleys.
Radio/TV Station: See “Broadcast Facility” and “Broadcast Studio.”
Raising of Farm Animals: Any livestock operation that falls below the thresholds of a Confined Feeding Operation.
Rear Lot Line: See “Lot Line, Rear.”
Rear Yard: See “Yard, Rear.”
Recreation Center/Play Center: An enclosed structure containing recreational facilities, such as a tennis court,
swimming pool, and/or gymnasium. This shall not include outdoor recreation facilities.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
9-24
Definitions - Recreational Vehicle 9
Recreational Vehicle: A portable, durable living or sleeping space that can be towed, hauled, or driven and primarily
designed for recreational, camping, and travel use. Recreational vehicles include travel trailers, truck campers, camping
trailers, boats, and self-propelled motor homes.
Recreational Vehicle Park: Any commercially zoned site, lot, field, or tract of land under single ownership, or ownership
of two or more people, designed with facilities for short term occupancy for recreational vehicles only.
Registered/Licensed Land Surveyor: A land surveyor properly licensed and registered, or through reciprocity permitted
to practice in the State of Texas.
Registered Professional Engineer: An engineer properly licensed and registered, or through reciprocity permitted to
practice in the State of Texas.
Regulatory Flood: See “Flood, Regulatory.”
Research: Any use that includes the study or experimenting that results in knowledge, intellectual property, product
development, or similar. Research includes forensic, scientific, engineering, medical, and the like.
Residential District: Refers to the RE, R1, R2, R3, R4, M1, M2, and M3 Districts.
Residential Facility for the Developmentally Disabled (large): A residential facility which provides residential
services for more than eight (8) developmentally disabled individuals.
Residential Facility for the Developmentally Disabled (small): A residential facility which provides residential
services for eight (8) or less developmentally disabled individuals.
Residential Facility for the Mentally Ill: A residential facility which provides residential services for mentally ill
individuals. No two (2) Residential Facilities for the Mentally Ill shall be within 3,000 feet of one another in the zoning
jurisdiction.
Responsible Party: For purposes of issuing notice of violation, the following persons shall be considered responsible
parties, with liability for fines, and responsibility for remedy of the violation: the property owner(s); persons with any
possessory interest in the property, and/or any persons and/or their agents who have caused the violation. Any owner,
tenant, builder, developer, possessor of interest, architect, designer, property manager, equipment operator known or
suspected to be responsible in part or in whole for a violation of the Zoning Ordinance.
Restaurant: An establishment whose use is the selling of food in a ready-to-consume state, in individual servings, in
which the customer consumes these foods while seated at tables or counters located in or immediately adjacent to the
building in which the use is located, and which may include carry-out service. “Restaurant” shall include that portion
of any establishment which sells prepared food, such as a bakery or a delicatessen, and which is used for seating for the
consumption of food on the premises (See also “Drive-Through Establishment”).
Retail, Agriculture Related: Retail uses that primarily provide products to farmers and agricultural uses, including,
but not limited to farm equipment sales, seed sales, fertilizer sales, seed sales, part sales for farm equipment, farm
building materials and repair products, and tack shop.
Retail (Type 1) Very Low Intensity: A very low intensity retail business that provides products to all or portions of
the general public and that meets the applicable characteristics listed in Table 9-B: Limits of Retail Uses below. A very
low intensity retail business also includes ancillary uses, customarily associated with the primary retail business. A very
low intensity retail business shall not include business-to-business wholesale operations. Retail Type 1 does not include
“smoke shops”.
Retail (Type 2) Low Intensity: A low intensity retail business that provides products to all or portions of the general
public and that meets the applicable characteristics listed in Table 9-B: Limits of Retail Uses below. A low intensity
retail business also includes ancillary uses, customarily associated with the primary retail business. A low intensity
retail business shall not include business-to-business wholesale operations. Retail Type 2 does not include “smoke
shops”.
Retail (Type 3) Medium Intensity: A medium intensity retail business that provides products to all or portions of the
general public and that meets the applicable characteristics listed in Table 9-B: Limits of Retail Uses below. A medium
intensity retail business also includes ancillary uses, customarily associated with the primary retail business. A medium
intensity retail business shall not include business-to-business wholesale operations. Retail Type 3 does not include
“smoke shops”.
Article
Article 09: Definitions 9-25
Definitions - School, Trade or Business 9
Retail (Type 4) High Intensity: A high intensity retail business that provides products to all or portions of the general
public and that meets the applicable characteristics listed in Table 9-B: Limits of Retail Uses below. A high intensity
retail business also includes ancillary uses, customarily associated with the primary retail business. A high intensity
retail business shall not include business-to-business wholesale operations.
Retail (Type 5) Very High Intensity: A very high intensity retail business that provides products to all or portions of
the general public and that meets the applicable characteristics listed in Table 9-B: Limits of Retail Uses below. A very
high intensity retail business also includes ancillary uses, customarily associated with the primary retail business. A
very high intensity retail business shall not include business-to-business wholesale operations.
Table 9-B: Limits of Retail Uses
Characteristics
Retail Types
Max.
Vehicle
per Day
Max.
Retail
Floor Area
Max. Outdoor
Display of
Merchandise
Max. Frequency
of Dumpster
Emptying
Outdoor
Storage
Hours of
Operation
Drive
Through
Sexually Oriented Retail
Sales
Type 1: Very Low Intensity 750 5,000 sq ft 2% of retail floor
area or 50 square
feet whichever is
more restrictive
1 per week or
use of residential
service
not allowed open between
5 AM and 9 PM
not allowed not allowed
Type 2: Low Intensity 1,500 10,000
sq. ft.
5% of retail floor
area or 200 square
feet whichever is
more restrictive
2 per week not allowed open between
5 AM and 10 PM
not allowed up to 2% of retail floor area
or 2% of gross revenue
whichever is more restrictive
Type 3: Medium Intensity 5,000 50,000
sq. ft.
10% of retail floor
area or 400 square
feet whichever is
more restrictive
1 per day not allowed open between
5 AM and 11 PM
allowed up to 2% of retail floor area
or 2% of gross revenue
whichever is more restrictive
Type 4: High Intensity 15,000 100,000
sq. ft.
1 acre 1 per day or more 20% of retail
floor area
or 4,000
square feet
whichever
is more
restrictive
no limit allowed up to 100% of retail floor
area or 100% of gross
revenue
Type 5: Very High Intensity no limit no limit no limit no limit no limit no limit allowed up to 2% of retail floor area
or 2% of gross revenue
whichever is more restrictive
Retention Pond: A facility use to indefinitely hold water, like a natural pond, and concurrently used to temporarily
collect storm water and outlet it over a designated period of time or at a specific rate of release.
Retirement Community: An age-restricted development, which may include detached and attached dwelling units and
apartments.
Right-of-way: A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by transportation facilities, public utilities, or other
special public uses.
Road: See “Street.”
ROW: See “Right-of-way.”
Sales, Walk-in: See “Walk-in Sales.”
Satellite Dish/Antenna: An apparatus capable of receiving communications from a transmitter relay located in a
planetary orbit, or broadcast signals from transmitting towers.
School: A public or private institution which offers instruction in any of the branches of learning and study comparable
to that taught in the public schools, including preschool, pre-kindergarten, kindergarten, elementary school, and junior
and senior high schools, but excluding trade, business, or commercial schools.
School, Trade or Business: An educational facility which offers instruction specific to a trade, business or commercial
practice.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
9-26
Definitions - Scrap Metal Yard 9
Scrap Metal Yard: A general industrial use established independent of or ancillary to and connected with another
general industrial use, which is concerned exclusively in new and salvaged metal pipes, wire, beams, angles, rods,
machinery, parts, filings, clippings, and/or all other metal items of every type, and which acquires such items incidental
to its connection with the other general industrial use or by purchase, consignment or bailment which stores, grades,
processes, melts, cuts, dismantles, compresses, cleans, or in any way prepares said items for reuse by the connected
other general industrial use or for storage, sale or shipment and/or use in other industries or businesses including
open hearth, electric furnaces and foundry operations. Such an establishment shall not include junk yards, dumps, or
automobile or other vehicle graveyards.
Self-storage Facility: Generally, a structure or group of structures containing two (2) or more individual storage units
for rent to the general public with separate access to each unit for the storage and warehousing of personal property.
Self-storage facilities do not include commercial activities run from inside the unit (e.g. wholesaling, retailing, or
providing services).
Setback: The minimum horizontal distance between the building line and a lot line. Or in a case where the property
runs to the centerline of the street, the minimum horizontal distance between the building line and the right‑of‑way as
proposed in the Henderson Thoroughfare Plan.
Setback, Established: An average of the front yard setbacks of all primary structures on either side of the subject
property. If the subject property is a corner lot, the average of the front yard setback of structures adjacent to the subject
property and directly across the street of the subject property shall be used. Established setbacks may apply to side yard
setbacks and rear yard setbacks.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Established
Setback of
Subject
Lot Equals
Average of
Lots “E”
and “F”
Established Setback
of Subject Lot Equals
Average of Lots “A”,
“B”, “C” and “D”
Sewer Utility: A community-serving sewer system including collection and treatment facilities.
Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business: An establishment which regularly offers live entertainment, lingerie
or nude modeling, presentation of motion pictures, or publications by any photographic, electronic, digital, magnetic
or other media which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating
“Specified Sexual Activities” or “Specific Anatomical Areas”; or, offers massage therapy or body work (not including
when performed by a licensed massage therapist); or, advertises or holds itself in any forum as “XXX”, “adult”, or
“sex”. This also includes businesses, clubs, organizations, or associations that organize or plan sex engagements or
adult oriented entertainment with two (2) or more persons (e.g. swingers clubs or fetish clubs).
SFHA: Special Flood Hazard Area.
Shooting Range: An outdoor area or indoor space designed and used for discharging firearms safely; primarily for
sport, maintaining proficiency, and training.
Shooting Range (Indoor): A shooting range fully contained within a building.
Shooting Range (Outdoor): A shooting range which is not fully contained within a building.
Side Lot Line: See “Lot Line, Side.”
Side Yard: See “Yard, Side.”
Article
Article 09: Definitions 9-27
Definitions - Sign, Drive-up Menu 9
Sign: Any device or means used to convey a name, logo, slogan, brand, identification, description, display, or illustration,
or used to attract attention toward a object, product, structure, building, location, activity, institution, organization,
or business; except as exempted by the Henderson Zoning Ordinance.
Sign, Abandoned: A sign that no longer correctly identifies or advertises an existing business, product, or activity
conducted.
Sign, Animated: A sign with an animated message, video, motion picture, audible sound, odor, visible matter, flashing
light, scrolling message, blinking light, fluttering light or color, or that projects laser light or light beams.
Sign Area: The entire area within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of a sign, including
all words, logos, illustrations, and characters. However, such perimeter shall not include any structural elements
lying outside the limits of the sign which are not part of the information, visual attraction or symbolism of the sign.
Channelized signs are measured similarly by multiplying the overall width and height of all channel characters and
graphic elements in combination.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Sign Height
Sign Width
Sign Area
Sign, A-Frame: A type of temporary sign or device that is self-supporting with two faces connected at or near the
top with each face angled outward making a triangular shape. This type of sign is generally designed to be setup on a
sidewalk or other flat surface to attract pedestrians.
Sign, Awning: A sign attached to or integrated into the material of an awning mounted on a building.
Sign, Banner: A sign composed of lightweight fabric, plastic, vinyl, or similar material that is mounted to a building.
Banner signs are typically related to a special event or promotion.
Sign, Changeable Copy: A type of sign or device that allows a message to be changed by mechanical, electronic, or
manual means. Changeable copy signs may be capable of animated messages, cyclical messages, or static messages.
However, the zoning regulations limit the frequency of messages changing even if a changeable copy sign is capable of
features not permitted.
Sign, Commercial: Any sign that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls attention to a business, product,
service, or other commercial activity.
Sign Copy: The wording or graphic illustration used on a sign surface either in permanent or removable form.
Sign, Directional: A sign used to direct the safe flow of vehicular and pedestrian traffic which typically includes words
like “enter,” and “exit,” or uses arrows to communicate information. Also called a directional device.
Sign, Drive-up Menu: Any sign containing a menu or special offerings for restaurant, coffee shop, or other food
establishment designed to be visible from and intended for persons in vehicles in drive-through lanes to read and order
from.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
9-28
Definitions - Sign Face 9
Sign Face: The surface intended for the display of information on the sign.
Sign Structure Sign Face
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Sign, Flashing: See “Sign, Animated.”
Sign, Gateway: A common sign, typically located near a major entrance, indicating the presence of multiple-tenants
on a property being owned or managed as a single development. Such developments include, but are not limited to:
shopping centers, office parks, and industrial parks.
Sign, Ground: A sign in which at least 80% of the bottom edge of the sign panel is permanently affixed to the ground.
A monument sign is another name for a Ground Sign (See graphic for “Types of Signs”).
Sign, Illuminated: A sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs, or outline illuminated by electric lights or
luminous tubes as a part of the sign proper, or which is illuminated by reflectors.
Sign, Monument: See “Sign, Ground.”
Sign, Mural: A sign painted onto the side of a building, wall, ground, or structure. A mural sign is regulated as a wall
sign in the Zoning Ordinance (See graphic for “Types of Signs”).
Sign, Non-commercial: Any sign that, directly or indirectly, does not name, advertise, or call attention to a business,
product, service, or other commercial activity.
Sign, Permanent: A sign that is designed or intended to be used indefinitely, or used indefinitely without change in
the same state or place. Permanent signs primarily include: wall signs, ground signs, pole signs, gateway signs, entry
feature signs, projecting signs, awning signs, display board signs, and drive-up menu signs.
Sign, Pole: A sign in which less than 80% of the bottom edge of the sign panel is permanently affixed to the ground,
generally supported by one (1) or more poles, posts, or braces mounted to the ground (See graphic for “Types of
Signs”).
Sign, Portable: See “Sign, Temporary.”
Sign, Projecting: A sign which is mounted perpendicular to and extending away from a structure (e.g. facade) (See
graphic for “Types of Signs”).
Sign, Scrolling: See “Sign, Animated.”
Sign, Self-Standing: A type of temporary sign or device that is self-supporting without being affixed to the ground or
without legs that project into the ground. This type of sign is generally designed to be setup on a sidewalk or other flat
surface to attract pedestrians.
Sign, Structure: Any structure which supports, has supported, or is capable of supporting a sign, including decorative
cover, poles, piers, masonry, stone, foundation, metal frames or cabinets, and/or other structural components.
Sign, Temporary: A sign not fixed to a permanent foundation or substantially affixed to a wall or vehicle, generally meant
to convey a message for a short period of time. Typical temporary signs include yard signs, self-standing signs, banner
signs, or A-frame signs. Temporary signs do not include changeable copy. Not all types of temporary signs are permitted
in each zoning district.
Sign, Tenant Listing: An sign affixed to an exterior wall near a public entrance, or interior wall in a common area of a
development used to identify businesses within the building and to direct the public to those businesses within.
Article
Article 09: Definitions 9-29
Definitions - State 9
Sign, Vehicle: A vehicle displaying a sign, applied to or attached to the vehicle, which is purposefully parked or placed
to be visible from a public street.
Sign, Wall: A sign attached to and/or integral with the exterior wall of a building or canopy, the face of which is
generally parallel to the wall surface (See graphic for “Types of Signs”).
Sign, Window: A sign installed on or inside a window for purposes of being viewed from outside of the building. This
term does not include merchandise in the window.
Signs, Types of: The graphic below depicts the primary types of signs used in this ordinance, excluding gateway and
entry feature signs. Regulations for each type of permitted sign will very by zoning district. Not all sign types are
represented in the illustration.
© 2016, Bradley E Johnson, AICP
Sign, Yard: A type of temporary sign or device with one (1) or two (2) faces affixed to one (1) or two (2) legs that are
pressed into the ground.
Single-family Residential District: Refers to the RE, R1, R2, R3, and R4 districts.
Site Plan: A map of a site, drawn accurately to scale, showing existing and proposed features of the site including but
not limited to buildings, and other structures, circulation, grading, trees, and landscaping, sufficient for review.
Smoke Shop: A retail business, primarily established to sell tobacco and products associated with smoking.
Spandrel Panel: The space on a facade between either:
1. The top of the first floor windows and the bottom of second floor windows; or
2. The top of first floor windows and the top of the parapet or eave line (i.e. roof line); or
3. The top of any second or higher floor’s windows and the bottom of the windows on the next floor higher; or
4. The top of the highest floor’s windows and the top of the parapet or eave line (i.e. roof line).
Special Exception Use: The authorization of a use that is designated as such by this ordinance as being permitted
in the district concerned if it meets special conditions, is found to be appropriate and upon application, is specifically
authorized by the Board of Adjustments.
Stable, Private: An agricultural operation utilizing one (1) or more buildings for the shelter and feeding of riding or
working horses for personal use. Public offering to board a horse, offering to provide riding lessons, offering to lead
trail rides, and the like shall not be considered a private stable.
Stable Public: An agricultural operation utilizing one (1) or more buildings for the shelter and feeding of riding or
working horses as a commercial enterprise. Public offering to board a horse, offering to provide riding lessons, offering
to lead trail rides, and the like shall be considered a public stable.
Stadium: A venue for sporting events and/or concerts where the performance area is completely or partially surrounded
by a structure to seat the spectators. A stadium includes activities related to major cultural and sports activities; uses
customarily incidental and subordinate to a stadium including but not limited to: live performances, temporary hospitality
facilities, vehicle/product entertainment/trade shows; and temporary camping facilities for staff, participants, and/or
patrons of events.
State: The State of Texas.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
9-30
Definitions - Static Message 9
Static Message: Not changing any sign copy, character, graphic, color, or pixel, light element, or light intensity (e.g.
changing copy on a changeable copy sign) on a sign more frequently than once every one (1) hour.
Storage, Outdoor: The outdoor accumulation of goods, junk, motor vehicles, equipment, products or materials for
permanent or temporary holding.
Storage Tank: A structural device used to contain a liquid, gas, or solid commodity.
Storm Event: An estimate of the expected amount of precipitation within a given period of time. For example, a storm
event with a one (1) year frequency over a twenty-four (24) hour period duration is a storm that has a one percent (1%)
probability of occurring in any one (1) year.
Stormwater: The portion of precipitation that does not naturally infiltrate into the ground or evaporate, but flows via
overland flow, interflow, channels, or pipes into a defined surface water channel.
Story: The portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or
if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling above it. Any portion of a story exceeding
fourteen (14) feet in height shall be considered as an additional story for each fourteen (14) feet or fraction thereof.
Maximum stories is generally what is used to regulate a structure’s height.
Street: Any vehicular facility that is:
1. Established in a right-of-way, or that predates use of right-of-ways and established over property lines.
2. Shown upon a plat approved pursuant to law, that is not a driveway, or
3. An access facility intended to provide access to three (3) or more lots, three (3) or more condominium units, or five
(5) or more dwelling units in a multiple-family residential building shall not be considered a driveway.
Street, Arterial: A street with access control, no parking outside urban areas, and that conveys traffic across the City.
State and Federal highways are generally considered arterials.
Street, Collector: A street designed to facilitate the collection of traffic from other collectors. A collector can provide
circulation within commercial areas and convenient access from neighborhoods to arterials.
Street, Local: A street designed primarily to provide access to residential or farm properties.
Street, Private: A street on private property, an easement, or common area owned and maintained by the property
owner, easement holder, or an owner’s association.
Street, Public: A street within a public right-of-way and maintained by a municipal, county, state or federal
government.
Street, Unpaved: A local street with and unpaved surface designed to provide access to minimally developed areas.
Structural Alteration: Any change in the supporting members of a building or structure such as bearing walls, partitions,
columns, beams or girders, or any change in the footprint or increase in the size of living space. Also, substantial
roofing and siding work when repairs are made to the structure beneath.
Structure: Anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having
a location on the ground, including but not limited to buildings, fences, swimming pools, sport courts, sheds, detached
garages, manufactured homes, above-ground storage tanks, towers, and signs.
Structure Height: The vertical distance measured from the ground level (i.e. average elevation surrounding the
structure, not including any artificially mounds or berms) to the highest point of the roof, or top most portion of the
structure. Maximum structure height generally allows a structure to have the maximum number of stories plus enough
to allow a pitched roof and other architectural features.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Structure
Height
Gable, Hip and Gambrel Roof
(from midpoint on pitched roof)
Flat Roof
(from highest section
of flat roof)
chimneys are
exempt
parapet
Mansard Roof
(from midpoint on
mansard roof)
deck line
Structure
Height
Studio Arts: Karate studio, dance studio, art studio and the like.
Article
Article 09: Definitions 9-31
Definitions - Vehicle 9
Subject Lot: See “Lot, Subject.”
Swimming Pool: A self-contained body of water at least eighteen (18) inches deep and eight (8) feet in diameter or
width and used for recreational purposes. It may be above or below ground level, and shall be considered an accessory
structure.
TDOT: Texas Department of Transportation.
Telecommunication Facility: A land based facility, consisting of towers, antennae, accessory structures or other
structures intended for use in connection with the commercial transmission or receipt of radio or television signals, or
any other spectrum-based transmissions/receptions.
Telecommunication Tower: Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one
or more antennas. The term includes: radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, cellular telephone
and wireless communication towers, alternative tower structures and the like.
Temporary Use/Structure: See “Use, Temporary.”
Testing: Any use that includes evaluating a product for quality, function, longevity, or quality control purposes. Testing
can also include medical testing.
Theater: A facility for audio and visual productions and performing arts, excluding adult motion picture theaters and
adult entertainment businesses.
Thoroughfare: A public way or public place that is included in the Thoroughfare Plan. The term includes the entire
right‑of‑way for public use of the thoroughfare and all surface and subsurface improvements on it such as sidewalks,
curbs, shoulders, and utility lines and mains.
Thoroughfare Plan: The official plan, now and hereafter adopted, which includes a street plan, sets forth the location,
alignment, dimensions, identification, and classification of existing and proposed streets, and other thoroughfares.
Through Lot: See “Lot, Through.”
Tower: See “Telecommunication Tower.”
Tower Accessory Structure: Any structure located at or near the base of a tower for housing receiving or transmitting
equipment.
Trash Receptacles: Any container used to store trash and that is less than 120 gallons in volume.
Two-Page Layout: Two (2) facing pages dedicated to each of the zoning districts established in the Henderson Zoning
Ordinance and located in Article 2: Zoning Districts. Each two‑page layout includes the district intent, permitted uses,
Special Exception Uses, and basic development standards applicable to that zoning district.
Underlying District: See “Base Zoning District.”
Use: The purposes for which land, building, or structure thereon is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is
occupied, maintained, let, or leased.
Use, Permitted: A use which may be lawfully established in a particular district or districts provided it conforms with
all applicable requirements, regulations and standards.
Use, Primary: The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from an accessory use. A primary use may be either
a Permitted Use or a Special Exception Use.
Use, Temporary: A land use or structure established for a limited and fixed period of no more than four (4) months
with the intent to discontinue such use or structure upon the expiration
of the time period.
Use Variance: See “Variance, Use.”
Utility, Public: Any entity duly authorized to furnish under public regulation to the public, electricity, gas, steam,
telephone, fiber optics, potable water, storm sewers, or sanitary sewer systems. The term does not include a municipality
that may acquire, own, or operate any of the foregoing facilities.
Variance, Development Standards: A specific approval granted by the Board of Adjustments in the manner prescribed
by the Zoning Ordinance, to deviate from the development standards (such as height, bulk, area) that the Zoning
Ordinance otherwise prescribes.
Variance, Use: A specific approval granted by the Board of Adjustments in the manner prescribed by the Zoning
Ordinance, to deviate from the permitted uses and Special Exception Uses in the applicable zoning district.
Variety Store: A retail establishment that sells a multitude of consumer goods.
Vehicle: See “Motor Vehicle.”
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
9-32
Definitions - Veterinary Clinic or Hospital 9
Veterinary Clinic or Hospital: A place where animals are given medical care and the boarding of animals is limited to
short-term care incidental to the hospital use. A kennel is not considered part of a veterinarian clinic or hospital.
Vineyard: The area primarily used for the agricultural practice of growing grapes. Vineyards are not inclusive of a
winery.
Walk-in Sales: An enterprise where the doors to retail sales area are open to the public during posted hours.
Water Utility: A community-serving water supply system including existing and new wells and/or surface water
sources and intakes, treatment facilities, and distribution lines and includes such of the above facilities established by
the developer to serve a new subdivision, or commercial or industrial development.
Winery: A business or operation that makes wine for human consumption. A winery may include ancillary uses that
are clearly subordinate, for example: a small cafe, retail sales of products produced on site, retail sales of complementary
items such as corkscrews, wine glasses, art, and boutique cheese.
Yard: A space on the same lot with a primary building that is open and unobstructed except as otherwise authorized
by the Zoning Ordinance. All required yards shall be kept free of all material including but not limited to, buildings,
structures, material for sale, storage, advertising or display to attract attention and parking lots.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Front Yard
Side
Yard
Rear Yard
R.O.W.
Side
Yard
Rear Lot Line
Front Lot Line
Side Lot Line
Side Lot Line
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Rear Lot Line
Front Yard
Side Lot Line
Side Lot Line
Rear Yard
Side
Yard
Front Lot Line
Side
Yard
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Side Lot Line
R.O.W.
Front Yard
Front Lot Line
Side Lot Line
Side Yard
Side
Yard
Front Lot Line
Front
Yard
R O W
Yard, Front: On a lot without a primary structure, the front yard shall be the area between the front lot line and front
yard setback line, between side lot lines. On a lot with a primary structure, the horizontal area from the front facade of
a primary structure to the applicable front yard setback, extending to the applicable side yard setbacks. This definition
also applies to the largest storage-based or support-based accessory structure with a permanent foundation on a lot
without a primary structure.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Front Yard
Envelope
R.O.W.
Building
Envelope
Rear Yard
Setback
Side Yard
Setback
Front Yard
Setback
Article
Article 09: Definitions 9-33
Definitions - Zoning Map 9
Yard, Rear: On a lot without a primary structure, the rear yard shall be the area between the rear lot line and rear yard
setback line, between side lot lines. On a lot with a primary structure, the horizontal area from the rear facade of a
primary structure to the applicable rear yard setback, extending to the applicable side yard setbacks. This definition also
applies to the largest storage-based or support-based accessory structure with a permanent foundation on a lot without a
primary structure.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Rear Yard
Envelope
R.O.W.
Building
Envelope
Rear Yard
Setback
Side Yard
Setback
Front Yard
Setback
Yard, Required: A combination of one or more side yards, rear yards, and/or front yards as established by the regulations
in the Henderson Zoning Ordinance.
Yard, Side: Area on a lot which is not defined as a front yard or a rear yard, roughly described as the area between
the side foundation and the side lot line between the front yard and rear yard. This definition also applies to the largest
storage-based or support-based accessory structure with a permanent foundation on a lot without a primary structure.
© 2016, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
R.O.W.
Building
Envelope
Side Yard
Setback
SideYard
Envelope
ZBA: See “Zoning Board of Adjustments.”
Zoning Administrator: The person appointed by and/or delegated the responsibility for the administration of the
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance by the Henderson Planning and Zoning Commission. The term “Zoning
Administrator” includes his/her authorized representatives.
Zoning District: A purposefully created and uniquely named classification used to prescribe a set regulations to
geographic areas within the zoning jurisdiction of the City of Henderson. Zoning districts are drawn on the Official
Zoning Map.
Zoning Jurisdiction: The area within the corporate limits of the City of Henderson, Texas over which the City has
legal planning and zoning authority.
Zoning Board of Adjustments: The Henderson Zoning Board of Adjustments or any division thereof.
Zoning Map: See “Official Zoning Map.”
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Article
9-34
﻿ 9
© 2017, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
City of Henderson
Zoning Ordinance
A
Appendix
Land Use Matrix
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Appendix Accessory Uses
A-02
A
AG PR RE R1 R2 R3 R4 M1 M2 M3 IS C1 C2 UC OC I1 I2 HI
Agricultural Uses
agricultural crop production P P
agricultural products, processing S S P
agricultural products, sales S
agricultural products, storage P S P
agricultural tourism (type 1) P
agricultural tourism (type 2) S
bio-diesel production (micro) S
forestry P S S
grain elevator S
hobby farming P P
land conservation P P P
orchard P P
plant nursery, wholesale P S
raising of animals (farm) P S
stable (private) P S
stable (public) S
tree farm, wholesale P S
vineyard P
AG PR RE R1 R2 R3 R4 M1 M2 M3 IS C1 C2 UC OC I1 I2 HI
Accessory Uses
home business (type 1) P P P P P P P P P
home business (type 2) S S S S S S
home business (type 3) S S
home daycare facility S S S S
Appendix Commercial Uses
Appendix A: Land Use Matrix A-03
A
AG PR RE R1 R2 R3 R4 M1 M2 M3 IS C1 C2 UC OC I1 I2 HI
Commercial Uses
amusement park P
animal grooming P
atm, drive-up P S
atm, walk-up P P
auction (indoor) P
auction (outdoor) S
automobile oriented business (type 1) S P S
automobile oriented business (type 2) P
automobile oriented business (type 3) S P
bakery P P P
bank S P P P
bank/atm, drive-up P P
banquet hall P S
bar or tavern S P P
barber or beauty shop P P P
billiard hall S
bowling alley P
brew pub P P
broadcast studio P P
cabins (for rent) S
campground S
car rental P
catering service P
check cashing service S
club or lodge P P
coffee shop P P P P
coin laundry S P
computer service P P P
copy center P P P
counseling center S P S
country club S P
crematory S S S
day care, adult P S S S
day care, child S P S S S
delicatessen P P P P
design services S P P
donation collection point P
driving range S
dry cleaning pickup and drop-off P P P
express shipping center P P P
exterminator P P
farmers market P P P
funeral home P S
gas station P
golf course P
hotel P S
ice cream shop P P P
kennel S S
lumberyard P
media rental P P P
medical clinic P S S
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Appendix Commercial Uses
A-04
A
AG PR RE R1 R2 R3 R4 M1 M2 M3 IS C1 C2 UC OC I1 I2 HI
Commercial Uses
mobile device dealer P P
motel S
nail salon P P P
night club P
office, construction trade S P S
office, general P P P P P
office, medical P P P P
paintball facility S S
parcel shipping S
parking lot, pay S
party facility S P S S
pharmacy P P
photography studio S P
printing, commercial P P
real estate office S P
recreation center (indoor) P S
recreation center (outdoor) P
recreational vehicle park S
repair shop, electronics P
repair shop, equipment P P
repair shop, general S
restaurant P S
restaurant, drive-in P
restaurant, drive-through only P
restaurant, no drive-through P P S S
restaurant with drive-up window P
retail, agriculture related P
retail (type 1) very low intensity P P P
retail (type 2) low intensity P P P
retail (type 3) medium intensity S P P
retail (type 4) high intensity P S
retail (type 5) very high intensity S S S
seamstress/tailor P P
self-storage warehouse S P
sexually oriented entertainment S
shoe repair P
shooting range (indoor) S
shooting range (outdoor) S P
software development S P P
spa P P
sports field (indoor) S S S S
sports field (outdoor) S
studio arts S P P
swimming pool S S S
tanning salon P P P
tattoo/piercing parlor P S
theater, movie (indoor) P S
theater, movie (outdoor) S
title company P P
tool/equipment rental (indoor) P P
Appendix Commercial Uses
Appendix A: Land Use Matrix A-05
A
AG PR RE R1 R2 R3 R4 M1 M2 M3 IS C1 C2 UC OC I1 I2 HI
Commercial Uses
tool/equipment rental (outdoor) S P P
trade or business school S P S P
travel agency P P
veterinary clinic P S
veterinary hospital S S P
water park S
wellness facility P P S P S
winery S P
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Appendix Industrial Uses
A-06
A
AG PR RE R1 R2 R3 R4 M1 M2 M3 IS C1 C2 UC OC I1 I2 HI
Industrial Uses
asphalt plant S P P
assembly P P
bio-fuel production S P
blast furnace P
bottling/canning P P
brewery P P
broadcast facility S P
call center S
chemical manufacturing S P
coke oven P
composting facility S S P P
concrete plant S P P
construction materials landfill P
distribution facility P P
dry cleaning processing S P P
electrical generation plant P
explosives manufacturing P
fireworks manufacturing P
fleet vehicle storage S P
flex space P P P
food processing S P
freight terminal P P
heavy equipment repair P
incinerator S P
industrial park P P
junk yard P
liquid fertilizer distribution S P
manufacturing, heavy S
manufacturing, light P
materials recycling (type 1) P P
materials recycling (type 2) S P
materials recycling (type 3) P
meat processing S
metal casting S P
mining, rock or sand S P
outdoor storage S P
petroleum processing P
pipeline transportation P
printer, industrial P P
produce terminal P P
rail yard P
rendering plant P
research center, general P P P
research center, medical P P
rock crushing P
sanitary landfill/refuse dump P
saw mill S P P
Appendix Industrial Uses
Appendix A: Land Use Matrix A-07
A
AG PR RE R1 R2 R3 R4 M1 M2 M3 IS C1 C2 UC OC I1 I2 HI
Industrial Uses
scrap metal yard P
sign fabrication P P
smelting P
stone cutting P
storage tanks (hazardous) P
storage tanks (non-hazardous) P P
telecommunication facility S S S P
testing, general P
testing lab, electronics P P
testing lab, materials P P
tool and die shop P P
transfer station S P
utility facility, above ground S S P P P P P P P
warehouse S P P
welding service P P
wholesale business P P
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Appendix Institutional Uses
A-08
A
AG PR RE R1 R2 R3 R4 M1 M2 M3 IS C1 C2 UC OC I1 I2 HI
Institutional Uses
botanical gardens P P
cemetery or mausoleum P
child care institution P
community center P P P P
emergency service training facility P
fairground P
fire or rescue station P
government office P P
government operations facility P P P
homeless shelter S
hospice facility S P S
hospital P
information center P P
jail S S P
juvenile detention facility S S P
library P P
museum P
nature center P
nature preserve P P
observatory S P
park, public P
parking garage, public P P
parking lot, public P P P
performing arts center S P S
place of worship P P
police station S P P P P P
post office P
prison S S P
recycling collection point S S P P
rehabilitation clinic, drug S
school (P-12), private P S P
school (P-12), public P S
sewage treatment facility, public P
shelter S S
university or college P S P
water tower P P P P P
water treatment facility, public P
wellhead, public P P P
wildlife preserve S S
zoo S
Appendix Residential Uses
Appendix A: Land Use Matrix A-09
A
AG PR RE R1 R2 R3 R4 M1 M2 M3 IS C1 C2 UC OC I1 I2 HI
Residential Uses
assisted living facility S S P P S
assisted living facility, upper floor P
bed and breakfast S S S S
bed and breakfast (Upper Floor) S
caretakers residence P
dwelling, duplex (2 units) S P P S
dwelling, manufactured home P
dwelling, multiple-family (3 to 4 units) P P P
dwelling, multiple-family (5 to 8 units) P P
dwelling, multiple-family (9 to 16 units) S P
dwelling, multiple-family (17+ units) S
dwelling, single-family attached S S P S
dwelling, single-family detached P P P P P P S S S
dwelling, upper floor (multiple-family) S S P
dwelling, upper floor (single-family) P S P
fair housing facility S S
fair housing facility (large) S
hostel S
nursing home S P P S
retirement community P P
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Appendix Residential Uses
A-10
A
© 2017, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
City of Henderson
Zoning Ordinance
Appendix
B
Index
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Appendix Index
B-02
B
A
Accessory Structure: 2-3; 2-5; 2-7; 2-9; 2-11; 2-13; 2-15; 2-17;
2-19; 2-21; 2-23; 2-25; 2-27; 2-29; 2-31; 2-33; 2-35; 2-37; 3-2; 5-3;
5-4; 5-5; 5-6; 5-7; 5-8; 5-9; 5-10; 5-11; 5-12; 5-13; 5-14; 5-18; 5-20;
5-26; 5-27; 5-28; 5-29; 5-43; 5-57; 5-58; 5-90; 5-93; 7-2; 7-4; 7-6;
7-12; 9-2; 9-8; 9-18; 9-19; 9-31; 9-32; 9-33.
Administrative Appeal: 1-4; 7-3; 7-7; 7-10; 7-11.
AG District: 1-5; 2-2; 2-3; 2-4; 2-6; 2-8; 2-10; 2-12; 2-14; 2-16; 2-18;
2-20; 2-22; 2-24; 2-26; 2-30; 2-32; 2-34; 2-36; 2-38; 4-2; 5-36;
5-88; 9-3.
Alley: 1-7; 4-2; 5-38; 5-93; 7-5; 7-13; 7-20; 7-21; 7-26; 7-29; 7-32; 9-3;
9-19; 9-22; 9-23.
B
Board of Adjustments: 1-4; 5-60; 5-88; 7-2; 7-3; 7-7; 7-8; 7-10;
7-11; 7-15; 7-25; 7-26; 7-27; 7-28; 7-29; 7-30; 7-31; 8-2; 8-7; 9-4;
9-5; 9-7; 9-10; 9-29; 9-31; 9-33.
Building Code: 5-3; 7-5; 9-6; 9-9; 9-10.
Building Official: 3-5; 3-6; 3-7; 5-62; 5-89; 7-5; 9-6.
C
C1 District: 1-5; 2-2; 2-4; 2-8; 2-10; 2-12; 2-14; 2-16; 2-18; 2-20;
2-22; 2-24; 2-25; 2-26; 2-28; 2-30; 2-38; 4-2; 5-36; 9-7.
C2 District: 1-5; 2-2; 2-4; 2-18; 2-20; 2-22; 2-24; 2-26; 2-27; 2-30;
2-32; 2-34; 2-38; 4-2; 5-36; 5-60; 9-7.
City Council: 1-4; 1-8; 1-9; 3-5; 3-6; 3-7; 4-2; 5-32; 5-65; 7-2; 7-19;
7-20; 7-25; 7-32; 7-33; 7-34; 9-7; 9-14.
City Manager: 1-7; 3-5; 5-32; 5-90; 7-14; 7-18; 7-22; 9-10.
D
DBH: 7-6; 7-13.
Detailed Development Plan: 7-19; 7-20; 7-22; 7-23; 7-24.
Development Plan: 7-2; 7-4; 7-12; 7-13; 7-14; 7-15; 7-17.
Development Standards Variance: 1-4; 7-29; 7-30; 7-31; 9-9.
E
Enforcement Official: 7-11; 8-2; 8-3; 8-4; 8-6; 8-7; 9-10.
Establishment Plan: 7-17; 7-19; 7-20; 7-23; 7-24.
F
Fire Chief: 5-90.
Fire Department: 5-90; 7-14; 7-18; 7-22.
FPO District: 1-6; 3-2; 3-3; 9-13; 9-14.
G
H
HDO District: 1-6; 3-4; 3-5; 3-6; 3-7; 3-8.
HI District: 1-5; 2-2; 2-4; 2-22; 2-34; 2-36; 2-37; 2-38; 5-36; 9-14.
Historic Landmark: 3-4; 3-5; 3-6; 3-7; 3-8; 9-14.
Historic Landmark Preservation Committee: 3-5; 3-6; 3-7; 9-7;
9-14.
Home Business: 2-2; 2-6; 2-8; 2-10; 2-12; 2-14; 2-16; 2-18; 2-20;
5-27; 5-28; 5-29; 5-61; 5-63; 5-68; 7-4; 9-15.
I
I1 District: 1-5; 2-2; 2-4; 2-18; 2-20; 2-22; 2-26; 2-30; 2-32; 2-33;
2-34; 2-38; 4-2; 5-36; 5-88; 9-15.
I2 District: 1-5; 2-2; 2-4; 2-22; 2-26; 2-30; 2-32; 2-34; 2-35; 2-36;
2-38; 4-2; 5-36; 5-88; 9-15.
Improvement Location Permit: 1-4; 5-3; 5-14; 5-15; 5-16; 5-21;
5-32; 5-40; 5-43; 5-56; 5-60; 5-61; 5-88; 7-2; 7-4; 7-5; 7-6; 7-7; 7-8;
7-12; 9-15.
IS District: 1-5; 2-2; 2-4; 2-6; 2-8; 2-10; 2-12; 2-14; 2-16; 2-18; 2-20;
2-22; 2-23; 2-24; 2-26; 2-28; 2-30; 2-32; 2-34; 2-36; 2-38; 4-2;
5-36; 9-16.
J
K
L
Legal Counsel: 7-14; 7-18; 7-22; 9-10.
Legislative Body: 5-40; 8-2.
M
M1 District: 1-5; 2-2; 2-4; 2-10; 2-12; 2-14; 2-16; 2-17; 2-18; 2-22;
2-24; 2-38; 4-2; 5-36; 9-20; 9-24.
M2 District: 1-5; 2-2; 2-4; 2-10; 2-12; 2-14; 2-16; 2-18; 2-19; 2-20;
2-22; 2-24; 2-26; 2-28; 2-30; 2-32; 2-38; 4-2; 5-36; 5-63; 9-20;
9-24.
M3 District: 1-5; 2-2; 2-4; 2-10; 2-12; 2-14; 2-18; 2-20; 2-21; 2-22;
2-24; 2-26; 2-30; 2-32; 2-38; 4-2; 5-36; 5-63; 9-20; 9-24.
Mayor: 8-2.
Motel: 2-26; 5-48; 9-5; 9-9; 9-20; A-4.
N
Neighborhood: 3-5; 3-7; 4-2; 5-27; 5-28; 5-63; 5-91; 9-30.
Newspaper: 5-40; 7-14; 7-18; 7-23; 7-27; 7-30; 7-33; 7-34.
O
OC District: 1-5; 2-2; 2-4; 2-18; 2-20; 2-22; 2-24; 2-26; 2-30; 2-31;
2-32; 2-34; 2-38; 4-2; 5-36; 9-7.
Official Zoning Map: 1-4; 1-7; 3-3; 3-5; 4-3; 7-32; 7-33; 9-21; 9-33.
Overlay District: 1-6; 1-7; 3-1; 9-13; 9-14.
P
Park (use): 1-5; 2-4; 3-2; 5-47; 5-50; 5-60; 5-63; 7-20; 9-7; 9-22; A-8.
PD District: 4-2; 4-3.
Permitted Use: 1-6; 2-2; 2-4; 2-6; 2-8; 2-10; 2-12; 2-14; 2-16; 2-18;
2-20; 2-22; 2-24; 2-26; 2-28; 2-30; 2-32; 2-34; 2-36; 3-2; 3-4; 4-2;
5-4; 5-86; 6-5; 7-3; 7-17; 9-13; 9-15; 9-17; 9-20; 9-22; 9-23; 9-31.
Planned Development Detailed Development Plan: 7-19; 7-20.
Planned Development District Ordinance: 1-4; 7-17; 7-19; 7-20;
7-23; 7-24.
Planning and Zoning Commission: 1-4; 1-7; 1-8; 1-9; 3-6; 3-7;
4-2; 4-3; 5-18; 5-56; 7-2; 7-11; 7-13; 7-14; 7-15; 7-17; 7-18; 7-19;
7-20; 7-21; 7-22; 7-23; 7-24; 7-25; 7-29; 7-32; 7-33; 7-34; 8-2; 9-3;
9-4; 9-5; 9-7; 9-8; 9-10; 9-21; 9-22; 9-33.
Appendix Index
B-03
B
Appendix B: Index
Police Chief: 5-90.
Police Department: 5-90; 7-14; 7-18; 7-22.
PR District: 1-5; 2-2; 2-4; 2-5; 2-6; 2-8; 2-10; 2-12; 2-14; 2-16; 2-18;
2-20; 2-22; 2-24; 2-26; 2-28; 2-30; 2-32; 2-34; 2-36; 2-38; 4-2;
5-36; 5-88.
Preservation Plan: 3-6.
Primary Structure: 2-3; 2-5; 2-7; 2-9; 2-11; 2-13; 2-15; 2-17; 2-19;
2-21; 2-23; 2-25; 2-27; 2-29; 2-31; 2-32; 2-33; 2-34; 2-35; 2-37;
3-2; 5-4; 5-5; 5-6; 5-7; 5-8; 5-9; 5-10; 5-11; 5-12; 5-13; 5-14; 5-15;
5-16; 5-17; 5-18; 5-20; 5-21; 5-24; 5-26; 5-27; 5-28; 5-29; 5-32;
5-33; 5-34; 5-35; 5-36; 5-41; 5-43; 5-44; 5-45; 5-56; 5-57; 5-58;
5-59; 5-60; 5-67; 5-87; 5-88; 5-92; 5-93; 7-21; 9-2; 9-4; 9-7; 9-8;
9-9; 9-13; 9-18; 9-21; 9-23; 9-26; 9-32; 9-33.
Public Hearing: 1-8; 1-9; 3-6; 3-7; 7-2; 7-14; 7-18; 7-23; 7-24; 7-25;
7-27; 7-30; 7-33; 7-34.
Q
R
R1 District: 1-5; 2-2; 2-4; 2-6; 2-8; 2-9; 2-10; 2-22; 2-24; 2-38; 4-2;
5-36; 9-24; 9-29.
R2 District: 1-5; 2-2; 2-4; 2-6; 2-8; 2-10; 2-11; 2-12; 2-16; 2-18; 2-20;
2-22; 2-24; 2-38; 4-2; 5-36; 9-24; 9-29.
R3 District: 1-5; 2-2; 2-4; 2-10; 2-12; 2-13; 2-14; 2-16; 2-18; 2-20;
2-22; 2-24; 2-28; 2-38; 4-2; 5-36; 9-24; 9-29.
R4 District: 1-5; 2-2; 2-4; 2-12; 2-14; 2-15; 2-16; 2-18; 2-20; 2-22;
2-24; 2-38; 5-36; 9-24; 9-29.
Recreational Vehicle: 2-4; 5-3; 5-4; 5-5; 5-6; 5-7; 5-8; 5-41; 5-49;
9-6; 9-20; 9-24.
RE District: 1-5; 2-2; 2-4; 2-6; 2-7; 2-8; 2-10; 2-22; 2-38; 5-36; 9-24;
9-29.
River: 1-7; 7-14; 7-18; 7-23; 7-27; 7-30; 7-33; 7-34; 9-13; 9-21.
Roof: 5-14; 5-15; 5-16; 5-17; 5-18; 5-26; 5-65; 6-3; 7-21; 9-4; 9-6;
9-10; 9-13; 9-15; 9-18; 9-22; 9-23; 9-29; 9-30.
Rules of Procedure: 4-3; 7-11; 7-15; 7-25; 8-2; 9-10.
Rusk County: 3-5; 7-5; 9-8; 9-19.
S
School: 2-22; 2-24; 2-26; 2-30; 2-32; 5-45; 5-49; 5-50; 5-60; 9-21;
9-25.
Special Exception Use: 1-4; 1-6; 2-2; 2-4; 2-6; 2-8; 2-10; 2-12;
2-14; 2-16; 2-18; 2-20; 2-22; 2-24; 2-26; 2-28; 2-30; 2-32; 2-34;
2-36; 3-2; 3-4; 5-86; 7-2; 7-3; 7-17; 7-26; 7-28; 7-29; 9-20; 9-29;
9-31.
Street Department: 5-90.
Swimming Pool: 2-4; 2-24; 2-26; 5-3; 5-4; 5-5; 5-6; 5-7; 5-8; 5-22;
5-49; 7-4; 9-2; 9-21; 9-22; 9-23; 9-30; 9-31.
T Temporary Improvement Location Permit: 5-90; 5-91; 7-2; 7-4;
7-9; 7-10.
Tree Preservation Plan: 5-32.
U
UC District: 1-5; 2-4; 2-12; 2-18; 2-22; 2-24; 2-28; 2-29; 2-38; 5-36;
5-39; 5-58; 9-7.
Use Variance: 5-60; 7-29; 7-30; 7-31; 9-31.
US Mail: 7-7; 7-10; 7-14; 7-18; 7-23; 7-27; 7-30; 7-33; 7-34; 8-3.
Utility Departments: 7-14; 7-18; 7-22.
V Vehicle: 5-64.
Violation: 3-8; 5-47; 5-89; 5-90; 6-2; 6-3; 7-2; 7-4; 7-8; 7-12; 7-15;
7-34; 8-2; 8-3; 8-4; 8-5; 8-6; 8-7; 8-8; 9-14; 9-24.
W Waterway: 1-6; 1-7; 5-38; 9-5.
X
Y
Z
Zoning Administrator: 1-3; 1-4; 1-7; 5-20; 5-23; 5-24; 5-37; 5-43;
5-45; 5-47; 5-48; 5-50; 5-57; 5-59; 5-60; 5-61; 5-63; 5-86; 5-89;
5-90; 6-3; 7-3; 7-5; 7-6; 7-7; 7-8; 7-9; 7-10; 7-11; 7-12; 7-13; 7-14;
7-15; 7-17; 7-18; 7-19; 7-20; 7-21; 7-22; 7-23; 7-24; 7-25; 7-26;
7-27; 7-28; 7-29; 7-30; 7-31; 7-32; 7-33; 7-34; 8-2; 9-3; 9-4; 9-10;
9-21; 9-22; 9-23; 9-33.
Zoning Map Amendment: 7-2; 7-32; 7-33.
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Appendix Index
B-04
B
© 2017, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
City of Henderson
Zoning Ordinance
Appendix
C
Zoning Map
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Appendix Zoning Map
C-02
C
© 2017, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
City of Henderson
Zoning Ordinance
Appendix
D
Amendment Tracking Table
City of Henderson Zoning Ordinance
Appendix Amendment Tracking Table
D-02
Ordinance
Number
Planning
and Zoning
Commission/
City Council
Approval Date
Effective
Date Sections Affected Pages Changed Brief Description of Changes Date
Codified
Internal
Use
D
 
 
 
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
CITY
OF
HENDERSON
SUBDIVISION
ORDINANCE
NO. 05-05-10
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
Table of Contents
Section I: Subdivision Regulations ................................................ I
Section 2: Definitions .............................................. · ............ 1
Section 3: Area & Activities Subject to Subdivision Rules ............................. 8
Section 4: Platting Procedures ................................................... 8
Section 5: Preliminary Plat ...................................................... 1 O
Section 6: Final Plat .......................................................... 13
Section 7: Re-platting ......................................................... 18
Section 8: Amending Plats ..................................................... 19
Section 9: Plat Vacation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .... 19
Section 10: Development Fees ................................................... 19
Section 11: Requirements for Public Improvements and Design ......................... 20
Section 12: Private Streets and Alleys ............................................. 28
Section 13: Reserved .......................................................... 29
Section 14: Drainage and Utility Improvements ..................................... 29
Section 15: Construction & Inspection Procedures ................................... 35
Section 16: Participation and Escrow Policies ....................................... 3 8
Section 17: Gated Development Regulations ........................................ 38
Section 18: Simultaneous Construction ............................................ .40
Section 19: Non-Conformance ................................................... 40
Appendix A: Design Guidelines for Subdivisions .................................... 41
Chapter One: General Information ................................................ 42
Chapter Two: Paving & Drainage ................................................ .44
Chapter Three: Water and Sanitary Sewer Improvements .............................. 55
Standard I - III ................................................................ 69
Appendix B: Platting Process Flowcharts .......................................... 73
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
Section 1 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
This Ordinance sets out the procedures and standards for submitting plats, for
subdividing property, for the laying out and developing of lots, land and subdivisions within the
City limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Henderson, Texas and for guiding and
assisting developers in the correct procedures to be followed, and to furnish information of
standards required.
This Ordinance is also intended to promote the safe, orderly and healthful development of
the City by controlling the location, width, design and type of streets, storm sewers, culverts,
bridges, utilities and essential services required.
Section 2 - DEFINITIONS
Words not expressly defined herein are to be construed in accordance with customary
usage in municipal planning and engineering practice. As used in this Ordinance, the following
definitions shall apply:
Addition One lot, tract or parcel of land lying within the City limits or extraterritorial
jurisdiction which is intended for the purpose of development.
Adequate Public Facilities - Facilities determined to be capable of supporting and
servicing the physical area and designated intensity of the proposed subdivision as determined by
the City Council based upon specific levels of service.
Alley - A public or private service way which provides only a secondary means of public
access to property thereon and not intended for general traffic circulation.
Amended Plat - A revised plat correcting errors or making minor changes to the original
recorded final plat.
Amenity An improvement to be dedicated to the public or the common ownership of the
lot owners of the subdivision and providing an aesthetic, recreational, or other benefit, other than
those prescribed by this ordinance.
Applicant - The owner of land proposed to be subdivided, whether a person, firm,
association, corporation, syndicate, trust or any other legal entity who seeks authorization for
land to be divided into a subdivision for himself or others, or one who has express written
authority to act on behalf of the owner. Consent shall be required from the legal owner of the
premises.
Average Density The average number of dwelling units per acre.
Base Flood - A flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year. The based flood shall be determined by the City of Henderson Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM) Community Panel Number 480551- 0005B effective date September 27,1991.
1
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
Block - A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public
parks, cemeteries, railroad rights·of-way, shorelines of waterways, or boundary lines of
municipalities.
Bond - Any form of a surety bond in an amount and form satisfactory to the City.
Building - A combination of materials to fonn an edifice that is safe and stable, and
designed and built for the support, enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals, cattle or
property of any kind including, but not limited to, permanent or continuous occupancy for use
for assembly, business, education, industrial, institutional, mercantile, residential or storage
purposes. The term building shall be construed to include the term "structure", and as if
followed by the words, "or portion thereof'. When subdivided in a manner sufficient to prevent
the spread of fire, each portion so subdivided may be deemed a separate building.
Building Official - The Chief Building Inspector, or his designee who is responsible for
issuing building permits and charged with the administration and enforcement of the City
construction codes.
Building Setback Line - A line, established by the Zoning Ordinance, parallel or
approximately parallel to the front lot line at a specific distance therefrom, marking the minimum
distance from the front lot line that a building may be erected, except or unless as specifically
provided in the Zoning Ordinance.
City Engineer-A person under contract by the City of Henderson who is duly authorized
under the provisions of the Texas Engineering Registration Act, as heretofore or hereafter
amended, to practice the profession of Engineering.
Collector Street - Street which serves the internal traffic movement; within an area of the
City, such as a subdivision or commercial area, and connects this area with the arterial street
system.
Comprehensive Plan - A plan for development of the City prepared by the City Planning
and Zoning Commission and adopted by the Council, and including any part of such plan
separately adopted and any amendment to such plan, or parts thereof.
Commission - The Planning & Zoning Commission for the City of Henderson.
Concurrency - Requirement that development applications demonstrate that adequate
public facilities are available at prescribed levels of service based upon the impact of full
occupancy of development units.
Construction Plan - The maps or drawings accompanying a plat and showing the specific
location and design of public improvements to be installed in the subdivision or addition in
accordance with the requirements of the Subdivision ordinance as a condition of the approval of
the plat.
Contiguous - Lots are contiguous when at least one boundary line of one lot touches a
boundary line(s) of another lot.
2
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
Conveyance Plat - The portion of the Final Plat which is approved by the City Council
and record~d. i~ the Coun!y Clerk's office for Rusk County, Texas as determined by the DRB, for
large subd1v1s1ons the Fmal Plat may be recorded in sections satisfactory to the City where
approval of final development plans is not sought by the developer.
Council The Henderson City Council
County- Rusk County, Texas.
Cul-de-sac - A local street, one end of which is terminated and consists of an area for
turning vehicles around.
Dedication Plat - A plat prepared for the purpose of dedicating land or easements for
rights-of-way to the City.
Design Criteria - Standards that set forth specific improvement requirements.
Developer - The person, business, corporation or association responsible for the
development of a subdivision, addition, or other properties. In most contexts the terms
Developer and Property Owner are used interchangeably in these regulations.
Development - Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate including,
but not limited to, buildings or other structures, paving, drainage or utilities, but not agricultural
activities.
Development Extraction - Any dedication of land or easements for construction of or
contribution toward construction of a public improvement required as a condition of plat
approval by the City under these regulations.
Development Review Board (DRB) - A board consisting of the Public Services Director,
Fire Chief, Community Development Director, City Manager, and a developer (at Council's
discretion). Any decisions pertaining to plat approval or waivers of the requirements contained in
this Ordinance will be made by all members of this board.
Drainage Way - All land areas needed to allow passage of the Base Flood, including
sufficient access above the Base Flood elevation along each side of and parallel to the natural or
excavated channel.
ET J - Extraterritorial jurisdiction, including all lands within one mile from the City
limits.
Easement - A right-of-way or parcel of land, specified or set aside for a specific use;
normally for access, utilities, and other public or private usage, given by the owner of land to
another party, and kept free from buildings or structures.
Engineer - A person duly authorized under the provisions of the Texas Engineering
Registration Act, as heretofore or hereafter amended, to practice the profession of Engineering.
3
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
Exactions - Requirement of developer to dedicate or pay for all or a portion of land costs
for public facilities as a condition of development approval.
Final Plat - The map of a subdivision or addition to be recorded after approval by the
City Council and any accompanying material and additional requirements as described in these
regulations.
Flood Plain - An area of land subject to inundation by a 100-year frequency flood, as
shown on the City flood plain map.
Floodway - The channel of a stream or other watercourse and adjacent land areas that
must be reserved in order to discharge the 100-year flood without cumulatively increasing the
water surface elevation.
Floodway Easement - An easement within the flood plain as defined herein which
includes a channel, plus any adjacent flood plain area that must be kept free of encroachment and
obstruction in order that one hundred year frequency flood may be conveyed without increasing
the flood elevation at any point on the channel by more than one foot. Streams analyzed in detail
in the Federal Flood Insurance Study, its floodways and subsequent letters of map amendment
shall be used as criteria.
Frontage The distance along a property line which is also the right-of-way line of a
dedicated street or approved private street.
Frontage Street - Any street to be constructed by the developer or any existing street
where development shall take place on both sides.
Improvement Agreement - A contract entered into by the developer and the City by
which the developer promises to complete the required public improvements within the
subdivision or addition within a specified time period following final plat approval.
Industrial Park - A development of industrial sites, whether located inside or outside the
City, which if developed within the City, would be required by the zoning ordinance to be
located in a Light Industrial District (I-1) or General Industrial District (I-2).
Local Street - A street whose sole function is to provide access to abutting properties and
to other streets from individual properties, and to provide right-of-way beneath it for sewer,
water and storm drainage pipes and any other underground City franchised utilities.
Lot - A tract, plot or portion of a subdivision, addition, or other parcel of land intended as
a unit for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or possession or for
a building development.
Lot, Corner - A lot or parcel of land abutting upon two or more streets at their
intersection.
Lot Improvement Any building, structure, place, work of art, or other object situated on
a lot.
4
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
Lot of Record - A parce1 of land having its existence, location, dimensions, and
ownership legally recorded or registered, by deed or plat, with the Rusk County Clerk.
Metes and bounds - A description of real property by which property is not described by
reference to Lot or Block, shown on a map, but is defined by starting at a known point and
describing, in sequence, the lines forming the boundaries of property.
Major Plat - All plats not classified as minor plats, including but not limited to
subdivisions of more than four (4) lots, or any plat requiring creation of any new street or
extension of Municipal and public facilities.
Minimum Finished Floor Elevation - The mean sea level elevation above which the
lowest occupied floor slab, not including garages, of any building shall be built. This elevation
shall exceed the maximum surface elevation of the l 00-year flood for nearby creeks and
channels at that point of reach of said watercourse by at least one foot.
Minor Plat - A subdivision resulting in four or fewer lots and not requiring the creation
of any new street or extension of municipal facilities.
Municipal Facility-An improvement owned and maintained by the City.
Off-Site Improvement - Any public improvement located outside the physical boundaries
of the subdivision or addition to be platted.
Parcel - A continuous quantity of land in the possession of, owned by, or recorded as the
property of, the same person(s).
Pavement Width The portion of a street available for vehicular traffic. Where curb
exists, it is the distance between the face of the curbs on the opposite side of the street.
Perimeter Street - Any existing or planned street that abuts the subdivision or addition to
be platted.
Plat - A plan of a subdivision of land creating building lots or tracts and showing all
essential dimensions and other information essential to comply with the Subdivision ordinance of
the City and subject to approval by the City Council and filed in the plat records of Rusk County.
Platting- The act of preparing for approval and processing, pursuant to these regulations,
the plan or map for the subdivision or addition to be filed for record in the County where such
subdivision or addition is located and includes a development plat, unless otherwise noted.
Preliminary Plat- The preliminary drawing(s), described in these regulations, indicating
the proposed manner or layout of the subdivision or addition to be submitted to the Development
Review Board for approval.
Primary Arterial Street - A road intended to move traffic to and from major attractions
such as shopping centers, colleges, major industrial employers, and similar traffic generators
within the governmental unit.
5
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
Privat~ St;eets & A.lleys - A private vehicular access way shared by and serving two or
more lots, which is not dedicated to the public and is not publicly maintained. Private streets and
~Heys .may be established only under the terms of this ordinance. The term private street shall be
mclus1ve of alleys .
. Property Own.er Any person~s), firm_(s), corporation(s), or any other legal entity having
legal title to or suf.f icient propnetary mterest m the land comprising the subdivision or addition or any representative or agent thereto, who has express written authority to act on behalf of such'
owner.
P~blic .Facilities - Any buildings or facilities which are owned, leased and primarily used
and/or pnmarily operated by the City including, but not limited to, Transportation Services,
Utility Services, Transmission Lines, Metering Facilities, and Recreation Facilities/Services.
Public Improvement - Any drainage way, roadway, parkway, utility, pedestrian way,
off-street parking area, lot improvement, open space, or other facility for which the City or other
governmental entity will ultimately assume responsibility for maintenance and operation, or
which may affect an improvement for which local government responsibility is established.
Public Way - An officially approved, privately maintained drive constructed to City
street standards, open to unrestricted and irrevocable public access, serving two or more lots with
a minimum of 100 feet of frontage as their primary means of access.
Remainder The residual land left after platting of a portion of a tract. Platting of a
residual may in some instances be required under the provisions of this ordinance.
Replatting - Any change in a map of an unapproved or a recorded plat, except as
pennitted as an amended plat, that affects any street layout on the map or area reserved or
dedicated thereon for public use, or any lot line, or that affects any street layout on the map or
area reserved or dedicated thereon for public use, or any lot line, or that affects any map or plan
legalJy recorded prior to adoption of any regulations controlling subdivisions or additions.
Replatting includes the combination of lots into a single lot for purposes of development.
Resubdivision - The replatting of a subdivision plat. Any change in an approved or
recorded subdivision plat that affects any street layout or area reserved thereon for public use or
any lot line, or that affects a map or plan legally recorded prior to adoption of any regulations
controlling subdivisions.
Right-of Way A strip or parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street
or alley. Where appropriate right-of-way may include other facilities and utilities, such as
sidewalks, railroad crossings, electrical, communication, oil or gas, water or sanitary or stonn
sewer facilities, or for any other special use. The use of right-of-way shall also include parkways
and medians outside of pavement. The usage of the term "right-of-way" for land platting
purposes shall mean that every right-of-way hereafter established and shown on a final plat is to
be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way and not included
within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels.
Secondary Arterial Street - Roads intended to collect and distribute traffic in a manner
similar to a primary arterial street, except these roads service minor traffic generators such as
6
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
commercial areas, hospitals, churches, and offices and are designated to carry traffic from
collector streets to the system of primary arterials.
Security - The letter of credit or cash escrow provided by the applicant to secure its
promises in the improvement agreement.
Setback - The distance between a building and the property line nearest to the building.
Sidewalk - A paved walk, separated by a street, and intended for the movement of
pedestrian traffic.
Sketch Plat - A sketch preparatory to the preliminary plat (or final plat in the case of
minor subdivisions) to enable the sub divider to save time and expense in reaching general
agreement with the Development Review Board as to the form of the plat and the objectives of
these regulations.
Street - Any thoroughfare or public way, other than an alley, more than 25 feet in
roadway width, which has been dedicated to the public for public use.
Subdivider - Any person who (1) having an interest in land causes it, directly or
indirectly, to be divided into a subdivision or platted as an addition or, who (2) directly or
indirectly, sells, leases or develops, or offers to sell, lease, or develop or advertise to sell, lease or
develop, any interest, lot, parcel, site, unit, or plat in a subdivision or addition, or, who (3)
engages directly through an agent in the business of selling, leasing, developing, or offering sale,
lease, or development a subdivision or addition or any interest, lot, parcel site, unit or plat in a
subdivision or addition or who (4) is directly or indirectly controlled by, or under direct or
indirect common control with any of the foregoing.
TA.C. Texas Administrative Code
Temporary Improvement - Improvements built and maintained by an owner during
construction of the development of the subdivision or addition and prior to release of the
performance bond or improvements required for the short term use of the property.
Tract - A lot. The term "tract" is used interchangeably with the term "lot", particularly
in the context of subdivision, where a "tract" is subdivided into several lots, parcels, sites, units,
plots, condominiums, tracts or interests.
Utilities Engineer - The City designated engineer with responsibility to review and
release plans for water and sewer improvement projects, or his designee.
Variance~ A relaxation by the City Council of the dimensional regulations of this
Ordinance where such action will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to
conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of actions or the situation of the applicant, a
literal enforcement of this Ordinance would result in unnecessary and undue hardship.
7
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
Section 3 -AREA & ACTIVITIES SUBJECT TO SUBDIVISION RULES
A.
B.
c.
D.
Except as otherwise provides, these regulations apply to all subdivisions of land,
located within both the City limits and within the City's extraterritorial
jurisdiction.
The following types of subdivision do not require approval by the City. However,
the City shall not extend utilities, provide access to public roads or issue building
permits for the development of any property which has not received final plat
approval, except as otherwise provide in this ordinance.
1. The division of land into two or more parts where all parts are larger than
5 acres, where each part has access, and where no new building or
improvements is proposed and no required public improvement is to be
dedicated.
2. The creation of a remainder of a tract is caused by the platting of a portion
of the tract, provided the remainder is larger than 20 acres.
3. The use of the subject property for agricultural purposes provided that the
use does not involve the construction of a building(s) to be used as a
residence or for any purpose not directly related to agricultural use of the
land or crops or livestock raised thereon.
4. The division of property through inheritance, the probate of an estate, or
by a court of law.
Except as provided above, no land may be subdivided or platted through the use of
any legal description other than with reference to a plat approved by the City
Council in accordance with these regulations.
No building permit or final inspection shall be issued for any parcel or tract of land
inside the City limits until such property has received final plat approval and is in
substantial conformity with these subdivision regulations, and no private
improvements shall take place or be commenced except in conformity with these
regulations.
Section 4 - PLATTING PROCEDURES
A. Applicable Law for Plat Approval.
1. All applications for plat approval, including, final plats, pending on the
final approval of this ordinance and which have not lapsed, shall be
reviewed under regulations in effect immediately preceding the date of
adoption of these regulations.
2. These regulations shall not be construed as abating any action now pending
under, or by virtue of, prior existing subdivision regulations, or as
8
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
discontinuing, abating, modifying, or altering any penalty accruing or
about to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm, or
corporation, or as waiving any right of the City under any section or
provision existing at the time of adoption of these regulations, or as
vacating or annulling any rights obtained by any person, firm or
corporation, by lawful action of the City except as shall be expressly
provided for in these regulations.
B. General Procedure.
1. Classification of Subdivisions and Additions Before any land is platted,
the property owner shall apply for and secure approval of the proposed
subdivision plat or addition plat in accordance with the following
procedures, unless otherwise provided by these regulations. Subdivisions
are classified as major or minor, depending on the number of lots proposed
and the extent of public improvements required.
a. Minor subdivisions shall create no more than four lots and not require the
creation of a new street or the extension of municipal facilities. Minor
subdivisions may be approved for residential and non-residential
properties. Minor plat approval requires the submission of a final plat as
described under Section 6. Minor plats will be considered and approved
by the Development Review Board and City Council.
b. Major subdivisions involve the creation of new streets, the extension of
municipal facilities or the creation of more than four lots. Major
subdivisions may be approved for residential and non-residential
properties. Plats are considered major subdivisions if they create more
than four lots or involve the creation of new streets or the extension of
municipal facilities. The procedure for approving a major plat typically
requires two steps: preliminary plat approval, and final plat approval.
2. Official Submission Date for Items Requiring Commission and Development
Review Board recommendation to the City Council - For the purpose of
these regulations, the date on which the application is first filed shall
constitute the official submission date for the plat, after which the statutory
period required for approval or disapproval of the plat shall commence. In
order to comply with State law time requirements for plat review, the date of
filing shall be when the application and all required information is received
by the City Staff.
3. Approval Criteria - Applications for plat approval shall be evaluated for
compliance with these regulations and requirements contained in the
Design Guidelines for Subdivisions, which are incorporated herein by
reference and attached hereto as Appendix A, and with any other
criteria, policies, rules, and plans which are referenced elsewhere in
these regulations.
9
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
4. Statutory Compliance Procedure - The City Staff shall place the application
for major plats on a scheduled meeting of the Commission prior to the
expiration of thirty (30) days following the official submission date. The
Commission shall make recommendation to the City Council for approval or
disapproval of the application at the meeting. If the Commission fails to
recommend approval or disapproval of the application within 30 days of the
official submission date, the application shall be sent to the City Council for
consideration. Unless the Commission wiconditionally disapproves the plat
application within such period, the City shall continue to process the
application for compliance with these regulations. The Commission shall
consider the application within 30 days.
5. Application Fonns and Procedures - The City Staff may establish procedures,
fonns and standards with regard to the content, fonnat and number of copies
of infonnation constituting an application for a preliminary plat, replat,
vacation of plat or final plat.
6. Extraterritorial Jurisdiction-Land in the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction is
subject to platting, as provided by State Law. The approval of a plat for land
within the extraterritorial jurisdiction does not constitute approval of land use.
Properties incorporated subsequent to platting are subject to the City's zoning
authority.
Section 5 - Preliminary Plat.
A.
B.
Applicability A preliminary plat is required for all major subdivisions prior to
the construction of public improvements, [except as pennitted under subsection
e.] If a preliminary plat is omitted, a final plat shall be required in confonnance to
Section 6.
Application Procedure and Requirements On fonns approved by the City, the
applicant shall file for approval of a preliminary plat. The plat shall be prepared
by or under the supervision of a registered public surveyor in the State of Texas
and shall bear surveyor's seal, signature and date on each sheet. The payment of
all applicable fees shall be required at the time of submission.
1. General Application Requirement - 5 copies of the proposed preliminary plat
shall be at a scale of l" ::e 100', unless otherwise approved by the (DRB) and
shall be in a fonn substantially as follows:
a. A title including the name of the subdivision, developer, engineer (or
surveyor), name of the survey, the scale, date, a north point and
approximate acreage.
b. The boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided with courses, angles,
and distances, the property lines and names of record owners of
adjoining undeveloped property, easements, building lines, buildings
and lots, physical features including water courses, ravines, bridges,
10
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
culverts, drain pipes, sanitary and stonn sewers, water mains, and
other existing features on the property being developed and on
undeveloped properties within two hundred (200) feet of the subject
property.
c. Contours based on U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey mean sea level
elevations at intervals, as required by the city engineer, of two (2) to
five (5) feet, and approximate flood hazard lines delineating the
limits of the 11ood plain on the unimproved property which have
been detennined by a registered professional engineer.
d. Location and width of existing streets, street names, width between
curbs, if paved, and alleys, within and adjacent to the property.
e. The location, widths and names of all proposed streets, alleys or
other public ways, all lots, blocks and all parcels of land to be
dedicated for public use.
f. A vicinity map shall be presented prior to submitting the preliminary
plat, showing sufficient area to properly locate the proposed subdivision
in relation to schools, parks, shopping centers, thoroughfares
and highways.
g. Description of subdivision metes and bounds.
h. Location of subdivision with respect to a corner of the survey tract,
or an original survey of which it is a part.
1. Construction plans prepared by a Professional Engineer licensed in
the State of Texas in accordance with the City of Henderson Guidelines
for Subdivisions.
2. Standards for Approval - No preliminary plat shall be approved by the
Commission or City Council as applicable, unless the following standards
have been met:
a. Provisions for installation and dedication of public improvements
have been made.
b. Plat confonns to applicable zoning and other regulations.
c. Plat meets all other requirements of these regulations.
d. Plat conforms generally to the Zoning Ordinance.
3. Approval Procedure - After review of the preliminary plat, the report and
recommendations of the Development Review Board concerning the
application, the report and recommendation of the City's Engineer on the
construction plans if submitted with the preliminary plat, any exhibits
submitted at the Planning and Zoning Hearing, the applicant shall be advised
of any required changes and/or additions. The Commission shall recommend
11
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
approval or disapproval the preliminary plat to the City Council. One copy of
the proposed preliminary plat shall be returned to the owner with the date of
approval or disapproval and the reasons therefore accompanying the plat. If
the Commission disapproves the proposed preliminary plat, the applicant may
execute an appeal to the City Council.
a. Effect of Approval - Approval of a preliminary plat also authorizes the
property owner, upon fulfillment of all requirements and conditions of
approval, to submit an application for final plat approval to the City
Council.
b. Lapse of Preliminary Plat Approval - The approval of a preliminary
plat shall be effective for a period of one year from the date of approval
by the Commission or the Council, at the end of which time the
applicant must have submitted and received approval for final plat. If a
final plat is not submitted and approved within one year, the
preliminary plat approval shall be null and void, and the
applicant shall be required to submit a new plat for land
study review subject to then existing zoning restriction and
subdivision regulations. (See subsection D. concerning extensions and
reinstatement of approval.)
C. Amendments to Preliminary Plat
1. At any time following the approval of a preliminary plat, and before the lapse of
such approval, a property owner may request an amendment. The rerouting of
street, addition or deletion of alleys, or addition or deletion of more than 10% of
the approved number of lots shall be considered a major amendment. The
adjustment of street and alley aligmnents, lengths, and paving details; the addition
or deletion of lots within 10% of the approved number and the adjustment of lot
lines shall be considered minor amendments.
2. The DRB may approve a minor amendment. Refusal to approve shall be referred
to the City Council under the terms of Section 4. Major amendments will be
considered by the Commission at a public meeting in accordance with the same
requirements for the approval of a preliminary plat.
3. Approval - The Commission shall recommend approval or disapproval of any
proposed major amendment and may make any modifications in the terms and
conditions of preliminary plat approval reasonably related to the proposed
amendment.
4. Retaining Previous Approval - If the applicant is unwilling to accept the proposed
amendment under the terms and conditions required by the Commission and City
Council, the applicant may withdraw the proposed major amendment.
D. Extension and Reinstatement Procedure.
1. Sixty days prior to or following the lapse f approval for a preliminary plat, as
provided in these regulations, the property owner may petition the Commission to
extend or reinstate the approval. Such petition shall be considered at a public
meeting of the Commission.
12
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
2. In determining whether to grant such request, the Commission shall take into
account the reasons for lapse, the ability of the property owner to comply with
any conditions attached to the original approval and the extent to which newly
adopted subdivision regulations shall apply to the plat or study. The Commission
shaJJ extend or reinstate the plat or study, or deny the request, in which instance
the property owner must submit a new application for approval.
3. The Commission may extend or reinstate the approval subject to additional
conditions based upon newly enacted regulations or such as are necessary to
assure compliance with the original conditions of approval. The Commission may
also specify a shorter time for lapse of the extended or reinstated plat or study than
is applicable to original approvals.
E. Exceptions. The preceding requirements for the preliminary plat in this Section are
waived if the following criteria are met:
l. The subdivision is actually a re-subdivision of lots previously platted and filed in
the Official Public Records, Rusk County, Texas; or all proposed lots of the
subdivision abut upon an existing street of adequate width such that no additional
right-of-way is required; and in either case, no construction of public streets,
alleys, storm sewers, sanitary sewers or water mains is required within or for
extension to the subdivision and
2. The developer first secures written permission from the (DRB) to waive the
preliminary plat and proceed directly to the final plat procedure.
Section 6 - FINAL PLAT
A Applicability - A final plat shall be required for subdivisions of property and recorded
before lots can be sold if a preliminary plat has either been approved or waived pursuant
to Section 5.
B. Application for Procedure and Requirements A final plat for minor subdivisions will be
approved by the City Council upon recommendation by the DRB. A final plat for major
subdivisions shall require approval by the Commission and City Council. Final plats
shall comply with the preliminary plat where applicable. The application shall be
accompanied by the following:
1. 5 copies of the proposed final plat bearing all information specified in Section 5
and the following language:
"Notice: Selling a portion of this addition by metes and bounds is a violation of
city ordinance and state law and is subject to fines and withholding of utilities
and building permits."
2. Formal irrevocable offers of dedication to the public of all streets, local
government uses, utilities, parks and easements, in a form approved by the City
13
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
Attorney. The plat shall be marked with notation indicating the formal offers of
dedication.
3. The improvement agreement and security, if required, in a form satisfactory to
the City Engineer and shall include a provision that the property owner shall
comply with all the terms of the final plat approval as determined by the City
Council.
4. A recording fee in an amount required by the County Clerk.
5. Construction plans.
6. One copy of plat in a digital format approved by the (DRB).
7. Original Tax Certification showing no taxes are delinquent, as required by State
Law.
8. A certificate, shown on the plat of ownership and dedication of all streets, alleys
easements and public areas, to the public use forever, signed and acknowledged
before a Notary Public by the owner of the land and placed on the face of the
map.
9. A statement, shown on the plat acknowledging the existence of flood plains on
the property, and dedicating a flood way easement.
10. The certificate shown on the plat of the registered public surveyor who surveyed
mapped, and monumented the land, which certificate shall be sworn to before a
notary public, and shall be placed on the face of the map. Under certain conditions
approved by the (DRB), the Developer may be able to monument the land
at a later date. No lot shall be sold or building permit shall be issued until
monuments are in place.
C. The Engineer's or Surveyor's Statement, the owner's statement, and the Floodway
Easement statement shall be in the following format:
14
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
ATTACHMENT "A"
ENGINEER'S OR SURVEYOR'S STATEMENT
Registered (Public Land Surveyor or
Professional Engineer) No. , do hereby certify that this plat was prepared from an
actual survey made by (me) or (under my
direction and supervision) on the ground during (Month & Year).
GIVEN UNDER MY HAND AND SEAL this the day
(Signature)
(Seal)
SUBSCRIBED AND SWORN BEFORE ME, a Notary Public, in and for the State of
Texas, this day of , 2 _ _
Notary Public, State of Texas
(Seal)
OWNER'S STATEMENT
I (we) (owners name and title if applicable) am
(are) owner(s) of the tract of land shown hereon and do accept this as its Plan for the subdividing
into lots and blocks and do dedicate to the public forever the streets, alleys and easements as
shown.
(Signature) (Signature)
SUBSCRIBED AND SWORN BEFORE ME, a Notary Public, in and for the State of
Texas, this the __ day of _________ _
(Signature)
(Seal)
15
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
ATTACHMENT "A-1"
FLOODWAY EASEMENT STATEMENT
STATE OF TEXAS
KNOW ALL PERSONS BY THESE PRESENTS:
COUNTY OF RUSK
THAT whereas we , are the owners of the above
described property and we are familiar with the terrain, elevation, high water level and all
physical conditions, in, on and adjacent to said property; and
WHEREAS, said property is subject to flooding high water and inundation due to the
terrain, elevation and the fact that a creek(s) traverses or runs adjacent to said property; and
WHEREAS, the property subject to flooding, high water and inundation is marked on
the plat and with the "Floodway Easement" line as shown and outlined on the plat.
WHEREFORE, PREMISES CONSIDERED:
We hereby agree that no obstruction to the natural flow of water, including storm waters
and overflow water from any creek(s) shall be permitted by filling or by construction of any type
of dam, building, bridge, walkway or any other structure within the floodway easement unless
designed in accordance with the Storm Drainage Criteria of the City of Henderson. In the event
any property owner obstructs the natural flow of the water in any manner, the City of Henderson
may summarily remove any of said obstructions upon notification by mail to the owner.
We do hereby declare and dedicate this "Floodway Easement" to be "a covenant running
with the land" and that this shall constitute a notice to all parties concerned including our heirs,
successors or assigns and any and all purchasers of property within said subdivision.
Minimum finish floor elevation of buildings shall be built at least one (1) foot above the
established 100-year flood plain or six (6) inches above the curb whichever is greater.
WITNESS OUR HANDS AT ______ , TEXAS, this ___ day of
~~~~~~~~~·'2~~~-
SUBSCRIBED AND SWORN BEFORE ME, a Notary Public, in and for the State of
Texas, this the day of , 2 __ _
(Notary Public, State of Texas)
(Seal)
16
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
D. Construction Plan Procedure and Requirements
1. General Application Requirement - Construction plans shall be prepared by or
under the supervision of a Professional Engineer registered in the State of Texas.
Plans submitted for review by the City shall be dated and bear the responsible
Engineer's name, serial number and designation of "Engineer'', "Professional
Engineer", or "P.E." and an appropriate stamp or statement near the engineer's
identification, stating that the documents are for preliminary review and are not
intended for construction. Final plans acceptable to the city shall bear the seal
and signature of the Engineer and the date signed on all sheets of the plans. A
Professional Engineer registered in the State of Texas shall design public works
construction in streets, alleys or easements that will be maintained by the city.
2. Construction Plan Review Procedure - Copies of the construction plans and the
required number of copies of the plat shall be submitted to the City's Engineer
and Public Services Director for final approval. The plans shall contain all
necessary information for construction of the project, including screening walls,
pollution prevention plan, and other special features. All materials specified shall
conform to the Design Guidelines for Subdivisions. Each sheet of the plans shall
contain a title block including space for the notation of revisions. This space is to
be completed with each revision to the plan sheet and shall clearly note the nature
of the revision and the date the revision was made. The City's Engineer will
release the plans for construction after approval of the final plat by the City
Council and payment of all inspection fees. Upon such release, each Contractor
shall maintain one set of plans, stamped with City release, on the project at all
times during construction.
3. Failure to Commence Construction - If construction has not commenced within
one year after approval of the plans, resubmittal of plans may be required by the
City's Engineer or Public Services Director for meeting current Design
Guidelines for Subdivisions. "Construction" shall mean installation of City
maintained public improvements.
E. Standards for Approval - No final plat shall be approved by the DRB or the
Commission or City Council unless the following standards have been met:
l. Plat substantially conforms to the preliminary plat.
2. Plat conforms to applicable zoning and other regulations.
3. Provision has been made for adequate public facilities under the terms of this
ordinance
4. Plat meets all other requirements of this ordinance.
F. Approval Procedure - After review of the final plat, the DRB shall place the final plat
for consideration on the agenda of a public meeting of the Commission. Minor plats
may be approved by the DRB or referred to the City Council. In the event of
disapproval, reasons for disapproval shall be stated. One copy of the final subdivision
17
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
plat shall be returned to the applicant with the date of approval or disapproval noted on
the final plat and, if the final plat is disapproved, the reasons for disapproval
accompanying the final plat.
G. Appeals - If the DRB disapproves the final plat for a minor subdivision, the applicant
may appeal to the City Council.
H. Letter of Compliance - Upon final approval of a final plat required by these regulations,
the City shall issue to the applicant a Letter of Compliance stating that final plat has
been approved by the Commission and/or the City Council. For purposes of this
section, final approval shall not occur until all conditions of approval have been met.
I. Signing and Recording of Final Plat - It shall be the responsibility of the City Secretary
to file the final plat with the County Clerk. Simultaneously with the filing of the final
plat, the Public Services Director shall record such other agreements of dedication and
legal documents as shall be required to be recorded by the City Secretary. The final plat,
bearing all required signatures, shall be recorded after final approval within sixty
working days of receipt of the signed originals. One copy of the recorded final plat, with
street addresses assigned, will be forwarded to the property owner and others as
designated by the Development Review Board.
J. Effect of Approval - Approval of final plat shall certify compliance with the City
regulations pertaining to the subdivision of land. An approved and signed final plat
shall be filed with the County as a record of the subdivision of land and shall be used to
reference lots and interests in property thereon defined for the purpose of conveyance
and development as allowed by these regulations.
Section 7 - REPLA TIING
A Replatting of Land
1.
2.
Replat Required - Unless otherwise expressly provided for herein, a
property owner who proposes to replat any portion of an already approved
final plat, other than to amend or vacate the plat, must first obtain approval
for the replat under the same standards and by the same procedures
prescribed for the platting of land by these regulations.
Replatting Without Vacating Preceding Plat - A replat of a final plat or
portion of a final plat may be recorded and is controlling over the
preceding plat without vacation of that plat if the replat:
(a) Is signed and acknowledged by only the owners of the property
being replatted;
(b) Does not attempt to amend or remove any covenants or
restrictions previously incorporated in the final plat.
( c) Is approved by the City Council, as applicable.
18
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
3. Any replat which adds or deletes lots must include the original lot
boundaries.
4. Plats must conform to applicable State law with regard to public
notification requirements in Texas Local Government Code Sections
212.014 and 212.015, or successors.
5. Any replat that has an existing subdivision name shall use the same
subdivision name along with a subtitle.
Section 8 -AMENDING PLATS
The DRB may, upon petition of the property owner or developer, approve and issue an
amending plat which is signed by the applicants only, unless remove period otherwise required
to the contrary, and which is for one or more of the purposes amending plats set forth in Texas
Local Government Code Section 212.016, or successor, and such approval and issuance shall not
require notice, hearing, or approval of other unaffected lot owners.
Section 9-PLATVACATION
A. By Property Owner - The property owner of the tract covered by a plat may vacate,
upon the approval of the City Council, the plat at any time before any lot in the plat
is sold. The plat is vacated when a signed, acknowledged instrument declaring the
plat vacated is approved and recorded in the manner prescribed for the original plat.
B. By All Lot Owners - If lots in the plat have been sold, the plat may be vacated on
the application of all the owners of lots in the plat with approval obtained in the
manner prescribed for the original plat.
C. Criteria - The City Council shall approve the petition for vacation on such terms
and conditions as are reasonable to protect public health, safety and welfare. As a
condition of vacation of the plat, the City Council may direct the petitioners to
prepare a revised final plat in accordance with these regulations.
D. Effect of Action - On the execution and recording of the vacating instrument, the
vacated plat shall have no effect. Regardless of the City Council's action on the
petition, the property owner or developer will have no right to a refimd of any
monies, fees or charges paid to the City nor to the return of any property or
consideration dedicated or delivered to the City except as may have previously been
agreed to by the City Council. Such plat vacation shall be recorded in the office of
the Rusk County Clerk by the applicants for such vacation, if any portion of the plat
being vacated was so filed.
Section 10 DEVELOPMENT FEES
A .Preliminary Plat - $50.00 and review cost from City Engineer.
19
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
B. Final Plat and Construction Plans - $50.00 each and review cost from City
Engineer.
C. Replats, Lot Splits, Minor Plats - $50.00.
D. Construction Inspection Fees - The developer will pay all inspection fees of the
project. City inspections will be perfonned on all public improvements including
streets, water, sewer and drainage. 2% of initial estimate of developer construction
cost will be paid to the City before construction starts. At the end of the project the
developer will furnish the actual cost of the development and the City will furnish
the actual cost of inspection fees. Final payment from the developer will be based
on these computations. Fees will be paid before the City will accept any
improvements.
E. Street Lights - cost of light conduits, traffic signals, pavement structures,
installation, etc. are the responsibility of the developer.
F. Street signs - cost of sign post and sinage are the responsibility of the developer.
G. Legal review and document preparation by City Attorney - cost for the City
Attorney. Fees will be paid before the City will accept any improvements.
Section 11 - REQIDREMENTS FOR PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS AND DESIGN
A. General Requirements
I. Plats straddling water system service areas - The City's Engineer may request
assurance from that Water System's Attorney that access is legally established
along with a Certificate of Convenience and Necessity.
2. Character of the Land Land that is unsuitable for subdivision or development
due to flooding, utility easements or other features which will reasonably
be harmful to the safety, health and welfare of the present or future inhabitants
of the subdivision or addition and/or welfare of its surrounding areas, shall not
subdivided or platted unless adequate methods are formulated by the owner
and accepted by the City's Engineer.
3. Adequate Public Facilities Policy - The land proposed for subdivision must
be adequately served by the essential facilities and services. Design of
improvements shall confonn to the Design Guidelines for Subdivisions.
These services include street access, water, waste water disposal, and off-site
drainage. No plat or replat may be approved ullless it conforms to this policy
and its standards. This policy may be further defined and supplemented by
other City ordinances.
a. Street Access - All platted lots must have safe and reliable street
access for daily use and emergency purposes.
20
I
I
I
I
I
I
I B. Water
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
(1). All platted lots must have direct access to an improved public
street, private street, or an approved public way, and connected
by improved public streets to an improved public thoroughfare.
(2). Except for lots which are provided access from an approved culde-
sac, all subdivisions must have adequately designed access or
approach as approved by the City's Engineer. Where development
phasing or constraints of the land prevent the provision of a
second, separate means of access, the City may accept a
temporary connection, or a median divided street or entry to
satisfy this requirement.
(3). All access points/driveways adjoining State Highways must be
pre-approved by TXDOT for the planned access points as shown
in the plat.
All platted lots must be connected to a State approved water system.
1. Except for lots along an approved cul-de-sac, all lots within the
City limits and as appropriate in the ETJ must be provided service
connections from a looped water main.
2. Water Service must be sufficient to meet the fire flow requirements
of the proposed development, except where a suitable alternative
means of fire protection is approved by the City Fire Chief.
3. The City may accept development phasing, development
restrictions, and/or the construction of improvements to maintain
adequate fire protection.
4. Waste Water - All platted lots must be served by an approved
means of waste water collection and treatment.
5. On-site wastewater treatment systems will not be permitted,
except for the pretreatment of industrial waste, unless approved
by the City Engineer.
6. The projected wastewater discharge of a proposed development
shall not exceed the capacity of the wastewater treatment and
collection system.
7. The City may accept the phasing of development and/or
improvements to the systems so as to maintain adequate waste
water capacity.
8. Where off-lot sewerage is not required or is not to be provided, onsite
sanitary sewer facilities shall conform to Onsite Sanitary
Sewage Facility standards. The minimum lot size as well as the
septic tank system design and construction shall be in accordance
with the appropriate responsible State Agency and as approved by
21
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
the designated representative of Rusk County.
C. Drainage Increased storm water runoff attributable to new development must
not exceed the capacity of the downstream drainage system or adversely affect
adjoining or downstream property. Where the projected runoff would exceed
capacity, the City may accept the phasing of development, the use of control
methods such as retention or detention, and/or the construction of off-site drainage
improvements as means of mitigation.
D. Subdivision or Addition Name The proposed name of the subdivision or addition
shall not duplicate, or too closely approximate phonetically, the name of any other
subdivision or addition in the area covered by these regulations and shall, where
possible, correspond to named subdivisions or additions in the immediate vicinity.
The DRB shall have final authority to approve the name of the subdivision or
addition.
E. Comer and Reference Markers
1. All lot comers shall be located and marked with one half inch reinforcing
bar, twenty-four inches in length, and shall be placed flush with the
ground or counter sunk, if necessary, in order to avoid being disturbed.
2. Iron rods, one half inch in diameter and twenty-four inches long, shall be
placed on all boundary comers, block comers, curve points, and angle
points in public rights-of-way.
F. Lot Design and Improvements
1. Lot Arrangement - The lot arrangement shall be such that there will be no
foreseeable difficulties, for reasons of topography or other conditions, in
securing building permits to build on all lots in compliance with the
Zoning Ordinance, Building Code and other applicable ordinances, laws
and regulations. Driveway access shall be provided to buildings on the
lots from an approved street, alley or public way.
2. Lot Dimensions - Lot dimensions shall comply with the IDimmum
standards of the zoning ordinance. Depth and width of properties reserved
or laid out for business, commercial, or industrial purposes shall be
adequate to provide for the off street parking, land-scaping, and loading
facilities required for the type of use and development contemplated, as
established in the Zoning Ordinance.
3. Double Frontage Residential Lots - Double frontage and reversed frontage
lots shall be avoided except where necessary to separate residential
development from traffic arterials or to overcome specific disadvantages
of topography and orientation.
4. Blocks-
22
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
a. Blocks shall generally have sufficient width to provide for two
tiers of lots of appropriate depths.
b. The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be such as
are appropriate for the locality and the type of development
contemplated. In general, blocks shall be approximately one
thousand (1,000) feet long, but the length may be varied
according to circulation and topography.
5. Non-residential Plats -
c.
a. General - All non-residential plats shall be subject to all the
requirements of these regulations, except those that clearly pertain
only to residential properties, as well as such additional standards
as may be required by the DRB, and shall conform to the
proposed land use and standards established in the Comprehensive
Plan and Zoning Ordinance. Site plan approval and plat
approval may proceed simultaneously at the discretion of the
DRB.
b. Design Principles -- In addition to these regulations, which are
appropriate to all platting, the applicant shall demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the DRB that the street, parcel, and block
pattern proposed is specifically adapted to the uses anticipated and
takes into account other uses in the vicinity. The following
principles shall be observed:
( 1) Proposed non-residential parcels shall be suitable in
area and dimensions to the types of non-residential
development anticipated.
(2) Street rights-of-way and pavement shall be adequate
to accommodate the type and volume of traffic
anticipated to be generated thereupon.
(3) Residential areas shall be protected from potential
nuisance from a proposed non-residential plat.
( 4) Streets carrying non-residential traffic, especially
truck traffic, shall not normally be extended to the
boundaries of adjacent existing or future residential
areas, except where required by the DRB.
Frontage and Access Streets -- All non-residential lots established
following (effective date of this ordinance) shall meet the
following frontage and access criteria:
(1)
(2)
Frontage -- All frontages shall conform to the
requirements of the specific zoning district set forth
in the Zoning Ordinance.
Access Standards All non-residential lots shall
have access to a public street.
23
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
(3) When adjacent to a median divided street, all lots
shall have access to a median opening. Direct
access should be provided where possible. If direct
access is not available, a corner lot shalJ have
indirect access through a shared access easement
between it and adjacent properties. All off-corner
lots shall have direct access, or indirect access, by
platting a minimum of one half of the intersecting
drive as a shared access easement.
d. Soil Preservation and Final Grading - Soil Preservation and Final
Grading shall be protected to prevent erosion and silt runoff.
e. Debris and Waste - No cut trees, timber, debris, large rock or
stones, junk, rubbish or other waste materials of any kind shall be
buried in any land, or left or deposited on any lot or street at the
time of final acceptance by the City's Engineer, and removal of
those items and materials shall be required prior to such
acceptance. No items and materials as herein described shall be
left or deposited in any area of the subdivision or addition at the
time of expiration of any improvement agreement or acceptance of
dedication of public improvements, whichever is sooner.
However, dirt or topsoil may be stock piled on a property with
approval of the City's Engineer.
f. Streets and Thoroughfares
(I.) Adequacy of Streets and Thoroughfares - All
streets and alleys shall be designed and platted in
conformance with the Design Guidelines for
Subdivisions, and other valid development plans
approved pursuant to these regulations. Access to
all lots must be suitably improved or secured by
provisions contained in these regulations.
(2) Design Standards If the adjacent property is
undeveloped and the street must temporarily be a
dead-end street the right-of-way shall be extended
to the property line.
(3) Where existing alleys are used, alley turnouts shall
be provided to new subdivisions.
(4) Cul-de-sacs - For greater convenience to traffic and
more effective police and fire protection, permanent
dead-end streets should, in general, be prohibited.
However, the DRB may require the reservation or
dedication of an appropriate easement to
accommodate drainage facilities, pedestrian traffic
24
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
g.
h.
or utilities. A cul-de-sac turnaround shall be
provided at the end of a permanent dead-end street
in accordance with Design Guidelines for
Subdivisions.
(5) Temporary Dead-End Streets - The City may
require the construction of temporary dead-end
streets in order to provide for the future connection
of subdivisions and to ensure reasonable access and
avoid excessive street length.
Street and Alley Length-
(1) In general, blocks shall be approximately one
thousand (1,000) feet long, but the length may be
varied according to circulation and topography.
Blocks shall have a minimum width of two hundred
(200) feet.
(2) No cul-de-sac unless otherwise authorized by the
Commission shall exceed 600 feet in length, which
is to be measured from the centerline of the street
with which it intersects to the center of the cul-desac.
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Cul-de-sac lengths longer than those specified in
this section shall require approval of the DRB. In
reviewing a request, the DRB shall consider the
following:
Alternative designs which would reduce streets, culde-
sacs or alley length;
The effect of over length streets, cul-de-sacs, or
alleys on access, congestion and delivery of
municipal services; and
Means of mitigation, including but not limited to
increased street width, mid-block turnarounds,
limitation on the number of lots to be created and
served, temporary points of access, and additional
fire protection measures.
Street Names and Signs -
(1) Street names must be submitted to the DRB for
approval. Street names and subdivision names will
be referred to the 9-1-1 Authority for verification.
Streets that are to be in alignment with existing
25
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I~
1.
J.
k.
(2)
streets shall be given the same name. Names shall
be sufficiently different in sound and spelling so as
not to cause conflict or confusion. The DRB will
maintain an index of street names. Street names
and subdivision names are fixed at the time of
approval of the final plat.
The developer shall provide payment for street
name signs for the development. The price of each
street name installation shall include cost of the sign
assembly, pole, and installation. Payment by the
developer will be due prior to approval of the
engineering plans by the City's Engineer.
(3) Street name signs shall be installed by the City upon
acceptance of the development improvements by
the City's Engineer.
Street lights- Installation of street lights are subject to approval by
the City Engineer and shall be in accordance with the Design
Guidelines for Subdivisions. The developer shall be responsible
for the cost of such street lighting installation as required. The
developer shall install conduit for the street lights and traffic
signals in divided thoroughfares as directed by the City Engineer.
The pavement structure shall be designed in accordance with the
Design Guidelines for Subdivisions in Henderson.
Environmental considerations:
Whereas it is an environmental hazard and can cause property
damage to increase the turbidity of streams or increase the
sedimentation onto private property, it shall be the responsibility of
property owners, developers, builders, contactors and others
disturbing the natural surface or ground cover, both collectively
and separately, to institute such precautions as may be necessary to
prohibit erosion, sediment transport, and/or siltation into any storm
sewer conveyance system or onto nearby properties. The property
owner is required to submit any erosion control plan, which must
be designed by the developer's Engineer to the disturbing of the
natural surface or ground cover. The developer's Engineer
submittal must comply with any State and Federals laws. An
erosion control plan should be included with the construction plans
for paving, drainage, and utilities, and with site plans submitted for
approval for building permits in all zoning districts except single
family, multiple family districts where construction is to take place
on I acre or more. It is unlawful to pollute or obstruct the flow of
water in such streams by introducing into said waterways
26
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I.
m.
construction debris, brush, or other cleared materials, excavated
material, trash or rubbish.
Street Dedications and Reservations
( 1 ). Dedication of Right-of-Way - The developer shall provide
all right-of-way for existing or future streets as required or
other valid development plans approved by the DRB or
City Council as applicable. In the case of perimeter streets,
half of the total required right-of-way for such streets shall
be provided. However, in some instances more than half
shall be required depending on the actual or proposed
alignment of the street.
(2). Perimeter Streets - Where an existing half-street is adjacent
to a proposed subdivision or addition, the unimproved half
of the street shall be dedicated and improved by the
developer.
(3). Slope Easements The dedication of easements, m
addition to dedicated rights-of-way.
(4). Street widths Streets (including sidewalks) which deadend
at power lines, railroad, or similar rights-of-way, and
are intended for future extension shall be constructed in the
full right-of-way for half the distance across such right-ofway
for each side. The minimum paving widths for the
various types of streets shall be in accordance with the
Design Guidelines for Subdivisions.
Improvement, Widening, and Realignment of Existing and
Proposed Streets - Where a subdivision or addition borders a
substandard street, widening or constructing a street that would
require use of some of the land in the subdivision or addition, the
applicant shall be required to improve and dedicate those areas for
widening or realignment of those streets, as follows:
(1). When a proposed subdivision or addition abuts or will abut
both sides of a substandard street or a proposed street, the
developer shall be required to improve the substandard
street or proposed street so that it will be a standard street,
including sidewalks. The minimum street paving width
shall be shown in Chart of Street Widths set forth in the
Design Guidelines for Subdivisions.
(2). If the proposed subdivision or addition is located along
only one side of a substandard street or a proposed street in,
the developer shall be required to improve the developer's
side of the substandard street or proposed street so that it
27
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
will be a standard street. The minimwn street paving width
shall be shown in the Chart of Street width in this Section.
The developer may, however, petition the City to construct
the improvements herein after consultation and
recommendation from the DRB.
(3). When an arterial street is to be extended through a property
to intersect with another arterial street, all lanes shall be
constructed for minimwn distance of 350 feet from the
point of intersection. From that point the pavement width
may be decreased abutting the only side of the proposed
thoroughfare is to be developed. Then half the roadway
will be constructed, including the left tum lane and
transition. This provision will not require widening an
existing intersection that already provides for through
lanes.
Section 12 - PRIVATE STREETS AND ALLEYS
Subdivisions may be developed with private streets and alleys instead of public streets
and alleys if the development complies with the requirements of this section and the subdivision
has received DRB approval for private street development. The term private shall be inclusive of
alleys. Variances to these requirements shall not be permitted.
A.
B.
c.
Design and Construction Standards Private streets shall conform to the same
standards regulating the design and construction of public streets. These
standards shall include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. Minimum Pavement width of private streets shall be 28 feet measured
from face of curb face to curb face.
2. Design Guidelines for Subdivisions shall be complied with; and
3. Street Naming requirements in Section 11 shall be complied with.
Streets Excluded - Streets determined to be collector streets by the ORB shall not
be used, maintained or constructed as private streets. Also, the ORB may deny
the creation of any other private street if, in the DRB's judgment, the private
street would negatively affect traffic circulation on public streets or impair access
to property either on-site or off-site to the subdivision, impair access to or from
public facilities including schools and parks, or delay the response time of
emergency vehicles.
Property Owners Associations Required - Subdivisions developed with private
streets and alleys must have a mandatory property owners association that
includes all property owners and their property served by served by private
streets. The association shall own and be responsible for the maintenance of the
28
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
private streets. The association shall own and be responsible for the maintenance
of private streets and appurtenances.
Private Street Lot - Private streets and alleys must be constructed within a
separate lot owned by the property owners association. This lot must conform to
the Design Guidelines for Subdivisions. An easement shall be granted to the City
providing unrestricted use of the property for utilities and the maintenance of the
same. This right shall extend to all utility providers, including telecable
companies, operating within the City. The easement shall also provide the City
with the right of access for any purpose related to the exercise of a governmental
service or function, but not limited to, fire and police protection, inspection and
code enforcement. The easement shall permit the City to remove any vehicle or
obstacle within the street lot that impairs emergency access.
Construction and Maintenance Cost - The City shall not pay for any portion of
the cost of constructing or maintaining a private street.
City Utilities - Water facilities placed within the private street and alley shall be
installed in conformance with Design Guidelines for Subdivisions. Sewer, water
and drainage facilities placed within the private street and alley shall be installed
in conformance with the Design Guidelines for Subdivisions. All such facilities
shall be dedicated to the City prior to final approval. Street repairs shall be paid
by the Property Owners Association after water and sewer repairs are made by the
City.
Plans and Inspections - Developments proposed with private streets must submit
to the City the same plans and engineering information required to construct
public streets and utilities. Requirements pertaining to inspection and approval of
improvements for private streets shall be the same as for public streets. Fees
charged for these services shall also apply. The City will inspect private streets
during construction. The City shall periodically inspect private streets and may
require necessary repairs to insure emergency access.
Street Sign Standards - Signs identifying Private Streets shall conform to the
same minimum standards regulating the design and construction of signs
identifying Public Streets as approved by the City's Public Services Department.
Private Street Signs located at the intersection of a Private Street with a Public
Street are subject to approval by the City's Public Services Department. All
private traffic signs shall conform to the Texas Manual of Uniform Traffic
Control Devices.
Section 13 - RESERVED
Section 14 - DRAINAGE AND UTILITY IMPROVEMENTS
A. Drainage -
29
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
1. Design of Facilities - Drainage facility needs caused by the development
or use of a piece of property must be identified and provided for in
appropriate stages of development. The objectives of drainage planning
and facilities are to protect the uses of the platted property and safety
of citizens who use the platted property in the future and to prevent
development and usage of the platted property from adversely affecting
others. Design of stonn sewer systems, materials and construction shall
be in accordance with the Design Guidelines of Subdivision
Improvements. When a project is determined to be in the jurisdictional
control of the U.S. Corp of Engineers, in regard to the Federal Clean
Water Act or its successor, the City requirements for drainage
improvements will be subordinate to the requirements of a Section 404
Permit of the Federal Clean Water Act, or its successor. During the
platting process, the flood hazard areas shall be identified and drainage
easements dedicated to the public on the final plat Plans shall be
submitted with the plat. The owners and developers of property have the
duty to:
a. Accommodate Upstream and Adjacent Drainage Areas - A culvert
or other drainage facility shall in each case be large enough to
accommodate potential runoff from ultimate development
conditions from its entire upstream drainage area, whether inside,
outside, along or adjacent to the subdivisions or addition. The
owner's engineer shall initially determine the necessary size of the
facility, based on the provisions of the construction standards and
specifications assuming conditions of maximwn potential
watershed development subject to approval by the City's Engineer.
b.
c.
Effect on Downstream Drainage Areas - The owner's engineer
shall study the affect of each addition's storm runoff on the
existing drainage facilities at a reasonable distance downstream of
the addition as determined by the City's Engineer. Where it is
determined that existing capacity is not available immediately
downstream, the owner's engineer shall design a drainage system,
detention facility, or parallel system to mitigate to the deficiency.
The City shall deny the plat until construction plans for such
mitigation have been approved by the City's Engineer. If oversize
improvements are required, then the City may participate in the
cost, if recommended by the DRB.
Requirements for Developments in Drainage Areas Less Than
One-Half (1/2) Square Mile - Drainage areas having a
contributing watershed less than one-half (1/2) square mile shall be
provided for in accordance with the Design Guidelines for
Subdivisions. Water conveyances shall consist of pipe culverts,
box culverts placed underground, improved open channels. An
improved open channel is one in which the channel bottom sides
are lined with reinforced Portland cement concrete or other
30
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
d.
e.
structurally sound material approved by the City's Engineer to a
depth that will convey the 100- year frequency flood.
Requirements for Developments in Drainage Areas Greater Than
One-Half (1/2) Square Mile and Less Than One (1) Square Mile -
Drainage areas having a contributing watershed greater than onehalf
(1/2) square mile and less than one (I) square mile shall be
provided for by one of the following methods:
( 1 ). Drainage improvements may be provided for in accordance
with the Design Guidelines for Subdivisions. Water
conveyances shall consist of pipe culverts; box culverts
placed underground or improved open channels. An
improved open channel is one in which the channel bottom
sides are line with reinforced Portland cement concrete or
other structurally sound material approved by the City's
Engineer to the depth that will convey the 100-year
frequency flood.
(2). When the floodplain is part of an overall Master Plan of the
development, the City's Engineer may allow the floodplain
to be left in a natural state or greenbelt. The greenbelt shall
be required to be dedicated to the City or a Homeowners
Association for maintenance. The minimum dedication
shall be one hundred feet (100') on each side of the defined
floodplain limits. If the dedication is to the City,
maintenance by the City shall consist of removal of dead or
fallen trees blocking the drainage. In general, the greenbelt
area shall be left in a natural state.
Requirements for Developments in Drainage Areas Greater Than
One (1) Square Mile - Drainage areas having a contributing
watershed greater than one (1) square mile shall be provided for by
one of the following methods:
(1 ). The stream may be left in its natural state with minor
improvements and no development within its floodplain.
Minor improvements include the removal of dead trees,
discarded debris and obstructions that would hinder the
conveyance of water. The entire floodplain shall be platted
and dedicated to the City as a floodway easement and the
Home 01Wners Association for maintenance. The City will
maintain the easement in the same condition as provided
when the easement is within the City limits. The City
Council or DRB may waive the dedication requirement
only for the following exceptions:
(a.) Replats which were originally platted prior to the
dedication requirements.
31
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
2.
3.
(2).
(3).
(b.) Subdivisions of five (5) lots or less.
The floodplain fringe may be reclaimed for use as long as
the floodway is protected and the l 00-year flood elevation
is not raised more than one ( 1) foot. This method of
development may require erosion control to offset changes
in the stream regimen caused by development of the
property and drainage improvements. The entire floodway
shall be platted and dedicated to the City as a floodway
easement. The entire floodway shall be platted as a
separate lot and dedicated to the City or Homeowners
Association for maintenance. The City will maintain the
easement in the same condition as provided when the
easement is within the City limits. The City Council DRB
may waive this dedication requirement only for the
following exceptions:
(a.) Replats which were originally platted prior to the
dedication requirements.
(b.) Subdivisions of five (5) lots or less.
The stream may be reconstructed or relocated to
accommodate development. The new channel shall be
sufficient to convey the I 00-year flood. The design will
include erosion control such as seeding, sodding, channel
lining, or a combination of these. The entire floodway with
proper access easements shall be platted and dedicated to
the City as a floodway easement. The entire floodway and
proper access easement shall be platted as a separate lot and
dedicated to the City or Home Owners Association for
maintenance. The City will maintain the easement in the
same condition as provided when the easement is within
the City limits. The City Council I DRB may waive this
dedication requirement only for the following exceptions:
(a.) Rep lats which were original! y platted prior to
dedication requirements.
(b.) Subdivisions of five (5) lots or less.
Detention Facilities - Lakes, detention ponds, and retention ponds
may be constructed in all areas, provided the City's Engineer
approves them. The City may assume maintenance responsibilities
for this type of facility only if title to the facility passes to the City,
if approved by the Council; however, easements shall be provided
to ensure protection of these areas for maintenance purposes.
Alternative Facilities - Other innovative drainage concepts will be
considered if approved by the City's Engineer. Any City costs are
subject to approval by the City Council.
32
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
B.
c.
4. Dedication of Drainage Easements -
Access to Floodway Easements - The Developer must provide
sufficient access on each side of and parallel to creeks or drainage
ways for maintenance purposes. The access shall be above the
base flood elevation and accessible to vehicles and equipment.
Access must also be provided at maximum 1,200-foot spacing
materials along streets or alleys. The City's Engineer shall
determine the location and size of the floodway easement. The
width of the access easement shall be 20 feet. Permanent
monuments, the type and locations of which are to be determined
by the City's Engineer, shall be placed along the boundaries of the
maintenance and access easement and private property. This
access easement shall be included in the dedication requirements
of this section and included in the drainage and floodway easement
width.
Sewage Facilities
1. Adequate Sewage Facilities - Sanitary Sewer facilities serving the
subdivision or addition shall connect with the City's sanitary sewer
system. Sewers shall be installed to serve each lot and to grades and sizes
according to specifications herein identified or referenced.
2. Design and Construction Requirements - Design of sanitary sewers shall
be in accordance with the City's Design Guidelines for Subdivisions and
30 Texas Administrative Code 317, or its successor. Materials and
construction shall conform to the Standard Specifications and Standard
Construction Details of the City of Henderson. The sanitary sewer system
shall conform to the City's sewer studies for the various drainage basins.
3. Sewage Locations - Sanitary sewers shall be located within street or alley
rights-of-way unless topography dictates otherwise. When located in
easements on private property, access shall be provided to all manholes.
A manhole shall be provided at each street or alley crossing. End lines
shall be extended to provide access from street or alley right-of-way
when possible.
4. Plan Approval. The City Engineer shall be responsible for receiving and
approving construction plans for sewage facilities.
Water Facilities
l. Adequate Water Facilities - Water systems serving the subdivision or
addition shall connect with the City's water supply and distribution
system, and shall conform to the City's rules for water supply, treatment
and distribution. Water facilities shall be installed to serve adequately
33
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
D.
2.
3.
I.
each lot and to grades and sized according to specifications herein
contained or referenced.
Design and Construction Requirements Design of water systems shall be
in accordance with the Design Guidelines for Subdivisions and 30 Texas
Administrative Code 290, Subchapter D, "Rules and Regulations for
Public Water Systems", or its successor. Materials and construction shall
confonn to the Design Guidelines for Subdivisions of the City of
Henderson.
Fire Hydrants - Fire hydrants and valves shall be required for all
subdivisions and additions and shall be located to satisfy the requirements
of the Fire Department. Fire hydrants shall be located in accordance with
the Design Guidelines for Subdivisions and 30 Texas Administrative Code
290, Subchapter D, "Rules and Regulations for Public Water Systems", or
its successor and shall be approved by the applicable fire protection unit.
To eliminate future street openings, all underground utilities for fire
hydrants, together with the fire hydrants themselves and all other supply
improvements, shall be installed before any final paving of a street shown
on the subdivision plat. Reflective fire hydrant buttons shall be installed
in all streets at a point adjacent to fire hydrants. The buttons shall
conform to Water Utilities and Fire Department specifications. At corner
locations, buttons shall be installed in both streets.
Public and Private Utilities
Easementsa.
b.
c.
The property owner shall be required to furnish all easements and
rights-of-way required to serve the development. Where
reasonable, utilities should be located within streets or alley rightsof-
way. Notwithstanding, the above, developers may offer
easements outside of street and alley rights-of-way. All utility
facilities existing and proposed throughout the property shall be
shown on the preliminary plat.
Easements shall be provided for both municipal and private
utilities and must be dedicated on the final plat or replat.
Municipal easements for water and sanitary sewer shall be a
minimum of twenty feet in width. Storm sewer easements shall be
a minimum of twenty feet in width. The utility company must size
all municipal easements. Proper coordination shall be established
between the property owner and the applicable utility companies
for the establishment of utility easements on adjoining properties.
Water, sewer or drainage easements shall not straddle lots unless
approved by the DRB and City Engineer.
34
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
d. All water and sewer easements shall be submitted in an acceptable
fonn to the City Engineer.
2. Damage - The contractor and owner shall be responsible for repairing all damage
to existing public improvements caused during construction of new public
improvements in a manner satisfactory to the Public Services Director.
3. Underground Utilities - In new residential subdivisions, all utilities, including
electrical distribution and communication, shall be installed underground along
streets and alleys, unless otherwise approved by the City's Engineer. Electrical
utility service to non-residential properties from overhead distribution lines shall
be place underground from the right-of-way to the point of service, unless
otherwise approved by the City's Engineer. Developers are encouraged to install
all utilities underground on each property in new subdivisions.
E. The Following Design Standards and Specifications Are Incorporated by
Reference Into 1bis Ordinance.
I.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
Design Guidelines for Subdivisions
Standard Construction Details
Texas Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for
Construction of Highways, Streets and Bridges, or its successor
Storm Drainage Design Standards
30 Texas Administrative Code 285 "On Site Sewage Facilities" or its
successor
30 Texas Administrative Code 290, Subchapter D, "Rules and Regulations
for Public Water Systems, or its successor
30 Texas Administrative Code 317 "Design Criteria for Sewer Systems",
or its successor
Section 15 - CONSTRUCTION & INSPECTION PROCEDURES
A. Pre-Construction Conference - The Public Services Director may require that all
contractors participating in the construction meet for a pre-construction
conference to discuss the project prior to release of a grading pennit and before
any filling or removal of vegetation and trees. At this time, the Pollution Control
Plan procedures, which must be installed prior to construction beginning to
prevent sedimentation discharge into storm sewers, creeks, and the like will be
discussed. Conditions Prior to Authorization - Prior to authorizing release of a
grading permit, the developer shall satisfy the City that the following conditions
have been met:
].
2.
The final plat has been approved by the City Council
All required documents have been completed and filed with the City's
Engineer.
35
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
B.
C.
D.
E.
3. All necessary off-site easements or dedications required for City
maintained facilities and not shown on the final plat have been conveyed
solely to the City with proper signatures affixed. The original of the
documents and filing fees shall be returned to the City Secretary and/or
Public Services Department prior to approval and release of the
engineering plans.
After the pre-construction conference and before construction begins, the
following steps must be complied with:
1. All contractors participating in the construction shall be presented with a
set of approved plans bearing the stamp of release of the City Engineer
and/or Public Services Department. These plans shall remain on the job
site at all times.
2.
3.
A complete list of the contractors, their representatives on the site, and
telephone numbers where a responsible party may be reached at all times
must be submitted to the City's Engineer and Public Services Department.
All other applicable fees must be paid to the City. The City shall not
withhold approval as means of obtaining compensation due under the
tenns of this ordinance.
Security - Whenever the City requires a developer to enter into an Improvement
Agreement; it shall require the developer to provide sufficient security, to cover
completion of the public improvements. The security shall be in the fonn of cash
escrow or, where authorized by the City, a letter or credit or other security
acceptable to the City Council, as security for the promises contained in the
improvement agreement. In addition to all other security for completion of those
public improvements, the developer shall provide a performance bond from the
contractor, with the City as a co-insured. Security shall be in an amount equal to
one hundred percent (100%) of the estimated cost of completion of the required
public improvements and lot improvements. The fonn of any surety bond or
letter of credit shall be subject to the approval of the City Attorney.
Letter of Credit If the City Council authorizes the developer to post a letter of
credit as security for its promises contained in the improvement agreement, the
letter of credit shall be irrevocable.
1. Be for a term sufficient to cover the completion, maintenance and
warranty periods but in no event less than two (2) years.
2. Require only that the City present the issuer with a sight draft and a
certificate signed by an authorized representative of the City certifying to
the City's right to draw funds under the letter of credit.
A pennit is required from the Public Services Department prior to beginning any
work in the City regulated by 30 Texas Administrative Code 317 "Design Criteria
for Sewer Systems", or its successor.
36
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
F. As portions of the public improvements are completed in accordance with the
Design Guidelines for Subdivision Improvement and the engineering plans, the
developer may make application to the City Manager or his designee, to reduce
the amount of the original letter of credit. If the City Manager or his designee, is
satisfied that such portion of the improvements has been completed in accordance
with City standards provided for herein the Design Guidelines for Subdivisions,
the City Manager may (but is not required to) cause the amount of the letter of
credit to be reduced by such amount deemed appropriate, so that the' remaining
amount of the letter of credit adequately insures the completion of the remaining
public improvements.
G. Upon the dedication of and acceptance by the City of a11 required public
improvements, the City shall authorize a reduction in the security to 10% of the
original amount of the security if the developer is not in breach of the
Improvement Agreement. If other than the contractors provide the required
security for maintenance and warranty, the City will release the entire amount of
the developer's security.
H. Temporary Improvements - The developer shall build and pay for all costs of
temporary improvements required by the City's Engineer and shall maintain those
temporary improvements for the period specified by the City Council. Prior to
Construction of any temporary facility or improvement, the developer shall file with
the City a separate Improvement Agreement and escrow or, where authorized, a
letter of credit, in an appropriate amount for temporary facilities, which agreement
and escrow or letter of credit shall ensure that the temporary facilities will be
properly constructed, maintained, and removed.
I. Failure to Complete Improvements For plats for which no Improvement
Agreement has been executed and no security has been posted, if the public
improvements are not completed, no building permits shall be issued. In those
cases where an Improvement Agreement has been executed and security has been
posted and required public improvements have not been installed within the terms
of the agreement, the City may:
1.
2.
3.
4.
Declare the agreement to be in default and require that all public
improvements be installed regardless of the extent of completion of the
development at the time the agreement is declared to be in default.
Obtain funds under the security and complete the public improvements
itself or through a third party.
Assign its right to receive funds under the security to any third party,
including a subsequent developer of the subdivision or addition for which
public improvements were not constructed, in whole or in part, in
exchange for the subsequent developer's promise to complete the public
improvements on the tract.
Exercise any other rights available under the law.
37
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
J. Maintenance and Guarantee of Public Improvements - The developer shall
maintain all required street, utility, and drainage improvements for a period of one
year following the acceptance by the City and shall provide a warranty that all
public improvements will be free from defect for a period of one year following
such acceptance by the City.
Section 16- PARTICIPATION AND ESCROW POLICIES
Developer's Responsibility -
A. The developer shall be responsible for the entire cost of designing and installing
all public improvements that primarily serve the subdivision or addition.
Facilities required by these regulations shall be considered as primarily serving
the subdivision or addition wtless otherwise determined by the City.
B. The developer shall also be responsible for its share of the costs of oversized or
off-site public improvements needed to assure the adequacy of public facilities
and services for the addition or subdivision, subject to participation and escrow
policies contained in this article.
C. The developer shall be responsible for extending streets or drainage facilities offsite
to its property as required by the City and/or required to ensure adequacy of
public facilities.
D. Water and sewer facilities shall be extended by the developer in accordance with
City Code of Ordinances Article I, Section 2 l-2, or its successor.
Section 17 - GATED DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
A. Purpose. To set forth a standard set of regulations, which will facilitate sound
long range planning and ensure that no threat to the health, safety, and welfare of
residents within the gated developments will occur as a result of the utilization of
restricted access features installed for added privacy.
B. This section shall not apply to individual property owners who install restricted
access devices for individual lots.
C.
D.
Required Zones for Gated Developments: Gated Developments are restricted to
the following zoning districts:
1. PDD Planned Development Districts
2. R1-R4 Single Family Districts
3. MFl- MF3 Districts
System Requirements
38
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
E.
I.
2.
Each entrance to a gated development shall have a Knox Key Operated
Dual Switch (KS-2DPDC), or approved equivalent, which shall meet the
following requirements:
a. Must have switch designated for FIRE and POLICE
b. Each switch shall allow for emergency override of any electrical
devices.
c. Red in color.
d. Each box shall be at least 5 inches high, 5 inches wide and 1-112
inches deep.
e. Switches shall be located to be easily accessible and visible to
service providers. Locations of switches are subject to approval at
the time of the issuance of the first building pennit in the Gated
Development by all affected City departments.
A 24-hour telephone number which can be called by any other utility or
service provider to gain access into the development shall be displayed
and clearly visible.
3. Provisions for mail carrier access shall be as required by the U.S. Postal
Service.
Installation and Operation Requirements.
1. Building permits shall be required for installation of restricted access
devices.
2. The switches shall have a normal and an emergency position. When
installed, the contractor shall wire this switch so that all gates open and
remain open for emergency access until the switch is returned to the
normal position.
3.
4.
A minimum of one set of gates shall be installed so that they either open
automatically or are readily manually operable from the approach side in
the event of power failure.
The operator of any development subject to these regulations shall
immediately notify the Henderson Fire Department of any changes.
F. Maintenance.
1.
2.
The mechanical components of the restricted access device shall be
serviced on a regular basis and maintained in an approved operating
condition.
The electrical components of the restricted access device shall be
maintained in an approved operating condition.
39
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
G.
H.
3. A power supply shall be maintained to electronic components of the
restricted access devices at all times.
Performance test required.
1. A performance test shall be conducted annually by the Fire and Police
Departments to verify proper operation of equipment.
2. Upon failure of the performance test, the gates shall be disabled and
maintained in the open position until repaired and re-tested.
Compliance. All existing gate and restricted access developments subject to these
requirements shall be in full compliance with this section by May I, 2005.
Section 18 - SIMULTANEOUS CONSTRUCTION OF SUBDIVISIONS
Simultaneous construction will be allowed under the following conditions;
A. All proposed roads/streets must have sub-base to required standards of the
Design Guidelines for Subdivisions.
B. The roads/streets must be able to hold up any police, fire or emergency
vehicle.
C. Curb and gutter must be in place.
D. The Developer shall furnish an irrevocable letter of credit in the amount of
unfinished Public improvements.
E. No final inspection of any buildings will be performed or occupancies will
take place until all public improvements are completed and approved by
the City with an established warranty date.
Section 19 - NON-CONFORMANCE
A.
B.
c.
Any request for deviations, hardships, waivers, variances, etc. will be considered
by the DRB on a case-by-case basis. The DRB will only consider a request where
a unique circumstance exists.
Financial hardship alone is not sufficient to show "unique circumstance."
Therefore, a request shall not be granted solely because nonconformance is more
profitable to the developer.
All matters pertaining to the interpretation or enforcement of this ordinance,
including the definition of a word as it relates to this ordinance, shall be ref erred
to the DRB for determination.
40
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
D.
E.
ORB decisions~ including granting of request for waiver of strict compliance with
these Subdivision Ordinance Rules, may be appealed to the City Council upon
written notice by any party.
Written notice of appeal shall be filed with the office of the City Secretary not
later than twenty-one (21) calendar days from the date of subject decision of the
DRB so that the item may be placed on the agenda for the next available City
Council meeting as the case may be and the affected parties notified of the appeal.
41
I
I
I
I
I
I Appendix A
I Design Guidelines
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I 42
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
DESIGN GUIDELINES FOR SUBDIVISIONS
IN
HENDERSON, TEXAS
CHAPTER ONE
GENERAL INFORMATION
I. Purpose:
The purpose of these guidelines is to inform Engineers, Planners and others concerned
with subdivision design, of the basic procedures and requirements for construction plans
for public facilities in subdivisions. These requirements are for use as guidelines only,
and are not to be construed as a waiver by the City of Henderson of the right to require a
more stringent or lenient design as conditions warrant.
II. Designs:
All construction plans for subdivision improvements are to be prepared under the
direction and supervision of a qualified Texas Registered Professional Engineer and such
plans shall bear the seal and signature of that engineer.
III. Construction Plans:
The following chapters outline the detailed requirements for the preparation of the
construction plans for water, sanitary sewer, paving and drainage. These various plans
may be combined into one complete set, as long as the clarity and usefulness of the
drawings is not diminished.
A. Submittal: Five complete sets of construction plans and technical specifications
shall be submitted to the Director of Public Services, when the final plat is submitted to
the City Manager for Planning and Zoning Commission.
B. Contents: Completed plans shall include the following sheets:
I. Title sheet showing names of subdivision, developer, engineer, Public Service
Director, City Engineer, City Manager, City Councilmen, Mayor, date,
location map and any other pertinent information. It should also provide a
space for signature of approval by the City Engineer and Public Service
Director.
2. Final plat as submitted and approved.
3. Overall site plan showing street layout, lots and lot dimensions, curve data,
and any other pertinent information necessary for surveying all lots and
streets. This may be a modified print of the subdivision final plat.
43
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
IV.
4. Drainage area map and drainage computation sheet showing contours at a
maximwn of two foot intervals for the entire drainage basin of all structures
planned for the subdivision and flood plains shown on the plat. Proposed final
grading plan for site shall be shown either on the drainage area map or on a
separate drawing. See Chapter Two Paving and Drainage for further details.
5. Plan profile sheets showing all improvements in accordance with Chapter
Two and Three.
6. Detail sheets for special construction shall conform to City of Henderson
Standard Details attached hereto.
C. Approval: Approval of the construction plans by the City Engineer and the
Development Review Board (DRB), are a prerequisite for final plat approval by
the City Planning and Zoning Commission.
D. Approved Construction Plans: Prior to commencing any construction, prints of
the approved subdivision construction plans, stamped as approved by the City
Engineer and the Director of Public Services, shall be distributed as set out in
Chapters Two and Three.
Inspection:
An inspector for the City of Henderson will inspect all construction of the improvements
described herein. No work of any nature, except clearing and roadway excavation, shall
begin without authorization of the inspector. The contractor shall cooperate with the
inspector in coordinating construction and inspections, and shall notify the inspector so
that he may be present to inspect construction. Failure to notify the inspector properly
may result in the City of Henderson not accepting that work. The contractor would then
be required to remove and reconstruct improvements. The inspector shall not have the
authority to approve defective work and his acceptance of improvements will not
constitute any waiver of the contractor's responsibility in adhering to the construction
plans and specifications, nor the designing engineer's responsibility for the inspection of
the construction of his design. In the event of any dispute related to materials furnished
or the manner of performing the work or any safety related issue, the City Inspector shall
report any such incident to the Director of Public Services who shall have the authority to
reject material or suspend work until the matter is resolved.
44
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I:
II.
General:
DESIGN GUIDELINES FOR SUBDIVISIONS
IN
HENDERSON, TEXAS
CHAPTER TWO
PA YING AND DRAINAGE
The purpose of these guidelines is to guide the engineer in design and preparation of
plans and specifications for the construction of public paving and drainage
improvements. All paving and drainage improvements shall be designed and constructed
in accordance with standard details of the City of Henderson. Materials and construction
methods for paving and drainage work (technical specifications) shall conform to most
recent "Texas Department of Transportation, Standard Specifications for Construction of
Highways, Streets and Bridges", except where specifically superseded in this publication.
Where any questions arise as to the interpretation of the standards of design, the decision
of the City Engineer will be final.
Roadway Design:
A. Typical Roadway Section for Residential Streets
1. The pavement section shall be either:
a. 8" lime or cement stabilized subgrade (based on soils classification
determined by the Design Engineer), 7" flexible base and 2" hot mix asphaltic
concrete (HMAC) with concrete curb & gutter or;
b. 8" lime or cement stabilized subgrade (based on soils classification determined
by the Design Engineer) and 5-112" reinforced concrete pavement with
concrete curb & gutter.
2. Lime or cement stabilized subgrade shall be free of vegetation and rocks over
3" in diameter. The subgrade shall be processed to a depth of 8", compacted
to 95 percent of ASTM D 698, Method D density at optimum moisture, and
shall extend 12" behind the back of each curb. For lime stabilized subgrade,
the lime shall be applied at a rate of 36 pounds per square yard and shall be in
accordance with TxDOT Specification Item No. 260. For cement stabilized
subgrade, 4% cement, based on the dry weight of the subgrade soil, shall be
applied. Cement stabilized subgrade shall be in accordance with TxDOT
Specification Item No. 275.
3. Flexible base material shall be Texas Department of Transportation ltem247,
either Type A Grade 2 or Type D (crushed concrete) Grade 2 or better and
45
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
shall have a minimum compacted thickness of 7". The material shall be
compacted in maximum four· inch lifts to a minimum of 95 percent of ASTM
D 1557 Method D density at or near optimum moisture content.
4. Hot mix asphaltic concrete (HMAC) surface material shall be Texas
Department of Transportation Item 340, Type D. The mix shall have a
minimum of 5% asphalt cement content and the coarse aggregate shall contain
at least 50% by weight of crushed pieces having two or more fractured faces.
Asphalt shall be compact dense-grade hot mix with not more than 5% to 9%
in-place air voids. Asphalt content of the mixture shall not be increased to
reduce pavement air voids. Liquid asphalt shall not exceed TxDOT Standards,
as applicable at date of application. Minimum thickness of HMAC pavement
shall be 2" compacted and installed with a tack coat over a single course seal
coat. The seal coat shall be MC-30 in accordance with TXDOT Specification
Item No. 300. The seal coat shall be applied at a rate of 0.25 gallons per
square yard. All construction methods shall be in accordance with TXDOT
Specification Item No. 310. Seal coat shall not be allowed as the wearing
course.
5. Concrete used for concrete pavements shall have a 28-day compressive strength
of 3,500 PSI. Concrete pavement shall have a minimum thickness of 5- l/2"
and shall be Class A in accordance with TxDOT Specification Item No. 42 l.
Joint Sealants and Fillers shall be in accordance with TxDOT Specification
Item No. 360. Reinforcing steel shall be #4 bars installed at 18" on-center
each way and shall be Grade 60 in accordance with TxDOT Specification
Item No. 440. Construction procedures shall be in accordance with Item 360
of the TxDOT Standard Specification for Construction of Highways, Streets
and Bridges, Latest Edition.
6. If an alternate pavement section is preferred or if the proposed street is
classified other than residential, the proposed pavement section shall be
designed by a Texas Registered Professional Engineer in cooperation with a
Texas Registered Professional Geotechnical Engineer and submitted to the
City Engineer for approval. The alternate design shall be based on testing of
representative soil samples taken in the field and a pavement design
recommendation resulting from the test data.
B. Roadway Width: Pavement widths shall conform to the requirements of, and
shall in no case be less than, the widths shown in the following table.
Street Classification
Right-of-Way Minimum Pavement
Width Width (back to back)
Residential 50' 32'
Collector/ Arterial 60' 36'
Industrial/Commercial 70' 40'
46
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
C. . Grades: Street profile grades shall be set on top of curbs or set on centerline
for streets with no curb and gutter. Profile grades shall not be less than 0.5 feet rise or fall in 100
feet. Profile grades shall not be grea~er than 12.0 feet rise or fall in 100 feet (12%) in local
streets, and not great~r than 9.? feet nse or fall in 100 feet (9%) on collector streets, and not
greater than 6.0 feet nse or fall m 100 feet (6%) on arterial streets Grade changes d'
(10 • • • excee mg one
p~rcent Vo) shall be made with vertical curves. To satisfy requirements of minimum sight
d1s~ce, comfort and appearance, use the following criteria for minimum vertical curve length
(L) m feet:
L KA
K Factor from table below
A Algebraic difference of grades in percent
Design Speed* 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65
Minimum K Value:
Crest Vertical Curve
Sag Vertical Curve**
30 40
40 50
*The City Engineer shall establish the design speed.
60 80 110
60 70 90
150 190 230
100 120 130
**Length of sag vertical curve may be shortened by the City Engineer to reduce siltation.
Top of curb grades shall be set low enough below the adjacent land to facilitate proper drainage
from the residential lot to the street. Curb separation shall not exceed crown height except in
situations of super elevated curves or divided roadways. Divided roadways shall have a straight
cross slope downward from median to outside curb rather than a parabolic crown on each lane.
Divided roadways shall not be designed for, unless approved by City Engineer.
D. Street Alignment: Street alignment design shall consider not only the best use of
the land, but also traffic safety. The maximum degree of horizontal curvature for an arterial shall
be 7.0 degrees. The maximum degree of curvature on a collector shall 22.9 degrees (minimum
radius shall be 250 feet). The horizontal curvature on commercial or residential streets shall be
designed so as to eliminate sharp reverse curves that are hazardous. The minimum tangent
length between reverse curves shall be 50 feet. All horizontal curve lengths, degree of curvature,
curve super elevations and other elements of traffic safety must be approved by the City
Engineer during the approval of subdivisions plans.
E. Intersections: All intersections should intersect at an angle of 90 degrees. When
not practical, the angle of intersection will not be less than 70 degrees.
When intersecting a street in a horizontal or vertical curve, adequate sight distance
must be provided.
Curb returns at intersections on residential streets shall have a radius of 20 feet
measured to the back of curb.
47
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
At the intersections of collectors and collectors, collectors and arterial and arterials
and c:rterials~ the radius will be _30 feet measured to the back of curb, unless othe~se approved
by City Engmeer. A larger radms may be required by the City Engineer to accommodate traffic
movement.
F. Curb and Gutter: Concrete curb and gutter is required on all streets constructed
within the City of
Henderson. All curb and gutter will be designed in accordance with City of Henderson
"Standard Details".
G. Concrete Headers: Concrete headers shall be installed at the termination of all
asphalt pavements, unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer.
H. Concrete Valley Gutters: Where water runoff conditions dictate, the City
Engineer may require certain valley gutters crossing streets or intersections within the
subdivision to be constructed of reinforced concrete to prevent asphalt pavement deterioration.
All concrete valley gutters will be designed in accordance with City of Henderson "Standard
Details".
I. Subsurface Drainage: The City Engineer reserves the right to require subsurface
underdrain systems as conditions warrant. If required by the City Engineer, the Developer shall
provide for the design and construction of such underdrain systems in the construction drawings.
J. Erosion Control: In the construction plans, the design engineer shall include
plans for erosion control during construction and permanent erosion control. Developer is
required to obtain a SW3P permit and supply a copy to the City of Henderson.
III. Paving Plans:
A. Paving plans shall be prepared in nominal 24"x36" plan profile sheets, or plan
sheets with separate profile sheets. Profiles shall have grid increments of less than one inch.
Drafting medium, lettering, layout, etc., are all optional except to the extent required herein.
B. The plan shall be drawn to a scale of not more than fifty feet to the inch ( l "=50')
for new sheets or not more than 20 feet to the inch (1"=20') for the reconstruction of existing
streets and shall include but not be limited to the following list:
] . Right of way, easements, and street pavement widths
2. Stationing of proposed street :from left to right on sheet and stationing of
intersecting streets.
3. Angles and stations of intersections
4. Street names
5. Horizontal curve data
48
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
6. Existing topographic features such as utility poles, fire hydrants, culverts, inlets
lakes, watercourses, etc. '
7. North arrow
8. Graphic scale
9. Lot lines, lot numbers, subdivision lines and City limit lines
10. Curb radii, and special curb grade points such as end of radius returns and
midpoints and top of inlet, etc.
11. Underground utilities located as accurately as possible
12. Location of soil borings
13. Limits if significant cut or fill
14. Directional arrows showing direction of drainage in gutters
15. Crown transition in intersections
16. Special notes
17. Engineer's seal and signature
C. The profile shall be drawn to a scale to match the plan horizontally and not
more than five feet to the inch (l "=5') vertically and shall include but not be limited to the
following list:
1. Existing ground profiles along the centerline and each right of way line.
2. Proposed top of curb profile line of each curb and existing top of curb line where
curb had previously been built.
3. Vertical curve data including the curve length, vertical point of intersection
station and elevation, high point or low point station and elevation. Percent
grades shall be shown on all tangents.
4. Top of curb grades shall be shown at not more than 50-foot intervals in tangents
and 25-foot intervals in vertical curves. The PC, PT and PI shall be shown in
profile with station and elevation.
5. Benchmark (National Geodetic Survey Datum, formerly U.S. Coast and Geodetic
Survey Datum) description and elevation on each sheet with temporary
benchmarks set at intervals of not more than 300 feet.
6. Proposed and/or existing storm sewer, sanitary sewer, water, electrical, gas and
telephone lines.
IV. Roadway Construction Testing
A. Submittals: The Developer shall provide, for approval by the City, four copies
of submittal data for roadway materials that are proposed to be installed. Information required
for approval shall include, but not be limited to, stabilized subgrade, flexible base material, hot
mix asphaltic concrete mix design and reinforced concrete mix design. Mix designs shall be
performed by an independent certified testing laboratory approved by the City.
B. Testing
Material Testing: The testing of all materials and construction shall be in conformance with the
appropriate TxDOT or ASTM specifications at no cost to the City.
49
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
During roadway construction, a certified independent testing laboratory recommended by the
Developer and approved by the City shall perform the following tests.
Stabilized Subgrade
Testing: Field moisture-density tests shall be taken at the rate of one test for each 1000 square
yards of subgrade area or a minimum of three tests. Thickness determinations of subgrade shall
be made at random locations.
After the subgrade has been compacted and tested, the entire subgrade shall be proof-rolled with
a heavily loaded vehicle. The vehicle shall have a loaded GVW of 50,000 pounds with a single
axle weight of at least 18,000 pounds and a tire pressure of 90 psi. Subgrade that is pumping or
deforming shall be reworked, replaced or otherwise modified to form a smooth, stable, nonyielding
base for subsequent paving courses. The City Inspector shall be notified at least 48
hours before final proof-rolling.
Acceptance: The results of field density tests, thickness and proof-rolling shall be submitted for
approval by the City. Provided all tests are acceptable, the subgrade will be approved and the
next paving course can be placed.
Flexible Base Course
Testing: At least one sample for each 2000 square yards of base course material placed, with a
minimum of two samples, shall be tested to determine gradation and Atterberg limits. Should
these tests indicate that the material does not meet specifications, the material shall be removed
and replaced. During placement and compaction, Compaction Curves will be required for each
material used. Field moisture-density tests shall be taken of each lift of material at random
locations at approximate intervals of one test for each 1000 square yards of base. Copies of all
haul tickets shall be provided to the City Inspector.
Acceptance: The results of field density tests shall be submitted to and reviewed by the City.
Provided all tests are acceptable, the aggregate base course materials, placement, and compaction
will be approved and the next paving course can be placed.
Hot Mix Asphaltic Concrete Pavement
Testing: During placement and compaction of hot mix asphaltic concrete pavement, observation
shall be on a full-time basis. Haul tickets shall be obtained from the HMAC plant. Haul Tickets
shall clearly state the "Type of Mix", the total weight of the mix loaded on the truck and the
project name. Thickness determinations shall be made at intervals of approximately l 00 feet in
each travel lane.
Acceptance: Copies of all haul tickets will be provided to the City Inspector o~ a daily basis.
The City reserves the right to require field measurements of the final pavement thickness.
Portland Cement Concrete
50
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
Testing: One test set shall be made for each seventy-five (75) cubic yards of each strength of
concrete placed on any one day and not less than one test set for each class of concrete each day
it is used. The Public Service Director may elect to reduce the test frequency after establishing a
consistent pattern of successful tests. Each test set shall consist of one slump test and four
compression test cylinders. All cylinders shall be kept in an secure location and protected from
the weather. The four cylinders shall be laboratory cured and tested for adequacy of the design
for strength of the concrete in accordance with ASTM Specification C3 l. Two cylinders shall be
tested at 7 days and two at 28 days.
Acceptance: All test results shall be submitted to and approved by the City. Unsatisfactory
concrete finish work shall be removed or replaced as directed by the Public Service Director.
V. Drainage Design
The storm drainage system in the proposed subdivision shall conform to the planning policies of
the City and the included minimum standards.
A. General Requirements
The streets, inlets, storm sewer pipe and all other drainage structures shall be designed to
accommodate a 25 year storm. All lots within the subdivision shall be required to be above the
I 00 year flood plain.
Provisions shall be made to prohibit the storm discharge from the proposed subdivision from
damaging the downstream property. Energy dissipating devices such as concrete or rock riprap,
splash basins, baffles and other structures shall be incorporated into design of storm drainage
facilities as required to prevent erosion of downstream properties. Where required, the
Developer shall obtain drainage easements from downstream property owners.
B. Drainage Computation and Routine
A Drainage Map shall be prepared using the Preliminary Subdivision Plat as a base. This map
will show all the drainage involved in the area being subdivided.
Offsite drainage coming into subdivided area may be shown on copies of USGS 7 'l1 Minute
Topographic Maps and will completely outline drainage areas involved. Any creek or other
drainage system studied by the Corps of Engineers or other agency that established flood
information with published reports, will show pertinent flood information on drainage map and
reference the particular study.
Interior drainage will be shown on Subdivision Plat and will break down areas so that all area
junctions may be identified and evaluated. Areas will be identified by number and drainage
information will be tabulated on Plan in an orderly manner beginning at the uppermost drainage
area.
A tabular form will identify drainage areas with acres drained and accumulated acres drained.
Each acreage, and accumulated acreage will shown time of concentration, coefficient of runoff,
51
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
rainfall intensity for 25 year and 100 year frequency and runoff in cubic feet per second ( cfs) for
25 and 100 year frequency.
A table of street capacities will be shown on Plan to define street sections that are critical for
drainage. These sections will be marked on Plan and identified in table. Table will identify and
tabulate street section, drainage area number, percent of grade of street, street capacity in cfs
required for 25 year and on 100 year frequency, street capacity in cfs provided between tops of
curbs for 25 year frequency, and velocity in feet per second (fps) at required 25 year frequency
capacity.
Channel flow and ditch sections shall be shown where they occur in or affect the subdivision.
Ditch sections will be shown below ditch junctions and just above drainage structures for street
crossings. Channel flow data will be shown in tabular form identifying the cross section, the
percent of ditch grade, bottom width in feet, runoff flow in cfs for 25 and 100 year frequencies,
ditch velocities in fps for 25 and 100 year runoff.
Drainage will be calculated using the Rational Method. Offsite drainage entering area to be
subdivided will be considered to be improved.
Storm drains and inlets will be shown on Plans where required showing inlet and proposed pipe
sizes. Proposed culverts for ditch drainage under streets will be shown and sized.
Small tracts (approximately 2 acres) and re-subdivision of platted lots will not require Drainage
Plans if the Subdivision Plat clearly indicates that no drainage problem exists.
Preliminary Drainage Plan will be submitted and have City approval before any final subdivision
plans are submitted for approval.
C. All pipe used in the storm sewer system shall be either (I) high density
polyethylene pipe (only allowable in locations outside of load bearing structures) or (2)
reinforced concrete pipe conforming to ASTM C-76 unless otherwise approved by the City
Engineer. Minimum pipe size shall be 18 inches inside diameter for storm sewer systems to be
dedicated to and maintained by the City. All storm sewer pipes shall be placed in a drainage
easement except where pipe is carrying storm water runoff solely from one property that likely
will not be subdivided or where approved by City Engineer.
D. All inlets shall conform to Texas State Department of Transportation
standard details for such structures.
E. Proposed storm sewer systems may be connected into existing systems as
long as the proposed combined discharge will not exceed the capacity of the existing system.
Additional drainage areas shall not be directed into a watershed from another watershed.
F. Storm sewers should discharge into natural streams or into other storm
sewers. No new unimproved channels may be constructed to carry storm water runoff.
52
,,
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
G. Reinforced concrete bridges, box culverts, headwalls, wingwalls, piers and
bents shall conform to Texas State Department of Transportation standard details for such
structures. Headwalls or wingwalls are required on all culverts and on the discharge point of
storm sewer pipe.
H. Any development within a designated 100-year floodplain must be
approved by the City. To develop property within a designated 100-year floodplain, the
developer must submit documentation to the City that proves the development of the lot will not
encroach into the 100-year floodway.
I. If channel modifications are to be done to recover land in the floodplain,
the Developer must submit required documentation to FEMA describing the proposed
modifications that will revise the floodplain. The Developer shall obtain and provide to the City,
a Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) from FEMA. Upon completion of channel
modifications, required documentation shall be submitted to FEMA showing that modifications
have been completed and requesting a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR), which actually revises
the floodplain maps. A copy of the LOMR shall be provided to the City.
VI. Drainage Plans:
A. Drainage plans shall be prepared on nominal 24"x36" plan profile or plan
with separate profile sheets. Profiles shall have grid increments of less than one inch. Drafting
medium, lettering, layout, etc., are all optional except to the extent required herein.
B. An overall drainage area contour map with 2-foot contour intervals of the
subdivision shall be shown divided into sub-basins for each structure or floodplain. Each subbasin
shall be marked with an identifying number or letter, and the acreage. Run-off
computations, curb inlet design computations, and storm sewer design computations shall all be
shown in a tabular format in the construction plans.
C. The plan shall be drawn to scale of not more than fifty feet to the inch
(l "=50') and shall include but not be limited to the following list:
I. Location of all proposed or existing inlets, pipe, culverts, manholes,
headwalls, and wingwalls.
2. Location of all channels and streams to be filled, improved, or used
discharge points for the system.
3. Curve data, angle points, or other survey data necessary to install the
storm sewer facilities or to locate the facilities and easements after
installation.
4. Location of all underground utilities or pipelines, which might conflict
with the storm sewer, culvert, or channel.
5. Typical cross sections for improved concrete lined channels.
6. North arrow, graphic scale, subdivision lines, lot lines, easement lines,
street names.
53
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
7. Proposed street paving width, right of way width, or easement width.
8. Base line (centerline) showing stationing.
9. Special notes.
10. Minimum finished floor elevation for each lot within or adjacent to a
100 year floodplain or drainage easement.
D. The profile shall be drawn to a scale of not more than fifty feet to the inch
(1 "=50') horizontally and not more than five feet (l "=5') vertically. Drainage profiles shall
include but not be limited to the following list:
1. Existing surface profile above centerline of storm sewer pipe, culverts,
and existing high bank and flowline profiles for open drainage channels.
2. Proposed drainage structures with flowline (invert) elevation at not more
than fifty feet intervals.
3. Proposed top of curb profile.
4. Elevations of pipelines or underground utility crossings.
5. Vertical curve data for flowline including the curve length and the
vertical point of intersection station and elevation.
6. Benchmark (National Geodetic Survey Datum, formerly U.S. Coast and
Geodetic Survey Datum) description and elevation.
7. Water surface profile for the " one hundred year flood " for open
channels within the subdivision and hydraulic grade line for storm sewer
pipe.
VII. Construction Plans (Paving and Drainage):
Following approval of final plat and the incorporation of changes required by the City
Engineer and DRB, five complete sets of construction drawings shall be submitted to the City
Engineer for signature prior to commencing construction.
VIII. "As Built" Drawings:
The developer's engineer shall furnish a hardcopy and reproducible set of construction
plans for all completed and accepted improvements to the City.
REFERENCES
Reference for Table II - A - 2
1. National Crushed Stone Association's "Flexible Pavement Design Guide for
Highways" April 1975
2. National Crushed Stone Association's "Design Guide For Streets Featuring Crushed
Stone Bases" June 1975
3. U.S. Army Engineers' Manual TM 5-822-5'' 1965
54
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
4. U.S. Department of the Navy, Naval Facilities Engineering Command's "Civil
Engineering-Pavements" Design Manual 5.4 NA VF AC DM-5.4 October 1979
Revised September 1985.
Reference for Table II -A-3
1. The Asphalt Institute's Manual Series No. 1 (MS-1) "Thickness Design Full
Asphalt Pavement Structures For Highways And Streets" Revised Eighth Edition
August 1970 and September 1981.
Reference for Table II - A - 4
1. Portland Cement Association's "Design of Concrete Pavement For City Streets"
IS184P 1974
2. Portland Cement Association's "Thickness Design For Concrete Highways And
Street Pavements" EB 109.01 P 1984
3. U.S. Department of The Navy, Naval Facilities Engineering Command's "Civil
Engineering-Pavements" Design Manual 5.4 NAVFAC
DM-5.4 October 1979 Revised September 1985
55
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I. General:
DESIGN GUIDELINES FOR SUBDIVISIONS
IN
HENDERSON, TEXAS
CHAPTER THREE
WATER & SANITARY SEWER IMPROVEMENTS
All water and sewer lines constructed within the City of Henderson shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with the most current guidelines as promulgated
by the American Water Works Association, the Environmental Protection Agency, and
the State of Texas regulatory agency.
II. Water Line Design:
a. Location: Water mains shall be constructed in a dedicated right-of-way or an
easement to the City of Henderson, which shall be filed in the public records.
When water mains are to be constructed in a dedicated right-of-way, the water
line shall be located under the north or west section of the street except where
otherwise approved by the Public Services Department.
i. Minimum cover for 8-inch water pipe shall be 36 inches below finished
sub grade.
ii. Maximum cover for 8-inch water pipe shall be 84 inches.
m. Required cover for water lines greater than 8-inch shall meet the approval
of the City Engineer.
iv. Water lines shall be laid higher in elevation than sewer lines and shall not
be installed closer than nine feet in all directions to wastewater collection
facilities. All separation distances shall be measured from the outside
surface of each of the respective pieces. Comply with 30 TAC §290.44(e)
through §290.44(f)(3) when water and sewer piping separation
requirements cannot be met.
b. Minimum Size: The minimum inside diameter size requirement for water lines is
8 inches. Exceptions may be granted in special circwnstances such as cul-de-sacs,
where the length of the cul-de-sac does not cause the fire flow to be below
required flow rates outlined in the International Fire Code, current edition.
c. Looping: All lines shall be looped except, where lines will enter a future
subdivision. A standard fire hydrant assembly shall be installed at any dead end
line. The end of the line shall be plugged and blocked with concrete to prevent
line blow-off. Construction of water lines shall extend to the boundaries of the
development.
56
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
d. Design Criteria: The water lines shall be designed to carry at least the minimum
required fire flow rate as outlined in the International Fire Code, current edition
while maintaining a minimum of 20 poWlds per square inch gauge pressure at an;
connection. The maximum head loss allowable is 10 feet per thousand feet of
pipe. In commercial and industrial areas, the minimum flow shall comply with the
International Fire Code, current edition.
e. Soil Testing: The soil corrosivity shall be determined in accordance with the
procedures outlined in ANSI/ A WW A C 105/ A21.5 "Polyethylene Encasement for
Ductile Iron-Pipe for Water and Other Liquids", Appendix A. The earth resistivity
and soil analysis shall be performed in line of the proposed water main and to a
depth equa1 to the proposed water line.
Locations of the earth resistivity and soil tests shall be placed along the proposed
pipeline to provide a representative view of the existing subsurface conditions. A
point accumulation of 10 or greater indicates corrosive soil conditions and
pipeline corrosion protection shall be required.
Corrosive soil conditions in isolated areas of development shall require
polyethylene encasement. Corrosive soil conditions in the general overall
development may require the Developer's Engineer to recommend alternate
materials for construction of water pipelines, subject to the approval of the Public
Services Department. Tests results shall be correlated with the Public Services
Department.
f. Fire Hydrant Assemblies: The number of fire hydrants, as well as, fire hydrant
spacing and location shall comply with the International Fire Code, current
edition. Variances to fire hydrant requirements are referenced in Appendix C
subject to the approval of the Fire Department.
g. Materials for Water Lines: Allowable materials for water lines are Ductile Iron
Pipe and PVC water pipe series C-900. For all non-metallic pipe installations, a
metallic locator wire shall be installed above the pipe for detection purposes. The
locator wire shall be terminated at valves as shown on the Standard Details.
h. Valves:
i. Each branch line shall be valved.
IL Main lines shall be valved at every intersection.
iii. The maximum distance between valves shall be 1000 feet.
1v. Each valve, in a non-street location, shall be marked with a permanent
steel valve marker.
i. House Connections:
i. A 1-inch copper tubing service shall be installed at a point three feet
behind the curb at each lot.
57
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
11. A single service line that will service two houses requires a l Y2-inch
copper tubing service installed at a point three fee behind the curb at the
property line of the two houses.
m. Each service line shall be permanently marked with a "W'' on the curb
where the service line crosses the curb.
iv. A single service shall include a curb stop located in a standard size
rectangular plastic meter box.
v. A double service shall require the two services to be located in separate
meter boxes.
J. Plans and Specifications for Water Lines:
i. Preliminary Plan:
· a. The developer shall submit with the preliminary plat, a plan showing the
proposed location and sizes of water lines, prepared_._ signed, and sealed
by a Registered Professional En~ The plan shall include location of
lots, minimum finished floor elevations, streets, water lines, sewer lines,
valves, and fire hydrants along with the design calculations for the size
of the lines.
b. There shall be one copy of the preliminary plan showing the coverage of
the area by fire hydrants. For residential areas, this preliminary plan
shall have a circle scribed around each fire hydrant 500 foot radius. For
commercial areas this preliminary plan shall have a circle scribed around
each fire hydrant 300 foot radius.
c. The preliminary plan will be on a scale of not more than one hundred
feet to the inch (1 "=100').
ii. Construction plans:
1l. The developer shall submit with the final plat , the proposed plans,
specifications, and contract documents complete, .e_repared1 signed and
sealed b a Re istered Professional Engineer. The Public Services
Department and the City Engmeer WI review for approval the plans and
specifications. After the review the developer shall include into the plans
and specifications any additions or corrections required.
b. The construction plans may be submitted by the City of Henderson to
the responsible State regulatory agency for their review, following staff
review. Generally, construction shall not begin until that approval has
been received.
c. The construction plans consists of 3 elements (Plan Section, Profile
Section, and the "As Built'' Plans). These elements are described in
paragraphs I through 3 below. The construction plans shall include a
location map showing location of proposed water lines, valves, and fire
hydrants. The map may be on the same scale as the preliminary plan.
The construction plans shall include plan and profile sheets showing the
location of all water lines, valves, and fire hydrants.
I. Plan Section: The plan shall be prepared on 24" x 36" plan
profile sheets or plan sheets with separate profile sheets. The
plan section of the plan and profile shall show the streets and
58
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
side streets, easements, lot lines, culverts, driveways (where
possible), sewer lines, water lines, telephone lines, gas lines,
power lines, poles, and TV. cable lines. The plan shall also
indicate where house service lines are to be installed. The plan
shall show all valves, fire hydrants and any branch line
connections, and concrete blocking. The plan shall be drawn to
scale of not more than fifty feet to the inch (l "=50').
2. Proflle Section: The profile shall be drawn to a scale of not more
than fifty feet to the inch (1 "=50') horizontally and not more than
five feet to the inch ( l "=5') vertically. The profile section shall
show the grade of the water lines, the existing ground line, and
the proposed ground line where it is different from the existing.
All Bench Mark and profile elevations shall be tied to the
National Geodetic Survey Datum (formerly the U. S. Coastal &
Geodetic Survey Datum). Assumed datum will not be allowed.
The profile shall show all storm sewers and sanitary sewers
crossing the construction alignment of the proposed water line.
The grades for water lines 12 inches diameter and larger shall be
set and staked in the ground for construction by the developer's
engineer and the contractor shall lay them as close as possible to
the proposed grades. Grade stakes for water lines smaller than 12
inch diameter are not required, however, the engineer may
include grades in the profile at his option. Water lines shall not
be laid to a grade less than 0.2 percent. A 1 inch corporation cock
shall be installed at each low spot and each high spot in the water
line on the lines smaller than 12 inches. There shall be a
temporary I inch copper tubing and 1 inch meter stop installed at
each of these cocks for blowing off air and for testing the lines.
After testing, these lines shall be removed. A 6 inch diameter
blow off line is required at each low spot of lines 12 inches and
larger and an adequately sized combination vacuum breaker, air
release valve is required at each high point in lines 12 inches and
larger. The construction plans shall also include a sheet showing
standard valve, fire hydrant, and other pipe laying details. Each
sheet must be reviewed, approved, signed, and sealed by a
Registered Professional Engineer licensed to practice in Texas.
3. "As Built" Plans: The developer's engineer shall prepare a set
of "As Built" plans based on the construction plans. The "As
Built" plans shall show the correct alignment and grade of lines
as installed. All valves shall be located on the ground tied to at
least two permanent land marks, i.e., fire hydrants, power poles,
property lines, etc. The landmarks shall be shown on the plan and
the dimension from landmarks shall be shown. The landmarks
shall be at least 90 degrees apart. The City Construction
Inspector will assist the Engineer in procurement of information
needed to develop the "As Built" plans. The developer shall
59
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
provide the Public Services Department one hard copy set of
plans and one set in digital format within (30) thirty days of
written final acceptance of the improvements.
k. Testing and Disinfection
All water lines shall be tested and disinfected prior to final acceptance by the City
Engineer.
Testing
A hydrostatic test shall be performed in accordance with A WW A C600 on all
new water lines. Upon completion and approval of the disinfecting of the lines,
necessary valves shall be opened to allow system pressure to be exerted on the
newly constructed lines. Care shall be exercised to remove all entrapped air from
the lines by draining the entire segment being tested. This can be accomplished
by opening the relief valves, fire hydrants or bleed valves located at the highest
elevations afong the lines. Once all air has been removed from the lines and the
valves closed, the working line pressure shall be measured with a gauge applied
to a fitting at or near the lowest elevation along the line. All valves required to
isolate the segment being tested shall then be closed. With the test segment
isolated, the test segment pressure shall be increased, by means of an external
pump and potable water supply. Leakage shall not exceed 11.65 gallons per inch
of pipe diameter per mile of pipe per 24 hours when tested at 1 Yi times the
working pressure or 150 psi, whichever is greater.
Any line segment being tested that fails to meet the allowable pressure loss or
leakage requirements established herein and by the A WW A C600 Specification
shall be rejected. Any rejected segment shall be repaired, redisinfected and
retested. The City's Inspector shall be present during any and all tests.
Disinfection
New water lines shall be disinfected in accordance with A WW A C651. Proposed
disinfection methods shall be submitted to the City Engineer for approval. If in
the opinion of the Engineer, any segments of the lines are not properly
disinfected, the lines shall be properly disinfect to the satisfaction of the Engineer.
All new mains shall be thoroughly disinfected, flushed and sampled before being
placed in service. Samples shall be collected for microbiological analysis to
check the effectiveness of the disinfection procedure, which shall be repeated if
contamination persists. A minimum of one sample for each 1,000 feet of
complete water line will be required or at the next available sampling point
beyond 1,000 feet as designated by the design engineer.
The environment to which the chlorinated water is to be discharged shall be
inspected. If there is any question that the chlorinated discharge will cause
damage to the environment, then a reducing agent shall be applied to the water to
be wasted to neutralize thoroughly the chlorine residual remaining in the water.
60
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
III.
Where necessary, federal, state, and local regulatory agencies should be contacted
to determine special provisions for the disposal of heavily chlorinated water.
Sanitary Sewer Improvements:
a. Location: Sanitary Sewer mains shall be constructed in a dedicated right-of~way
or an easement to the City of Henderson, which shall be filed in the public
records. Sanitary sewer mains shall be installed under the south or east section of
the street except where otherwise approved by the Public Services Department.
A legal description of any off-site easement required for outfall, interceptor,
approach or lateral lines to be constructed in conjunction with said project shall be
furnished with the final plans and specifications for sanitary sewer mains. Legal
descriptions shall be prepared by a Registered Public Land Surveyor.
( 1) Sewers shall be laid in a straight alignment with uniform grade
between manholes.
(2) The minimum cover for sewer lines shall be five feet. Minimum
clearance below established flow lines of creeks and drainage
ways shall be as approved by the City Engineer.
(3) Sewer lines shall be at a lower elevation than any water lines and
shall not be installed closer than 9 feet in all directions to water
facilities. All separation distances shall be measured from the
outside surface of each of the respective pieces. Comply with 30
TAC §290.44(e) through §290.44(±)(3) when water and sewer
piping separation requirements cannot be met.
(4) Sanitary sewer lines installed 14 feet deep or more shall meet the
required embedrnent of ASTM requirements for the proposed
pipe material.
b. Minimum Size: The minimum inside diameter size requirement for gravity
sanitary sewer lines is 6 inches.
c. Grade and Velocity: Size and minimum grade requirements are shown in the
table of30 TAC §317.2 (c) (2) and (c) (3). The minimum velocity in a sewer line
is 2 feet per second, and maximum allowable velocity is 15 feet per second.
Where velocities greater than 10 feet per second are attained, special provision
shall be made to protect against erosion by velocity, and displacement by shock as
noted in the requirements of 30 TAC §317.2 (c) (3).
d. Design Criteria:
i. Design Flows: In residential development, gravity sewers shall be
designed to carry an average daily flow of 140 gallons per capita per day
based on 3 .3 persons per single family unit. The line shall be designed to
61
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
carry a peak flow of 4.0 times the average daily flow for 6-inch lines, and
2.5 times the average daily flow for lines 8 inches and larger. For
developments other than residential, the developer's engineer shall use the
recommended design flows as promulgated by the State of Texas
regulatory agency unless the City of Henderson has data to required
greater design flows.
ii. Lift Stations and Pressure Lines: In general, the City of Henderson will
not permit the construction of lift stations and pressure lines, unless it is
impracticable to connect to a gravity system. If a lift station is required,
complete design, including site work, an all weather access, etc. shall be
included in the plans and specifications. The lift station shall be designed
in compliance with current state and federal requirements and shall have
either dual electrical supply or a stand-by generator. The minimum lift
station capacity shall be 100 gallons per minute and shall have at least two
pumps. The minimum size for a pressure line shall be 4-inches.
e. Soil Testing: The soil corrosivity shall be determined in accordance with the
procedures outlined in ANSI/ A WW A Cl 05/ A2 l .5 "Polyethylene Encasement for
Ductile Iron-Pipe for Water and Other Liquids". The earth resistivity and soil
analysis shall be performed in line of the proposed sewer main at points of
crossing water lines, and to a depth equal to the proposed sewer line, to provide a
representative view of existing subsurface conditions. A point accumulation of I 0
or greater indicates corrosive soil conditions and pipeline corrosion protection
shall be required. Test results shall be correlated with Public Services
Department.
f. Allowable Materials:
1. All gravity sewer lines 6 to 12 inches in diameter size shall be DR26 PVC
or Ductile Iron. If directed by the City, a metallic locator wire shall be
installed above non-metallic pipe between manholes for detection
purposes. The locator wire shall be terminated inside the manholes with a
minimum of 3' of coiled wire, taped and securely hung in an out-of-theway
location. The locator wire shall be brought into the manhole through
a small hole drilled in the cone section a maximum of 1' below the ring
and cover. The hole shall be sealed to prevent infiltration.
11. Creek crossings, shallow lines, and lines laid in areas with higher water
table shall be constructed with ductile iron pipe, and shall be encased in
concrete where unsuitable soil conditions necessitate encasement.
g. Manholes: Manholes shall be pre-cast concrete or cast in place concrete and
coated in cold-tar epoxy.
1• Manholes shall be placed at points of changes in alignment, grade, or size
of sewer. Manholes shall also be placed at all street intersections, at
intersections of sewers, and the end of all sewer lines that will be extended
at a later date.
62
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
Il. Manhole spacing shall be a maximum of 500 feet for sewer lines of 6 inch
to 12-inch in size.
111. The minimum inside diameter of a manhole shall be 4 feet.
1v. Whenever a manhole is located in the 100-year flood plain, the manhole
shal1 extend to an elevation above the flood plain or as approved by the
Public Services Department.
v. Manholes shall not be located where surface water can drain into them.
Areas subject to frequent flooding will require special consideration that
meets the approval of the Public Services Director.
h. Cleanouts: Cleanouts may be used in lieu of manholes at the end of sewers
which are not to be extended in the future. '
t. House Connections:
t. A minimum 4-inch diameter PVC service line shall be installed to the
property line of each lot.
11. Each service line shall have a "Y" fitting installed in the branch line.
ni. Each service line shall be permanently marked with a "S" on the curb
where the service line crosses the curb. For locating the end of the service
line, the sewer service line shall have a joint of pipe protruding the ground
surface to a height of at least 3 feet.
1v. The depth of the service line shall be at least 4 feet deep at the curb and
shall be deep enough to allow a 1 feet per 100 feet drop in the service line
from the back of the lot or lowest point in the lot to the property line, plus
an adequate depth for the house plumbing. The end of the service shall be
capped.
J· Plans and Specifications for Sewer Lines:
i. Preliminary Plan:
a. The developer shall submit with the preliminary plat, a plan showing the
proposed ]ocation and sizes of sewer lines, prepared, signed, and sealed
by a Registered Professional Engineer. The plan shall include location of
lots, minimum finished floor elevations, streets, water lines, sewer lines,
clean outs, and manholes, along with the design calculations for the size
of the lines.
b. The preliminary plan will be on a scale of not more than one hundred
feet to the inch (1 "=100').
ii. Construction plans:
a. The developer shall submit with the final plat , the proposed plans,
specifications, and contract documents complete, prepared, signed and
sealed by a Registered Professional Engineer. The Public Services
Department and the City Engineer will review for approval the plans and
specifications. After the review the developer shall include into the plans
and specifications any additions or corrections required.
63
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
b. The construction plans may be submitted by the City of Henderson to
the responsible State regulatory agency for their review, following staff
review. Generally, construction shall not begin until that approval has
been received.
c. The construction plans consists of 3 elements (Plan Section, Profile
Section, and the "As Built" Plans). These elements are described in
paragraphs 1 through 3 below. The construction plans shall include a
location map showing location of proposed sewer lines, manholes,
cleanouts, and water lines. The map may be on the same scale as the
preliminary plan. The construction plans shall include plan and profile
sheets showing the location of all sewer lines and manholes.
I. Plan Section: The plan shall be prepared on 24" x 36" plan
profile sheets or plan sheets with separate profile sheets. The
plan section of the plan and profile shall show the streets and
side streets, easements, lot lines, culverts, driveways (where
possible), sewer lines, water lines, telephone lines, gas lines,
power lines, poles, and TV cable lines. The plan shall also
indicate where house service lines are to be installed. The plan
shall show all manholes, cleanouts, ductile iron pipe, and branch
line connections, and concrete encasement. The plan shall be
drawn to scale of not more than fifty feet to the inch (l "=50').
2. Proflle Section: The profile shall be drawn to a scale of not more
than fifty feet to the inch (1"=50') horizontally and not more than
five feet to the inch (l "=5') vertically. The profile section shall
show the grade of the sewer lines, the existing ground line, and
the proposed ground line where it is different from the existing.
All Bench Mark and profile elevations shall be tied to the
National Geodetic Survey Datum (formerly the U. S. Coastal &
Geodetic Survey Datum). Assumed datum will not be allowed.
The profile shall show all storm sewers and water lines crossing
the construction alignment of the proposed sewer line. The
grades for sewer lines shall be set and staked in the ground for
construction by the developer's engineer and the contractor shall
lay them as close as possible to the proposed grades. Grade
stakes and grade lines are required for all sewer lines. The
construction plans shall also include a sheet showing standard
manholes, cleanouts, and other pipe laying details. Each sheet
must be reviewed, approved, signed, and sealed by a Registered
Professional Engineer licensed to practice in Texas.
3. "As Built" Plans: The developer's engineer shall prepare a set
of "As Built" plans based on the construction plans. The "As
Built" .plans shall show the location of all manholes, cleanouts,
and service connections, and the correct alignment and grade of
lines as installed. All manholes and cleanouts shall be located on
the ground tied to at least two permanent land marks, i.e., fire
hydrants, power poles, property lines, etc. The landmarks shall
64
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
be shown on the plan and the dimension from landmarks shall be
shown. The landmarks shall be at least 90 degrees apart. The
City Construction Inspector will assist the Engineer in
procurement of information needed to develop the "As Built"
plans. The developer shall provide the Public Services
Department one set of plans in digital format within (30) thirty
days of written final acceptance of the improvement.
k. Sanitary Sewer Pipe and Manhole Testing
All sanitary sewer lines and manholes shall be tested in the presence of the City
Inspector.
Preparation
Prior to performing any test, a sewer cleaning ball shall be passed through the
lines from manhole to manhole to assure that the line is free from defects and
debris. Precleaning by high velocity jet or other methods may be necessary.
Tests may be performed prior to installation of the service connections but with
the wyes in place. All ends and open fittings shall be plugged to resist the test
pressure.
Sanitary Sewer Pipe:
An exfiltration test on all sanitary sewer lines shall be performed in accordance
with one of the following procedures:
1. Air Test: This test shall conform to the procedure described in ASTM C-828,
ASTM C-924 or other appropriate procedures. For safety reasons, air testing of
sections of pipe shall be limited to lines less than 36-inch average inside diameter.
Lines 36-inch average inside diameter and larger may be air tested at each joint.
The maximum time allowable for the pressure to drop from 3.5 pounds per square
inch gauge to 2.5 pounds per square inch gauge during a joint test, regardless of
pipe size, shall be 20 seconds. For sections of pipe less than 36-inch average
inside diameter, the maximum time allowable for the pressure to drop from 3.5
pounds per square inch gauge to 2.5 pounds per square inch gauge shall be
computed by the following equation:
T = 0.0850 (D) (K)/(Q) where T =time for pressure to
drop 1.0 pounds per square inch gauge in seconds.
K = 0.000419DL, but not less than 1.0
D = average inside diameter in inches
L = length of line of same pipe size in feet
Q =rate ofloss, assume 00.0015 ft3/min/sq ft internal surface
Minimum testing time for each pipe diameter are outlined below:
65
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
Pipe Minimum Length for Time for
Diameter Time Minimum Longer
(inches) (seconds) Time Length
(feet) (seconds)
6 340 398 0.855 (L)
8 454 298 1.520 (L)
IO 567 239 2.374 (L)
12 680 199 3.419 (L)
15 850 159 5.342 (L)
18 1020 133 7.693 (L)
21 1190 114 l0.471 (L)
24 1360 100 13.676 (L)
27 1530 88 17.309 (L)
30 1700 80 21.369 (L)
33 1870 72 25.856 (L)
2. Water Test: Water testing shall be performed from manhole to manhole. The
downstream manhole of the section being tested shall be plugged and the line
filled with water at the upstream manhole. The level of water in the upstream
manhole shall be at least 2 feet deep and shall never exceed 25 feet higher than
the flowline in the downstream manhole. After a reasonable time for air escaping
and stabilization, the level of water in the upstream manhole shall be recorded.
The test shall run for a minimum of two hours. At the end of the test period, the
water level shall be recorded and the water leakage calculated. The allowable
leakage rate shall not exceed 50 gallon/inch of diameter/mile/day
(0.0004 gallon/inch of diameter/footlhour).
Any sanitary sewer line not meeting this allowable leakage is presumed to have
failed.
Manholes
Manholes shall be tested for leakage separately and independently of the
wastewater lines either by hydrostatic exfiltration testing or by vacuum testing.
Hydrostatic Exfiltration Testing shall be performed by sealing all wastewater lines
coming into the manhole with an internal pipe plug, the manhole shall then be
filled with water and maintained full for at least one hour. For concrete manholes,
a wetting period of 24 hours may be used prior to testing in order to allow
saturation of the concrete.
Manholes shall be tested as follows:
I. For precast concrete manholes with tongue and groove joints, the maximum
leakage for hydrostatic testing shall be 0.025 gallons per foot diameter per foot of
manhole depth per hour.
66
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
2. For manholes designated as watertight (fiberglass or precast concrete
manholes with rubber gaskets), the maximum leakage for hydrostatic testing shall
be zero (0.000) gallons per foot diameter per foot of manhole depth per hour.
If a manhole fails the hydrostatic exfiltration test, the manhole must be made
water tight and retested.
Vacuum testing shall be perfonned by plugging all pipes entering the manhole,
taking care to securely place the plug from being drawn into the manhole. The
test head shall be placed and the seal inflated in accordance with the
manufacturer's recommendations. A vacuum pump of ten (I 0) inches of mercury
shall be drawn and the vacuum pump shut off. With the valves closed, the time
shall be measured for the vacuum to drop to nine (9) inches. Following are
minimum allowable test times for manhole acceptance at the specified vacuum
drop:
DEPTH (FEET)
4
8
12
16
20
24
48" diameter
10
20
30
40
50
59
TIME (SECONDS)
60" diameter 72" diameter
13 16
26 33
39 49
52 67
65 81
78 97
Add for 2 ft. more depth: 5 6.66 8
Note: These numbers have been taken from ASTM C 1244-93.
If the manhole fails the initial test, repairs and adjustments necessary due to
extenuating circumstances (i.e. pipe joint, liner, plug sealing) should be made.
Retesting shall proceed until a satisfactory test is obtained.
Deflection Test
A deflection test shall be performed on all flexible or semi-rigid pipe in
conformance with Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) Chapter
317 - Design Criteria for Sewerage Systems. The test shall be conducted after the
final backfill has been in place at least 30 days. No pipe shall exceed a deflection
of 5%. A rigid mandrel with an outside diameter equal to 95% of the inside
diameter of the pipe shall be used to measure deflection. The test shall be
performed without mechanical pulling devices. If a pipe should fail to pass the
deflection test, the problem shall be corrected and a second test shall be conducted
after the final backfill has been in place an additional 30 days.
The rigid mandrel shall be constructed of a metal or a rigid plastic material that
can withstand 200 psi without being deformed. The mandrel shall have nine or
more "runners" or "legs" as long as the total number of legs is an odd number.
The barrel section of the mandrel shall have a length of at least 75% of the inside
67
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
diameter of the pipe. A proving ring shall be provided and used for each size
mandrel in use. The Developer shall submit his proposed pipe mandrels to the
City for concurrence prior to testing the line.
68
I
I
I
I
I Standards I - III I
I from Design Guidelines
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I 69
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
i
~
3
.!. n~u ~
~
~
~
JI/"
;
:s
~w - if el
l! p
~::-I. . .~.
.,
~~ r!:
i
,J:
~
il1l n. l·: . J..
" ·21 •
~ f!; I
I ~~- i
~
!
!r
u
f
~ ii
~ =:
~ ~!
! .11
i ii
~ i
~
~
.. ~I f I
i• ! i t' 111
I I ;r·
- b
; l i1lt Iii ·... •2
~ i ~ ~h[W Ii
a I; .. ~1n; i
I .. I t~l1 ~
I t 1i ~i rB • f ! :; liiJ! ! •~ w....t ~t .. ip.r' !•
ii !v itoi ;•;•:s ; f• ft
f ·1 ~·1~= II
• • II i '( ;-§ i !a '• r "11 ~·1·r " 11
• l 11 lidiilll .. .•.. f..w. ...§ .11. ,i,. ,
-----~·
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
i: I' ;. ;. ; ., I 1~ I: lo I: :.
~ i. e ~ ~ :.
;.:,·,:.ii
$. ·.1:\!i;
c=•es-;:
; . ~::~
;. 1-+-!-+-+-I
• • ~ : R ;
a. !:- ~ k ~
~ • :. lt !: a
I .
1.---~~.. r-
····.
Ii 1B ~A i. r n
i i
i I
.i. .. !i ~
~ 8i
~-~.j..1:·:·· ; 5
I l-... -l
I ~1 ~ ;
• s I i i ..
• l
ii
I· f
I
.I
ii
I :; x.. t; ..
i
! i ,11,
.·.-..
I 1; ::
'! ~
I
1: I=. .ti ~
Ii
Q
~ I; 1. ~
a
~ ~
:1
=<":
I
-. $ ~
11 i >lb
i ..,,»"
I ~ ~---
I I ._.___ .. .__i fl)
I
~
::: tl
~~
i c~
?
fll"'
I ~"Ir ~! I ::::"' "'"'
I ~ I
~~
• i
~~ i ."1 .ti• .t/ll Pll
loJ!:;
al • :::::~ r ~ ~~
~.z·-
"" wi f :..."'
' I I 1· !:
...
' s i:i
I I
= f-ij\~~
" .
I ""
~ l !i ;~
I .... ..
I 0
:~ Q~ I' ·: ... '- \
~lo.. ~
~~ tr
..,, :;. ..
~ ~
;9 :!
I nJ:©- ... JH;
~
~
lji I ~ii :~
.~ ' . ...
~
I ; If
~ ;;
iif
iii !l! li
I !
I f .
I 1tmis uII>
I
. -~ i~
·r1 ; d~ -~- r
t·~ 11
.... .. il~
a11
...
•t
!~
2•
.,
Oil "
I 1p :.
9
~ f
I
I :.
~ I -~ ·~
I.l.l ·•~• I .I! 1; ~ II r
I s~ tf =
~ ; ~=- a; ii ~1
I
~III ~1 RI
!\ !11 ;I 1 ii I
I .. 0 ~~
>.:.= " I ;l !:. ii
I r•
!..
:.i
~!
~
:,
;! ti
lo !I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
Appendix B
Subdivision Process Flowchart
* If there is any conflict between the provisions of this
subdivision ordinance and the herein after flow chart, the
provisions of the subdivision ordinance shall supercede the
flow charts.
73
I
I Appendix B1
I Minor Plat
I
I
DRS
I Rellk!w
Approval Sent I tDCoU'f"IOil
Approved & I File Is Cloeed
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
Appendix 82
Major Ptat
Major Plat
Pre-Application
Mestil'lg with ORB
Submit Pfelimirniry
Ptat&Pay
Application Fee
ORB Prepares Report
& Sends to P & Z with
Recoolmendatioo
Reoommendatioo
for ft.pproval
City Council
Publio Healing
GOOtinue to p2 of Appendix 82
Subc!Msion Does
Not Require
Cit-1 Approval
ORB Requires
Ch.anges and/or
Mditions
Chaflges Made
Sood to P & Z with
Recommendation
Reoommend.&tion
for Denial
Request Forwarded
to City Council for
Act~on
File is
Closed
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
continue frotn ,ooge 1 of Appendlx 82
Preiminary Pla:t
is Approved
Sutmit Final Ptat
& Pay Applicatioll
Fee
DRB Prepares
Report & Sends
for P & Z Hearing
p &Z
Recommendation
Recommendation
of Approval
City Council
Pub~c Hearing
Final Piat &
Coostructioo Pl.ans
Approved
Construction Plans
to City Engineer &
Citv Stai
ORB Requires
Changes and/or
Additions
Changes Made
P & Z Hearing
Motification
Appticatioo &
Appeats for
P & Z [)e()lsion
Changes Made
Deny
File 1s Closed




 


