City of Harker Heights, Texas
Code of Ordinances
2020 S-240 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 2020-27, passed 7-28-20
Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet:  www.amlegal.com
CHARTER OF THE
CITY OF HARKER HEIGHTS
Editor's note:  This Charter was adopted by the majority of the voters of this
city December 13, 1971, and includes changes adopted by the majority of the
voters voting in the municipal election of May 4, 1991.
Section
Article I
   
1.01   Incorporation
   
1.02   Form of government
Article II
Powers of the City
   
2.01   Powers of the City
   
2.02   Construction
   
2.03   Intergovernmental relations
   
2.04   Extension of City limits upon petition
   
2.05   Extension of City limits by the City Council
   
2.06   Exchange of territory
   
2.07   Wards
   
2.08   Eminent domain
   
2.09   Establishment and control of streets
   
2.10   Street improvements
   
2.11   Garbage disposal
   
2.12   Municipal court
   
2.13   Sanitary sewer system
   
2.14   Police force
   
2.15   Nuisances
   
2.16   Occupation and license taxes
   
2.17   Removal of dangerous structures
Article III
The City Council
   
3.01   Number, selection, term
   
3.02   Election by place
   
3.03   Qualifications
   
3.04   Compensation of member
   
3.04.01   Change to ward system
   
3.05   Presiding Officer: Mayor
   
3.06   Vacancies
   
3.07   Powers
   
3.08   Employment and removal of City Manager
   
3.09   City Judge
   
3.10   City Attorney
   
3.11   Induction into office meetings
   
3.12   Council to be judge of qualifications of its members
   
3.13   Ordinances
   
3.14   Procedure for passage of ordinance
   
3.15   Investigation by Council
   
3.16   Independent annual audit
Article IV
The City Manager
   
4.01   Qualifications
   
4.02   Powers and duties
   
4.03   Absence of City Manager
Article V
The Budget
   
5.01   Fiscal year
   
5.02   Anticipated revenues compared with other years in budget
   
5.03   Proposed expenditures compared with other years
   
5.04   Budget a public record
   
5.05   Notice of public hearing on budget
   
5.06   Public hearing on budget
   
5.07   Vote required for adoption
   
5.08   Date of final adoption; failure to adopt
   
5.09   Effective date of budget: certification: copies made available
   
5.10   Budget establishes appropriations
   
5.11   Budget establishes amount to be raised by property tax
Article VI
Taxation
   
6.01   Power to tax
   
6.02   Tax liens
Article VII
Nominations and Elections
   
7.01   Municipal elections
   
7.02   Regulation of elections
   
7.03   How to get name on ballot
   
7.04   Council ballots
   
7.05   Election by majority
   
7.06   Runoff elections
   
7.07   Tie election
Article VIII
Initiative, Referendum and Recall
   
8.01   Power of initiative
   
8.02   Power of referendum
   
8.03   Form of petitions; Committee of Petitioners
   
8.04   Filing, examination, and certification of petitions
   
8.05   Amendment of petitions
   
8.06   Effect of certification of referendum petition
   
8.07   Consideration by Council
   
8.08   Submission to electors
   
8.09   Form of ballot for initiated and referred ordinances
   
8.10   Results of election
   
8.11   Repealing ordinances; publication
   
8.12   Recall: general
   
8.13   Recall procedure
   
8.14   Recall petitions
   
8.15   Recall election
   
8.16   Ballots in recall election
   
8.17   Results of recall election
   
8.18   Limitations of recalls
   
8.19   District judge may order election
Article IX
Franchises
   
9.01   Ownership, control and use of real and public property of the City
   
9.02   Exclusive franchises
Article X
   
10.01   Personal financial interest
   
10.02   Prohibitions, activities prohibited
   
10.03   Charter amendment
   
10.04   Separability
Article XI
Transitional Provisions
   
11.01   Officers and employees
   
11.02   Pending matters
   
11.03   State and municipal laws
ARTICLE I
SECTION 1.01  INCORPORATION.
   The inhabitants of the City of Harker Heights, within the corporate limits
as established on this day or hereafter established in the manner provided by
this charter, shall continue to be a municipal body politic and corporate in
perpetuity under the name of the City of Harker Heights.
SECTION 1.02  FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
   The municipal government provided by this charter shall be known as the
Council-Manager government. Pursuant to its provisions and subject only to the
limitations imposed by the State Constitution and by this charter, all powers
of the City shall be vested in an elective council, hereinafter referred to as
“the council;” which shall enact local legislation, adopt budgets, determine
policies and employ the City Manager, who shall execute the laws and administer
the government of the City. All power of the City shall be exercised in the
manner prescribed by this charter, or if the manner be not prescribed, then in
such manner as may be prescribed by ordinance.
ARTICLE II POWERS OF THE CITY
SECTION 2.01  POWERS OF THE CITY.
   The City shall have all of the powers possible for a City to have under the
Constitution and laws of the State of Texas as fully and completely as though
they were specifically enumerated in this charter together with all of the
implied powers necessary to carry into execution all of the powers granted.
SECTION 2.02  CONSTRUCTION.
   The powers of the City under this charter shall be construed liberally in
favor of the City, and specific mention of particular powers in the charter
shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general power stated in this
article. It is intended that all of the powers enumerated in Chapter 13, Title
28, Revised Civil Statues of the State of Texas of 1925 and the acts amendatory
thereof and supplementary thereto now or hereafter enacted, or any other powers
which, under the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, it would be
competent for this charter to specifically enumerate, and also such further
power as may hereafter be granted under the Constitution and laws of Texas.
SECTION 2.03  INTERGOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS.
   The City may exercise any of its powers or perform any of its functions and
may participate in the financing thereof, jointly or in cooperation, by
contract or otherwise with any one or more states or civil divisions or
agencies thereof, or the United States or any agency thereof.
SECTION 2.04  EXTENSION OF CITY LIMITS UPON PETITION.
   Whenever a majority of the inhabitants, qualified to vote for members of the
Texas State Legislature, of any territory adjoining as said territory may be
designated by the City Council or in case there are no such qualified voters in
said territory, then when persons owning a majority of the land in area in said
territory desire the annexation of such territory to Harker Heights, they may
present a written petition to that effect to the City Council and shall attach
to said petition the affidavit of one or more of their number to the effect
that said petition is signed by majority of such qualified voters, or in case
there are no such qualified voters said affidavit shall be to the effect that
there are no such qualified voters in said territory and that the persons
signing said petition own a majority of the land in area in said territory; and
thereupon the City Council at regular session held not sooner than twenty days
after the presentation of said petition may by ordinance annex such territory
to Harker Heights, and thenceforth the said territory shall be a part of Harker
Heights, and the inhabitants thereof, shall be entitled to all the rights and
privileges of other citizens and shall be bound by the acts, ordinances,
resolutions and regulations of said City.
SECTION 2.05  EXTENSION OF CITY LIMITS BY THE CITY COUNCIL.
   The City Council shall have power by ordinance to fix the boundary limits of
Harker Heights; and to provide for the extension of said boundary limits and
the annexation of additional territory lying adjacent to said City, or
relinquishment of any territory within the City, with or without the consent of
the territory and inhabitants annexed or relinquished. Upon the introduction of
such an ordinance in the City Council, it shall be published one time in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City of Harker Heights, and shall not
thereafter be finally acted upon until at least thirty days have elapsed after
such publication thereof. Any citizen of Harker Heights, or of the territory to
be annexed, or relinquished, shall have the right to contest said annexation or
relinquishment by filing with the City Council a written petition setting out
their reasons for said contest and after citizen or citizens shall have been
given an opportunity to be heard, said ordinance, in original or amended form,
as said City Council in its judgment may determine, may be finally passed, and
the territory so annexed shall be a part of Harker Heights and the inhabitants
thereof shall be entitled to all rights and privileges of other citizens and
shall be bound by the acts, ordinances, resolutions and regulations of said
city, and the inhabitants of the territory so relinquished shall forfeit said
rights and privileges.
SECTION 2.06  EXCHANGE OF TERRITORY.
   The City may provide for the exchange of territory when deemed desirable
with other cities and towns in accordance with State law.
SECTION 2.07  WARDS.
   The City Council shall have the power by ordinance to create wards or change
the boundaries of wards so created, designating and describing same by metes
and bounds or other adequate means, provided that at no time shall there be
more than four wards and when created, each ward shall have as nearly as
possible the same number of residents residing therein. The City Council shall
change such wards every ten (10) years or the City Council, at it's discretion,
may change such wards within said ten (10) year period. Said ten (10) year
period shall begin with the effective date of the ordinance establishing said
wards and subsequent ten (10) year periods shall begin with each change of ward
boundaries. The City Council may, at its discretion, appoint a commission of
citizens of the City to review the ward boundaries in order to maintain a
substantial equality of residents in each district.
SECTION 2.08  EMINENT DOMAIN.
   The City shall have the full right, power and authority to exercise the
power of eminent domain when necessary or desirable to carry out any of the
powers conferred upon it by this Charter, or by the Constitution or laws of the
State of Texas. In all cases where the City seeks to exercise the power of
eminent domain, it may be controlled, as nearly as practicable, by the laws
governing the condemnation of property of railroad corporations in this State,
the City taking the position of the railroad corporation in any such case. The
City may also exercise the power of eminent domain in any other manner now or
hereafter authorized or permitted by the Constitution and laws of this State,
or in the manner and form that may be provided by ordinance of the governing
body of the City. The power of eminent domain hereby conferred shall include
the right of the City to take the fee in the lands so condemned and such power
and authority shall include shall have and possess this power of condemnation
of property within or without the corporate limits for any municipal or public
purpose, even though not specifically enumerated herein or in this charter.
SECTION 2.09  ESTABLISHMENT AND CONTROL OF STREETS.
   The City of Harker Heights, shall have the power to lay out, establish,
open, alter, widen, lower, extend, grade, abandon, discontinue, abolish, close,
care for, pave, supervise, maintain and improve streets, alleys, sidewalks,
parks, squares, public places and bridges; and regulate the use thereof and
require the removal from streets, sidewalks, alleys and other public property
or places of all obstructions and all fruit stands, show cases and
encroachments of every nature or character upon any of said streets and
sidewalks.
SECTION 2.10  STREET IMPROVEMENTS.
   The City of Harker Heights shall have exclusive dominion, control and
jurisdiction in, upon, and over and under the public streets, avenues, alleys
and highways of the City, and may provide for the improvement thereof by
paving, repaving, raising, draining, or otherwise. The provisions of Chapter
106, Fortieth Legislative, First Called Session, Acts 1927, being article
1105b, Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes of Texas, together with existing
amendments and all such amendments as hereafter may be made, and acts
supplementary thereto, now or thereafter enacted, are expressly adopted and
made a part of this charter. Such exclusive dominion, control and jurisdiction
in, upon, over and under the public streets, avenues, alleys and highways of
the City shall also include, but not be limited to, the right to regulate,
locate, relocate, remove, or prohibit the location of, all utility pipes,
lines, wires, or other property.
SECTION 2.11  GARBAGE DISPOSAL.
   The City Council shall have the right by ordinance to adopt and prescribe
rules and regulations for the handling and disposition of all garbage, trash,
refuse and rubbish within the City of Harker Heights, and shall further have
the right to fix charges and compensation to be charged by the City for the
removal of garbage, trash, refuse and rubbish, providing rules and regulations
for the collection thereof.
SECTION 2.12  MUNICIPAL COURT.
   There shall be a court for the trial of misdemeanor offenses known as the
Municipal Court of the City of Harker Heights, with such powers and duties as
are given and prescribed by the laws of the State of Texas.
SECTION 2.13  SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM.
   The City of Harker Heights shall have the power to provide for a sanitary
sewer system and to require property owners to connect their premises with such
sewer system; to provide for fixing penalties for failure to make sanitary
sewer connections; and shall further have the right to fix charges and
compensation to be charged by the City for sewerage services, providing rules
and regulation for the collection thereof. In the event any property owner
fails or refuses to connect his/her property with the sanitary sewer system in
accord with the requirements of the City, then the City may itself connect such
premises to the sewer system and the cost thereof shall be assessed and levied
against the property so connected and the City of Harker Heights shall have a
lien against such property for such cost plus interest and such lien shall be
paramount and prior to any and all other liens against such property except
State, County, City and School taxes and any prior assessment made against such
property by the City of Harker Heights.
SECTION 2.14  POLICE FORCE.
   The City of Harker Heights shall have power to maintain a City police force,
prescribe the duties, powers and compensation of policemen and regulate their
conduct; to appoint watchmen and prescribe their duties, powers and
compensation; to suppress and prevent any riot, affray, disturbance or
disorderly assembly within the city; to prevent, prohibit and suppress
immoderate riding and driving in the streets; to police all parks, grounds,
speedways, boulevards, cemeteries and all other property or places owned by the
City and lying either within or without the City limits and used for municipal
purposes.
SECTION 2.15  NUISANCES.
   The City of Harker Heights shall have the power to define and regulate any
nuisance which may be created or occur within five thousand feet of the City
limits of the City of Harker Heights.
SECTION 2.16  OCCUPATION AND LICENSE TAXES.
   The City of Harker Heights shall have power to levy and collect occupation
and license taxes, subject only to constitutional or legal limitations; and to
direct the manner of issuing and registering licenses and the fees and charges
to be paid therefor.
SECTION 2.17  REMOVAL OF DANGEROUS STRUCTURES.
   The City of Harker Heights shall have power to condemn and cause to be torn
down and removed, any building, fence, shed, awning, sign or any erection of
any kind whatsoever, or any part thereof which in the judgment of said City is
liable to fall, or from any other cause to endanger the safety of persons or
property, and may order the owner or his/her agent or other persons using the
same to take down or remove it, or any part thereof, within such time as said
City may direct, and to pass such ordinances as may be necessary and to punish
by fine any neglect, failure, or refusal to comply therewith.
ARTICLE III THE CITY COUNCIL
SECTION 3.01  NUMBER, SELECTION, TERM.
   The City Council of the City of Harker Heights shall be composed of a Mayor
and five City Councilmembers who shall be elected at large from the City for a
term of three years. Such council shall be elected in the following manner
subject to the adoption of this charter:
   Every year, in the second quarter, on a date prescribed by State law, either
a Mayor and one councilmember, or two councilmembers as the case may be, will
be elected by a majority vote to serve for a period of three years.
   No person shall serve for more than two consecutive three year terms in any
one office, after the adoption of the charter.
SECTION 3.02  ELECTION BY PLACE.
   Each councilmember will be assigned a place number upon election and persons
desiring to file for election will indicate the place to which they wish to be
elected.
SECTION 3.03  QUALIFICATIONS.
   The Mayor and each of the councilmembers, and any other elective officers,
shall be a citizen of the United States of America and a qualified voter of the
State of Texas; shall reside within the corporate limits of the City of Harker
Heights; and shall not be in arrears in the payment of any taxes or any other
liability due the City or be disqualified by reason of provisions of any other
section of this charter. A member of the council ceasing to possess any of the
qualifications specified in this section, or any other section of this charter,
or convicted of a felony while in office shall immediately forfeit his office.
SECTION 3.04  COMPENSATION OF MEMBER.
   The salary of the Mayor and the City Councilmembers shall be fixed by the
City Council.
SECTION 3.04.01  CHANGE TO WARD SYSTEM.
   Should the City Council elect to establish wards as prescribed by Section
2.07, it shall do so in the following manner:
   A.   Should the City Council deem it appropriate, it may expand the council
by ordinance to a maximum of seven members in addition to the Mayor, four of
which shall be elected from each of the four wards and the remaining shall be
elected at large. The places of the several councilmembers shall be designated
as Places No. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, etc. Councilmembers in Places 1, 2, 3, and 4,
shall reside in their correspondingly numbered wards and remain in that ward
for the period of time that they serve in that place. Councilmembers in any
other places may reside in any ward. All Councilmembers and the Mayor shall be
elected by all of the qualified voters of the City.
   B.   After passage of the appropriate ordinance, an election shall be held
on the election date next following the passage of said ordinances on the date
prescribed by State law. The council may elect to stagger terms by drawing lots
for two places to serve one (1) year terms, two places to serve two (2) year
terms, and the balance to serve three (3) year terms for the initial period,
with all places being elected for three (3) year terms in elections subsequent
to the initial election following passage of the above ordinances.
SECTION 3.05  PRESIDING OFFICER: MAYOR.
   The Mayor shall preside at the meetings of the City Council and shall be
recognized head of the City of Harker Heights government for all ceremonial
purposes, and by the governor for purposes of military law, but he/she shall
have no regular administrative duties. The Mayor shall only be entitled to vote
upon matters considered by the council in the event there is a tie vote. The
Mayor shall have the power of veto of any ordinance passed by the council
provided the Mayor sends such ordinance unsigned to the council together with
reasons for nonapproval within seven days of its passage by the council. The
council may pass the ordinance by an affirmative vote of ¾ of the elected
councilmembers in this case and it will become law notwithstanding the veto. In
the event of a failure to sign an ordinance within seven days without returning
it to the council with a message stating reasons for not signing, the ordinance
will automatically become law without the Mayor's signature.
   At the first meeting following the election, next following each regular
municipal election, the council shall elect a Mayor Pro-Tem from their number
to serve a one year term who shall act as Mayor during the absence or
disability of the Mayor, and if a vacancy should occur, shall become Mayor
until the next regular election of a Mayor.
SECTION 3.06  VACANCIES.
   A vacancy in the City Council, except the office of Mayor, shall be filled
by calling a special election to be held in accordance with the applicable laws
of the State of Texas; provided, however, if such vacancy occurs within ninety
days of a general election, then no special election shall be called. If the
Mayor Pro-Tem succeeds to the office of Mayor under the provisions of Section
3.05 of this Article III, then his/her office of councilmember shall be
considered vacant within the meaning of this Section.
SECTION 3.07  POWERS.
   All powers of the City of Harker Heights and the determination of all
matters of policy shall be vested in the City Council. Except where in conflict
with and otherwise expressly provided by this charter the City Council shall
have all powers authorized to be exercised by the City Council by Chapter 4 of
Title 28 Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes, and acts amendatory thereof and
supplementary thereto, now or hereafter enacted. Without limitation of the
foregoing and among the other powers that may be exercised by the council, the
following are hereby enumerated for greater certainty:
   1.   Employ and remove City Manager.
   2.   Establish administrative departments and distribute the work of
divisions.
   3.   Adopt the budget of the City.
   4.   Authorize the issuance of bonds.
   5.   Inquire into the conduct of any office, department or agency of the
City and make investigations as to municipal affairs.
   6.   Appoint all boards and commissions including provision for a planning
commission, a zoning commission and a zoning board of adjustment, and appoint
the members of all such commissions and boards, and as well the members of the
hospital board, if a hospital is established. The planning and zoning
commissions may be combined. Such boards and commissions shall have all powers
and duties now or hereafter conferred and created by this charter, by City
ordinance or by law.
   7.   Adopt plats.
   8.   Adopt and modify the official map of the City.
   9.   Adopt, modify, and carry out plans proposed by the planning commission
for the clearance of slum districts and rehabilitation of blighted areas.
   10.   Adopt, modify and carry out plans proposed by the planning commission
for the replanning, improvement and redevelopment of neighborhoods and for the
replanning, reconstruction or redevelopment of any area or district which may
have been destroyed in whole or in part by disaster.
   11.   Regulate, license and fix the charges or fares made by any person
owning, operating or controlling any vehicle of any character used for the
carrying of passengers for hire or the transportation of freight for hire on
the public streets and alleys of the City.
   12.   Provide for the establishment and designation of fire limits and to
prescribe the kind and character of buildings or structures or improvements to
be erected therein, and to provide for the erection of fireproof buildings
within certain limits, and to provide for the condemnation of dangerous
structures or buildings or dilapidated buildings or buildings calculated to
increase the fire hazard, and the manner of their removal or destruction.
SECTION 3.08 EMPLOYMENT AND REMOVAL OF CITY MANAGER.
   The council shall employ a City Manager who shall have the powers and
perform the duties in this charter provided. Neither the Mayor nor any
councilmember shall receive such employment during the term for which they
shall have been elected, nor within one year after the expiration of his/her
term.
   The salary of the City Manager shall be fixed by the City Council, and he/
she shall hold office at its will; but if removed at any time after six months
from his/her appointment, he/she may demand written charges and a public
hearing thereon before the City Council prior to the date on which his/her
final removal shall take effect, but during such hearing the council may
suspend him from office. The action of the council in suspending or removing
the City Manager shall be final, it being the intention of this charter to vest
all authority and fix all responsibility for such suspension or removal in the
City Council. During the absence or disability of the City Manager, the council
shall designate some properly qualified person to perform the duties of the
office; except in case of his/her temporary absence or disability.
SECTION 3.09  CITY JUDGE.
   There shall be a magistrate of the Municipal Court known as the City Judge
who shall be appointed by the City Council to serve for a term of two years.
The City Council may appoint an alternate judge or judges when desirable. They
may be removed by the City Council at any time for incompetency, misconduct,
malfeasance, or disability. They shall receive such salary as may be fixed by
the council from time to time. All costs and fines imposed by the Municipal
Court, or by any court in cases appealed from judgments of the Municipal Court,
shall be paid into the City treasury for the use and benefit of the city.
SECTION 3.10  CITY ATTORNEY.
   The City Council shall appoint a competent and duly licensed attorney who
shall be its City Attorney. He/she shall receive for his/her services such
compensation as may be fixed by the council and shall hold his/her office at
the will of the City Council and until his/her successor is appointed.
   The City Attorney shall represent the City in all litigation. He/she shall
be the legal advisor of and attorney and counsel for the City and all officers
and departments thereof.
SECTION 3.11  INDUCTION INTO OFFICE MEETINGS.
   At the first meeting following each regular municipal election held under
this charter, or any special election for the purpose of filling vacancies in
the council, the council shall meet at the usual place for holding meetings,
and the newly elected members shall qualify and assume the duties of office.
There-after, the council shall meet regularly at such times as may be
prescribed by its rules but not less frequently than once each month. All
regular meetings of the council, except as permitted by State law to be closed,
shall be open to the public; special meetings shall be called upon request of
the Mayor, City Manager, or a majority of the members of the council.
SECTION 3.12  COUNCIL TO BE JUDGE OF QUALIFICATIONS OF ITS MEMBERS.
   The council shall be the judge of the election and qualifications of its
members and for such purpose shall have power to subpoena witnesses and require
the production of records, but the decision of the council in any such case
shall be subject to review by the courts.
SECTION 3.13  ORDINANCES.
   In addition to such acts of the council as are required by statute or by
this charter to be by ordinance, every act of the council establishing a fine
or other penalty or for the contracting of indebtedness shall be by ordinance.
The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be “BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY
COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF HARKER HEIGHTS.”
SECTION 3.14  PROCEDURE FOR PASSAGE OF ORDINANCE.
   Every ordinance shall be introduced in written or printed form and, upon
passage, shall take effect at the time indicated therein; provided that any
ordinance imposing a penalty, fine or forfeiture for a violation of its
provisions shall become effective not less than ten days from the date of its
passage; subject to the provisions of Article VII of this charter. The City
Clerk shall give notice of the passage of every ordinance imposing a penalty,
fine or forfeiture for a violation of the provisions thereof, by causing the
caption or title of any such ordinance to be published in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City of Harker Heights within ten days after the
passage of said ordinance. It shall be noted on every ordinance, the caption of
which is hereby required to be published, and on the record thereof, the fact
that same has been published as required by the charter, and the date of such
publication, which shall be prima facie evidence of the legal publication and
promulgation of such ordinance; provided that the provisions of this
correction, amendment, revision and codification of the ordinances of the city
for publication in book or pamphlet form. It shall not be necessary to the
validity of any ordinance that it shall be read more than one time or
considered at more than one session of the City Council. Every ordinance shall
be authenticated by the signature of the Mayor and City Manager or clerk. It
shall only be necessary to record the caption or title of ordinances in the
minutes or journal of council meetings. The City Council shall have power to
cause the ordinances of the City to be corrected, amended, revised, codified
and printed in code form as often as the council deems advisable, and such
printed code, when adopted by the council, shall be in full force and effect
without the necessity of publishing the same or any part thereof in a
newspaper. Such printed code shall be admitted in evidence in all courts and
places without further proof.
SECTION 3.15  INVESTIGATION BY COUNCIL.
   The council shall have power to inquire into the conduct of any office,
department, agency, or officer of the City and to make investigations as to
municipal affairs, and for that purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer
oaths, and compel the production of books, papers and other evidence. Failure
to obey such subpoena or to produce books, papers or other evidence as ordered
under the provisions of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall
be punishable by fine not to exceed one hundred dollars.
SECTION 3.16  INDEPENDENT ANNUAL AUDIT.
   Annually the council shall designate qualified public accountants who, as of
the end of the fiscal year, shall make an independent audit of accounts and
other evidences of financial transactions of the City government and shall
submit their report to the council. Notice shall be given by publication in
some newspaper of general circulation in the City of Harker Heights that the
annual audit is on file at the City Hall for inspection. Such accountant shall
have no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the
City government. They shall not maintain any accounts or record of the City
business, but, within specifications approved by the council, shall post audit
the books and documents kept by the Department of Finance and any separate or
subordinate accounts kept by any other office, department or agency of the City
government.
ARTICLE IV  THE CITY MANAGER
SECTION 4.01  QUALIFICATIONS.
   The City Manager shall be chosen by the council solely on the basis of his/
her executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to his/
her actual experience in, or his/her knowledge of, accepted practice in respect
to the duties of his/her office as hereinafter set forth. At the time of his/
her employment, he/she need not be a resident of the City or State, but during
his/her tenure of office he/she shall reside within the City unless
specifically excused from doing so by the council.
SECTION 4.02  POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The City Manager shall be the chief executive office and the head of the
administrative branch of the City government. He/she shall be responsible to
the council for the proper administration of all affairs of the City and to
that end he/she shall have power and shall be required to:
   1.   Employ and, when necessary for the good of the service, remove all
officers and employees of the City except as otherwise provided by this Charter
and except as he/she may authorize the head of a department to appoint and
remove subordinates in such department.
   2.   Prepare the budget annually and submit it to the council and be
responsible for its administration after adoption.
   3.   Prepare and submit to the council at the end of the fiscal year a
complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the City for
the preceding year.
   4.   Keep the council advised of the financial condition and future needs of
the City and make such recommendations as may seem to him/her desirable.
   5.   Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this charter or
required of him/her by the council, not inconsistent with this charter.
SECTION 4.03  ABSENCE OF CITY MANAGER.
   To perform his/her duties during his/her temporary absence or disability,
the manager may designate by letter filed with the City Clerk a qualified
administrative officer of the City.
ARTICLE V THE BUDGET
SECTION 5.01  FISCAL YEAR.
   The fiscal year of the City of Harker Heights shall begin the 1st day of
October and shall end on the last day of September of each calendar year. Such
fiscal year shall also constitute the budget and accounting year.
SECTION 5.02  ANTICIPATED REVENUES COMPARED WITH OTHER YEARS IN BUDGET.
   In preparing the budget, the City Manager shall in the preparation of the
budget place in parallel columns opposite the several items of revenue the
actual amount of each item for the last completed fiscal year, the estimated
amount for the current fiscal year, and the proposed amount for the ensuing
fiscal year.
SECTION 5.03  PROPOSED EXPENDITURES COMPARED WITH OTHER YEARS.
   The City Manager in the preparation of the budget shall in parallel columns
opposite the various items of expenditures place the actual amount of such
items of expenditures for the last completed fiscal year, the estimated amount
for the current fiscal year and the proposed amount for the ensuing fiscal
year.
SECTION 5.04  BUDGET A PUBLIC RECORD.
   The budget and all supporting schedules shall be filed with the City Clerk
when submitted to the council and shall be a public record for inspection by
anyone. The City Manager shall cause copies to be made for distribution to all
interested persons.
SECTION 5.05  NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING ON BUDGET.
   At the meeting of the council at which the budget is submitted, the council
shall fix the time and place of a public hearing on the budget and shall cause
to be published a notice of the hearing setting forth the time and place
thereof at least five days before the date of hearing.
SECTION 5.06  PUBLIC HEARING ON BUDGET.
   At the time and place set forth in the notice required or at any time and
place to which such public hearing shall from time to time be adjourned, the
council shall hold a public hearing on the budget and all interested persons
shall be given an opportunity to be heard for or against any item or the amount
of any item therein contained.
SECTION 5.07  VOTE REQUIRED FOR ADOPTION.
   The budget shall be adopted by the favorable vote of a majority of the
members of the whole council.
SECTION 5.08  DATE OF FINAL ADOPTION: FAILURE TO ADOPT.
   The budget shall be finally adopted not later than the twenty-seventh day of
the last month of the fiscal year. Should the council take no final action on
or prior to such day, the budget as submitted by the City Manager shall be
deemed to have been finally adopted by the council.
SECTION 5.09  EFFECTIVE DATE OF BUDGET: CERTIFICATION: COPIES MADE AVAILABLE.
   Upon final adoption, the budget shall be in effect for the fiscal year. A
copy of the budget, as finally adopted, shall be filed with the City Clerk, the
County Clerk of Bell County, and the State Comptroller of Public Accounts at
Austin. The final budget shall be printed, mimeographed or otherwise reproduced
and a reasonable number of copies shall be made available for the use of all
offices, departments and agencies, and for the use of interested persons and
civic organizations.
SECTION 5.10  BUDGET ESTABLISHES APPROPRIATIONS.
   From the effective date of the budget, the several amounts stated therein as
proposed expenditures shall be and become appropriated to the several objects
and purposes therein named.
SECTION 5.11  BUDGET ESTABLISHES AMOUNT TO BE RAISED BY PROPERTY TAX.
   From the effective date of the budget, the amount stated therein as the
amount to be raised by property tax shall constitute a determination of the
amount of the levy for the purposes of the City, in the corresponding tax year.
ARTICLE VI TAXATION
SECTION 6.01  POWER TO TAX.
   The City Council shall have the power under the provisions of State law to
levy, assess and collect an annual tax upon taxable property within the City to
the maximum provided by the Constitution and general laws of the State of
Texas.
SECTION 6.02  TAX LIENS.
   The tax levied by the City is hereby declared to be a lien, charge, or
encumbrance upon the property upon which the tax is due, which lien, charge, or
encumbrance the City is entitled to enforce and foreclose in any court having
jurisdiction over the same, and the lien, charge and encumbrance on the
property in favor of the City, for the amount of the taxes due on such property
is such as to give the state courts jurisdiction to enforce and foreclose said
lien on the property on which the tax is due, not only as against any resident
of this state or person whose residence is unknown, but also as against non-
residents. All taxes upon real estate shall especially be a lien and a charge
upon the property upon which the taxes are due, which lien may be foreclosed in
any court having jurisdiction. The City's tax lien shall exist from January 1st
in each year until the taxes are paid. Such lien shall be prior to all other
claims, and no gift, sale, assignment or transfer of any kind, or judicial writ
of any kind, can defeat such lien.
   All persons or corporations owning or holding personal property or real
estate in the City of Harker Heights on the first day of January of each year
shall be liable for all municipal taxes levied thereon for such year.
   The personal property of all persons owing any taxes to the City of Harker
Heights is hereby made liable for all said taxes, whether the same be due upon
personal or real property, or upon both.
ARTICLE VII NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS
SECTION 7.01  MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS.
   The regular election for the choice of members of the council, as provided
in Section 3.01 of Article III of this charter, and all City elections shall be
governed, except as otherwise provided by this charter, by the laws of the
State of Texas governing general and municipal elections. The council may by
resolution order a special election, fix the time for holding same, and provide
all means for holding such special election. In event there should be any
failure of the general laws or this Charter to provide for some feature of the
City elections, then the City Council shall have the power to provide for such
deficiency. No informalities in conducting a City election shall invalidate the
same, if it be conducted fairly and in substantial compliance with the general
laws, where applicable, and the charter and ordinances of the City.
SECTION 7.02  REGULATION OF ELECTIONS.
   The council shall make all regulations which it considers needful or
desirable, not inconsistent with this charter or the laws of the State of
Texas, for the conduct of municipal elections, for the prevention of fraud in
such elections and for the recount of ballots in case of doubt or fraud.
Municipal elections shall be conducted by the appointed election authorities,
who shall also have power to make such regulations not inconsistent with this
charter, with any regulations made by the council or the laws of the State of
Texas.
SECTION 7.03  HOW TO GET NAME ON BALLOT.
   Any qualified person may have his or her name placed on the official ballot
as a candidate for Mayor or councilmember at any election held for the purpose
of electing a Mayor or councilmember by filing with the Mayor or City Clerk at
least thirty (30) days prior to the date of election a sworn application in
substantially the following form:
   “I                       , do hereby declare that I am a candidate for the
office of (designate office and place if appropriate) and request that my name
be printed upon the official ballot for that particular office in the next City
election.  I am      years of age, a qualified voter of the State of Texas, and
a bona fide resident of the City of Harker Heights. I am not in arrears in the
payment of any taxes or other liability due the City; nor am I otherwise
disqualified or ineligible to serve on the City Council if elected. I reside at
                                                , Harker Heights, Texas.”
   (Signature of Candidate)
SECTION 7.04  COUNCIL BALLOTS.
   The full names of all candidates for the council as herein before provided,
except such as may have withdrawn, died, or become ineligible, shall be printed
on the official ballots without party designations. If two candidates with the
same surnames or with names so similar as to be likely to cause confusion are
nominated, the addresses of their places of residence shall be placed with
their names on the ballot. The order of the names on the ballot shall be
determined by lot. The official ballots shall be printed not less than twenty
(20) days before the date of the elections.
SECTION 7.05  ELECTION BY MAJORITY.
   The candidate for councilmember receiving a majority of all votes cast as
provided in the charter hereof, for the position of councilmember under the
place number which that person's name appears shall be declared the duly
elected councilmember to hold said position. If no candidate for a place shall
receive a majority of all votes cast in an election, a runoff election shall be
called for that place.
SECTION 7.06  RUNOFF ELECTIONS.
   (a)   Candidates.  If no candidate for a place on the City Council receives
a majority of votes cast for that place, the Mayor of the City shall, according
to State law, issue a call for a second election to be held on the day as
authorized by State law. The two candidates receiving the highest number of
votes for a given place shall gain a place on the runoff election. Tie
candidates in the general election shall be treated as specified by State law.
   (b)   Ballot.  The official ballot to be used at the runoff election shall
be prepared by the City Secretary. The order on the ballot shall be determined
by a drawing
   (c)   Withdrawal.  If either candidate in a run-off shall withdraw, that
candidate shall make a request to the City Secretary as specified by State law.
If a runoff candidate withdraws, the remaining candidate is considered to be
elected and the runoff election for that place is not held.
SECTION 7.07  TIE ELECTION.
   In the event of a tie in the vote for the two leading candidates for a place
on the City Council at the first election, a runoff election shall be held as
provided for in the charter. If a tie occurs between the two candidates for a
place on the City Council in the runoff election, they shall cast lots to
determine who shall be elected to office.
ARTICLE VIII INITIATIVE,
REFERENDUM AND RECALL
SECTION 8.01  POWER OF INITIATIVE.
   The electors shall have power to propose any ordinance except an ordinance
appropriating money or authorizing the levy of taxes, and to adopt or reject
the same at its polls, such power being known as the initiative. Any initiative
ordinance may be submitted to the council by a petition signed by qualified
electors of the City equal in number to at least twenty-five percent of the
number of votes cast at the last regular municipal election.
SECTION 8.02  POWER OF REFERENDUM.
   The electors shall have power to approve or reject at the polls any
ordinance passed by the council, or submitted by the council to a vote of the
electors, such power being known as the referendum, except in cases of bond
ordinances and ordinances making the annual tax levy or annexing or de-annexing
additional territory. Ordinances submitted to the council by initiative
petition and passed by the council without change shall be subject to the
referendum in the same manner as other ordinances. Within twenty calendar days
after the enactment by the council of any ordinance which is subject to a
referendum, a petition signed by qualified electors of the City equal in number
to at least twenty-five percent of the number of votes cast at the last
preceding regular municipal election may be filed with the City Clerk
requesting that any such ordinance be either repealed or submitted to a vote of
the electors.
SECTION 8.03 FORM OF PETITIONS; COMMITTEE OF PETITIONERS.
   Initiative petition papers shall contain the full text of the proposed
ordinance. The signatures to initiative or referendum petitions need not all be
appended to one paper, but to each separate petition there shall be attached a
statement of the circulator thereof as provided by this section. Each signer of
any petition paper shall sign his/her name in ink or indelible pencil and shall
indicate after his/her name his/her place of residence by street and number, or
other description sufficient to identify the place. There shall appear on each
petition the names and addresses of five electors, who, as a committee of the
petitioners, shall be regarded as responsible for the circulation and filing of
the petition. Attached to each separate petition paper there shall be an
affidavit of the circulator thereof that he/she and he/she only, personally
circulated the foregoing paper, that it bears a stated number of signatures,
that all signatures appended thereto were made in his/her presence, and that
he/she believes them to be the genuine signatures of the persons whose names
they purport to be.
SECTION 8.04  FILING, EXAMINATION, AND CERTIFICATION OF PETITIONS.
   All petition papers comprising an initiative or referendum petition shall be
assembled and filed with the City Clerk as one instrument. Within ten days
after the petition is filed, the City Clerk shall determine whether each paper
of the petition has a proper statement of the circulator and whether the
petition is signed by a sufficient number of qualified electors. The City Clerk
shall declare any petition paper entirely invalid which does not have attached
thereto an affidavit signed by the circulator thereof. If a petition paper is
found to be signed by more persons than the number of signatures certified by
the circulator, the last signatures in excess of the number certified shall be
disregarded. If a petition paper is found to be signed by fewer persons than
the number certified, the signatures shall be accepted unless void on other
grounds. After completing his/her examination of the petition, the City Clerk
shall certify the result thereof to the council at its regular meeting. If he/
she shall certify that the petition is insufficient he/she shall set forth in
his/her certificate the particulars in which it is defective and shall at once
notify the committee of the petitioners of his/her findings.
SECTION 8.05  AMENDMENT OF PETITIONS.
   An initiative or referendum petition may be amended at any time within ten
days after the notification of insufficiency has been sent by the City Clerk,
by filing a supplementary petition upon additional papers and filed as provided
in case of an original petition. The City Clerk shall, within five days after
such an amendment is filed, make examination of the amended petition and, if
the petition be still insufficient, he/she shall file his/her certificate to
that effect in his/her office and notify the committee of petitioners of his/
her findings and no further action shall be had on such insufficient petition.
The finding of the insufficiency of a petition shall not prejudice the filing
of a new petition for the same purpose.
SECTION 8.06  EFFECT OF CERTIFICATION OF REFERENDUM PETITION.
   When a referendum petition or amended petition as defined in Section 8.05 of
this article, has been certified as sufficient by the City Clerk, the ordinance
specified in the petition shall not go into effect, or further action
thereunder shall be suspended if it shall have gone into effect, until and
unless approved by the electors, as hereinafter provided.
SECTION 8.07  CONSIDERATION BY COUNCIL.
   Whenever the council receives a certified initiative or referendum petition
from the City Clerk, it shall proceed at once to consider such petition. A
proposed initiative ordinance shall be read and provision shall be made for a
public hearing upon the proposed ordinance. The council shall take final action
on the ordinance not later than sixty days after the date on which such
ordinance was submitted to the council by the City Clerk. A referred ordinance
shall be reconsidered by the council and its final vote upon such
reconsideration shall be upon the question, “Shall the ordinance specified in
the referendum petition be repealed?”
SECTION 8.08  SUBMISSION TO ELECTORS.
   If the council shall fail to pass an ordinance proposed by the initiative
petition, or shall pass it in a form different than set forth in the petition
thereof, or if the council fails to repeal a referred ordinance, the proposed
or referred ordinance shall be submitted to the electors not less than thirty
days nor more than sixty days from the date the council takes its final vote
thereon. The council may, in its discretion, and if no regular election is to
be held within such period shall, provide for a special election if provided by
state law.
SECTION 8.09  FORM OF BALLOT FOR INITIATED AND REFERRED ORDINANCES.
   Ordinances submitted to vote of the electors in accordance with the
initiative and referendum provisions of this charter shall be submitted by
ballot title. The ballot title may be different from the legal title of any
such initiated or referred ordinance and shall be a clear, concise statement,
without argument or prejudice, descriptive of the substance of such ordinance,
if a paper ballot, shall have below the ballot title the following
propositions, one above the other in the order indicated: “"FOR THE ORDINANCE”
and “AGAINST THE ORDINANCE.” Any number of ordinances may be voted on at the
same election and may be submitted on the same ballot, but any paper ballot
used for voting thereon, shall be for that purpose only. If voting machines are
used, the ballot title of any ordinance shall have below it the same two
propositions, one above the other or one preceding the other in the order
indicated, and the elector shall be given an opportunity to vote for either of
the two propositions and thereby to vote for or against the ordinance.
SECTION 8.10  RESULTS OF ELECTION.
   If a majority of the electors voting on a proposed initiative ordinance
shall vote in favor thereof, it shall thereupon be an ordinance of the City. A
referred ordinance which is not approved by a majority of the electors voting
thereon shall thereupon be deemed repealed. If conflicting ordinances are
approved by the electors at the same election, the one receiving the greatest
number of affirmative votes shall prevail to the text of such conflict.
SECTION 8.11  REPEALING ORDINANCES; PUBLICATION.
   Initiative and referendum ordinances adopted or approved by the electors
shall be published, and may be amended or repealed by the council, as in the
case of other ordinances.
SECTION 8.12  RECALL: GENERAL.
   Any member of the City Council, including the Mayor, may be removed from
office by recall.
SECTION 8.13  RECALL PROCEDURE.
   Any elector of the City of Harker Heights may make and file with the City
Clerk an affidavit containing the name or names of the officer or officers
whose removal is sought and a statement of the grounds for removal. The clerk
shall thereupon deliver to the elector making such affidavit copies of petition
blanks on hand for distribution. Such blanks when issued by the City Clerk
shall bear the signature of that office and be addressed to the City Council,
and shall be numbered, dated, and indicate the name of the person to whom
issued. The petition blanks when issued shall also indicate the number of such
blanks issued and the name of the person to whom issued. The petition blanks
when issued shall also indicate the number of such blanks issued and the name
of the officer whose removal is sought. The City Clerk shall enter a record to
be kept in his/her office the name of the elector to whom the petition blanks
were issued and the number issued to said person.
SECTION 8.14  RECALL PETITIONS.
   The recall petition to be effective must be returned and filed with the City
Clerk within thirty days after the filing of the affidavit required in Section
8.13 of this article and it must be signed by qualified electors of the City
equal in number to at least fifty-one percent (51 percent) of the total number
of votes cast in the last regular municipal election; provided however, that
the petition shall conform to the provisions of Section 8.03 of this article.
No petition papers shall be accepted as part of petition unless it bears the
signature of the City Clerk as required in Section 8.13 of this article.
SECTION 8.15  RECALL ELECTION.
   The City Clerk shall at once examine the recall petition and if he/she finds
it sufficient and in compliance with the provisions of this article of the
Charter, he/she shall within five (5) days submit it to the City Council with
his/her certificate to that effect and notify the officer sought to be recalled
of such action. If the officer whose removal is sought does not resign within
(5) days after such notice the City Council shall thereupon order and fix a
date for holding a recall election. Any such election shall be held not less
than thirty nor more than sixty days after the petition has been presented to
the City Council at the same time as any municipal election held within such
period; but if no such municipal election is to be held within such period, the
City Council shall call a special election to be held within the time
aforesaid.
SECTION 8.16  BALLOTS IN RECALL ELECTION.
   Ballots used at recall elections shall conform to the following
requirements:
   1.   With respect to each person whose removal is sought the question shall
be submitted “Shall (name of person) be removed from the office of
councilmember by recall?”
   2.   Immediately below each question there shall be printed the two
following propositions, one above the other, in the order indicated: “For the
recall of (name of person)” “Against the recall of (name of person).”
SECTION 8.17  RESULTS OF RECALL ELECTION.
   If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election shall be against the
recall of the officer named on the ballot, he/she shall continue in office for
the remainder of his/her unexpired term, subject to recall as before; if a
majority of the votes cast at such an election be for the recall of the officer
named on the ballot, he/she shall, regardless of any technical defects in the
recall petition, be deemed removed from office and the vacancy shall be filled
by the City Council as in other vacancies.
SECTION 8.18  LIMITATIONS OF RECALLS.
   No recall petition shall be filed against a councilmember within six months
after he/she takes office nor in respect to an officer subjected to a recall
election and not removed thereby, until at least six months after such
election.
SECTION 8.19  DISTRICT JUDGE MAY ORDER ELECTION.
   Should the City Council fail or refuse to order any of the elections as
provided for in this article, when all the requirements for such election have
been complied with by the petitioning electors in conformity with this article
of the charter, then it shall be the duty of any one of the District Judges of
Bell County, Texas, upon proper application being made therefore, to order such
elections and to enforce the carrying into effect of the provisions of this
article of the charter.
ARTICLE IX FRANCHISES
SECTION 9.01  OWNERSHIP, CONTROL AND USE OF REAL AND PUBLIC PROPERTY OF THE
CITY.
   The ownership, right of control and use of the streets, highways, alleys,
parks, public places and all other real property of the City is hereby declared
to be inalienable, except by ordinances not in conflict with the general laws
of the State of Texas, duly enacted by the City Council of the City. No
franchise or easement involving the right to use same, either along, across,
over or under the same, shall ever be valid, unless expressly granted and
exercised in compliance with the terms hereof, and of the ordinances granting
the same. No act or omission of the City, its City Council, officers or agents
shall be construed to confer or extend by estoppel or indirection, any right,
franchise or easement not expressly granted by ordinance.
SECTION 9.02  EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISEE.
   No exclusive franchise or privilege shall ever be granted by the City.
ARTICLE X GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 10.01  PERSONAL FINANCIAL INTEREST.
   Any City officer or employee who has a substantial financial interest,
direct or indirect or by reason of ownership of stock in any corporation, in
any contract with the City or in the sale of any land, material, supplies or
services to the City or to a contractor supplying the City shall make known
that interest and shall refrain from voting upon or otherwise participating in
his capacity as a City officer or employee in the making of such sale or in the
making or performance of such contract. Any City officer or employee who
willfully conceals such substantial financial interest or willfully violates
the requirements of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or
position and shall forfeit his/her office or position. Violation of this
section with the knowledge express or implied of the person or corporation
contracting with or making a sale to the City shall render the contract or sale
voidable by the City Manager or the City Council.
SECTION 10.02  PROHIBITIONS, ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall be appointed to or removed from, or in any way favored or
discriminated against with respect to any City position or appointive City
administrative office because of age, race, sex, political or religious
opinions or affiliations, marital status, or national origin.
   No person shall willfully make any false statement, certificate, mark,
rating or report in regard to any test, certification or appointment under the
personnel provisions of this charter or the rules and regulations made
thereunder, or in any manner commit or attempt to commit any fraud preventing
the impartial execution of such provisions, rules and regulations.
   No person who seeks appointment or promotion with respect to any City
position or appointive City administrative office shall directly or indirectly
give, render or pay any money, service or other valuable thing to any person
for or in connection with his/her test, appointment, proposed appointment,
promotion or proposed promotion.
   No person shall orally, by letter or otherwise solicit or assist in
soliciting any assessment, subscription or contribution for any political party
or political purpose whatever for any person holding any compensated appointive
City position.
   No person who holds any compensated appointive city position shall make,
solicit or receive any contribution to the campaign funds of any political
party or any candidate for public office or take any part in the management,
affairs or political campaign of any political party, but he/she may exercise
his/her rights as a citizen to express his/her opinions and to cast his/her
vote.
SECTION 10.03  CHARTER AMENDMENT.
   a.   Proposal of Amendment. Amendments to this charter may be framed and
proposed:
      1.   In a manner provided by law, or
      2.   By ordinance of the council containing the full text of the proposed
amendment or amendments, or
      3.   By a report of a Charter Commission created by ordinance, or
      4.   By the voters of the City, upon submission of a petition containing
the full text of the proposed amendment or amendments and signed by not less
than 5% of the qualified voters of the City.
   b.   Upon delivery to the City election officials of a proposal meeting the
above requirements, an election shall be held on that proposal.
   c.   Such elections shall be announced on the same day of each of two
successive weeks in one or more newspapers published in Bell County and of
general circulation in the City at least 30 days prior to the date of the
election. This announcement shall include a substantial copy of the proposed
amendment or amendments.
   d.   The election shall be held not less than 60 days nor more than 120 days
after the adoption of the ordinance, approval of the report of the Charter
Commission by the City Council, or the final determination of the sufficiency
of the petition proposing the amendment or amendments.
   e.   If no regular election is to be held during this period, the council
shall call a special election on the proposed amendment or amendments.
Otherwise, the holding of a special election shall be within the discretion of
the council.
   f.   The form of the ballot shall be similar to that specified in Section
8.09.
SECTION 10.04  SEPARABILITY.
   If any provision of this charter is held invalid, the other provisions of
the charter shall not be affected thereby. If the application of the charter or
any of its provisions to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the
application of the charter and its provisions to other persons or circumstances
shall not be affected thereby.
ARTICLE XI TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 11.01  OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   1.   Rights and Privileges Preserved.  Nothing in this charter except as
otherwise specifically provided shall affect or impair the rights or privileges
of persons who are City officers or employees at the time of its Adoption.
   2.   Continuance of Office or Employment.  Except as specifically provided
by this charter, if at the time this charter takes full effect a City
administrative officer or employee holds any office or position which is or can
be abolished by or under this charter, he shall continue in such office or
position until the taking effect of some specific provision under this charter
directing that he/she vacate the office or position.
SECTION 11.02  PENDING MATTERS.
   All rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts and legal or administrative
proceedings shall continue except as modified pursuant to the provisions of
this charter and in each case shall be maintained, carried on or dealt with by
the City department, office or agency appropriate under this charter.
SECTION 11.03  STATE AND MUNICIPAL LAWS.
   In General. All City ordinances, resolutions, orders and regulations which
are in force when this charter becomes fully effective are repealed to the
extent that they are inconsistent or interfere with the effective operation of
this charter or of ordinances or resolutions adopted pursuant thereto. To the
extent that the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas permit, all laws
relating to or affecting this City or its agencies, officers or employees which
are in force when this charter becomes fully effective are superseded only to
the extent the they are inconsistent or interfere with the effective operation
of this charter or of ordinances or resolutions adopted pursuant thereto.
TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
11.   CITY STANDARDS
CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Rules of interpretation
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to other sections
   
10.09   Reference to offices
   
10.10   Errors and omissions
   
10.11   Official time
   
10.12   Reasonable time
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.17   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.18   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.19   Culpable mental state
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification of ordinances by and for the municipality of Harker
Heights shall be designated as the Code of Harker Heights and may be so cited.
§ 10.02  INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation, shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04  CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter, and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05  DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or
ordinary and usual sense.  However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, or MUNICIPALITY.  The City of Harker Heights,
Texas.
   CODE,THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES.  This municipal code as modified
by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or sections.
   COUNTY.  Bell County, Texas.
   MAY.  The act referred to is permissive.
   MONTH.  A calendar month.
   OATH.  An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
   OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT.  An officer, office,
employee, commission, or department of this municipality unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
   PERSON.  Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver.  Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to
any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as
applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
   PRECEDING or FOLLOWING.  Next before or next after, respectively.
   SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.
   SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION.  Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
   STATE.  The State of Texas.
   SUBCHAPTER.  A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the
heading.  Not all chapters have subchapters.
   2004 ANNEXATION AREA.   1,155 acres of land, more or less, located south of
F.M. 2410, and annexed into the city by Ordinance 2004-22.
   WRITTEN.  Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
   YEAR.  A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed; equivalent to the words
YEAR OF OUR LORD.
§ 10.06  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   The construction of all ordinances of this municipality shall be by the
following rules, unless such construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of
the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance:
   (A)    AND or OR.  Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or,” if the sense requires it.
   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, such
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of such act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.07  SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, such
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.09  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this municipality exercising the powers,
duties, or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.10  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be corrected and such word
or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
such error.
§ 10.11  OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws, shall be
the official time within this municipality for the transaction of all municipal
business.
§ 10.12  REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or
notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of such act or the giving of such notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.13  ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.14  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.15  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall
take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided. Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from
their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.16  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.17  ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of such chapter or section.  In addition to such
indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a
caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.18  SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and the most recent three amending ordinances,
if any, are listed following the text of the code section.  Example:  (Ord. 10,
passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord. 15, passed 1-1-70; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-80; Am.
Ord. 25, passed 1-1-85)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute. 
Example: (Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6252-17a) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-80; Am.
Ord. 20, passed 1-1-85).
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information.
Example:
   § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
      This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
   Statutory reference:
      For provisions concerning the inspection of public records, see Tex. Rev.
Civ. Stat., Art. 6252-17a
§ 10.19  CULPABLE MENTAL STATE.
   (A)   In any prosecution filed under a provision of this code or any
ordinance of the city which expressly requires proof that the actor engaged in
conduct intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or with criminal negligence, then
a person does not commit an offense unless he or she is shown to have engaged
in such conduct as the definition of the offense requires.
   (B)   Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city an act or a
failure to act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an
offense or a misdemeanor, and such provision does not expressly require proof
of a culpable mental state, proof of a culpable mental state is not required
for conviction of such offense, it being the intent of the City Council to
dispense with the requirement of any culpable mental state in prosecutions
filed under such provisions of this code and other ordinances of the city;
provided, however, that if such offense is punishable by a fine exceeding the
amount authorized by Tex. Penal Code § 12.23, a person does not commit such
offense unless he is shown to have recklessly engaged in such conduct as the
definition of the offense requires.
   (C)   Proof of a higher degree of culpability than that charged constitutes
proof of the culpability charged.
   (D)   The change in the law made by this section applies only to an offense
committed on or after the effective date of this section. For purposes of this
section, an offense is committed before the effective date of this section if
any element of the offense occurs before the effective date. An offense
committed before the effective date of this section is covered by the law in
effect when the act was committed, and the former law is continued in effect
for that purpose.
(Ord. 2002-25, passed 11-12-02; Am. Ord. 2005-31, passed 9-27-05)
§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city an act is
prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a
misdemeanor, or whenever in this code or ordinance the doing of any act is
required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no
specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of
this code or any such ordinance shall be punished by:
      (1)   A fine not to exceed $2,000 in all cases arising under municipal
ordinances that govern fire safety, zoning, and public health and sanitation
other than vegetation and litter violations;
      (2)   A fine not to exceed $2,000, if a motor vehicle is used in illegal
dumping or an offense under the law or city ordinance violated for illegal
dumping;
      (3)   A fine not to exceed $500 in all other cases, provided, however,
that no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same
or a similar offense under the laws of the state.
   (B)   Each day any violation of this code or any ordinance shall continue
shall constitute a separate offense.
(Am. Ord. 2000-35, passed 10-24-00)
Statutory reference:
   Municipal penalties, see Tex. Loc. Gov't Code § 54.001
CHAPTER 11:  CITY STANDARDS
Section
City Seal
   
11.01   City Secretary as custodian of Seal
CITY SEAL
§ 11.01  CITY SECRETARY AS CUSTODIAN OF SEAL.
   The City Secretary shall be the custodian of the corporate seal, and when it
is affixed to any instrument, shall be evidence of the authenticity of such
instrument.
('60 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 128)
TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   CITY COUNCIL
      
31.   CITY OFFICIALS
      
32.   POLICE DEPARTMENT
      
33.   BOARDS, DEPARTMENTS, AND COMMISSIONS
      
34.   RECORDS MANAGEMENT
      
35.   FINANCE AND TAXATION
      
36.   MUNICIPAL COURT
      
37.   EMPLOYMENT PROVISIONS
      
38.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
      
39.   CITY POLICIES
CHAPTER 30:  CITY COUNCIL
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Communications with City Manager
Proceedings of City Council; Rules and Regulations
   
30.10   Absence of Mayor
   
30.11   Order of business
Cross-reference:
   Further provisions concerning City Council, see
Charter, Article III
   Ordinances and resolutions, see
Charter, § 3.13
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01  COMMUNICATIONS WITH CITY MANAGER.
   (A)   Neither the Council nor any of its members shall dictate or attempt to
dictate the appointment to or removal from office or employment of any employee
appointed or approved for employment by the City Manager, or in any other
manner interfere in the city departments, as this duty is vested in the City
Manager by the City Charter.
   (B)   Except for the purpose of inquiry, the City Council and its members
shall deal with administrative matters for which the City Manager is
responsible solely through such City Manager and neither the Council nor any of
its members thereof shall give orders or directions to any of the subordinates
of the City Manager in the departments, either publicly or in private.
(Ord. 89-10, passed 8-8-89)
Cross-reference:
   Government vested in City Council, see
Charter, § 3.07
   Officers appointed by City Council, see
Charter, Article III
PROCEEDINGS OF CITY COUNCIL; RULES AND REGULATIONS
§ 30.10  ABSENCE OF MAYOR.
   If, at the hour of meeting, both the Mayor and the Mayor Pro Tem, shall be
absent, any one of the Councilmembers may be appointed to preside.
('60 Code, Rule 2)
§ 30.11  ORDER OF BUSINESS.
   The following order of business shall be observed:
   (A)   Call to order;
   (B)   Invocation;
   (C)   Pledge of allegiance;
   (D)   Roll call;
   (E)   Approve minutes of the previous meetings;
   (F)   Mayoral proclamation;
   (G)   Consent items;
   (H)   Presentations by citizens;
   (I)   Public hearings;
   (J)   Old business;
   (K)   New business;
   (L)   Reports of advisory boards and commissions;
   (M)   Items from council;
   (N)   Staff reports;
   (O)   Announcements; and
   (P)   Adjournment.
CHAPTER 31:  CITY OFFICIALS
Section
General Provisions
   
31.01   Interest in contract
   
31.02   Contracting authority of the City Manager
Cross-reference:
   City Manager, see
Charter, Article IV
   City Attorney, see
Charter § 3.10
   Mayor, see
Charter § 3.05
   Mayor Pro Tempore, see
Charter § 3.05
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01  INTEREST IN CONTRACT.
   No member of the City Council or any officer of the city, shall be directly
or indirectly interested in any work, business, or contract, the expense,
price, or consideration of which is paid from the City Treasury, or by
assessment levied by an ordinance or resolution of the City Council; nor shall
be the surety of any person having a contract, work, or business with the city,
for the performance of which security may be required, or become surety on the
official bond of any officer of the city.
('60 Code, Ch. 7, Art. 59)
§ 31.02  CONTRACTING AUTHORITY OF THE CITY MANAGER.
   (A)   The City Manager is granted authority to negotiate, execute, deliver,
amend and terminate contracts, purchase orders, memoranda of understanding,
letter agreements, interlocal agreements, and other such commitments on behalf
of the city, and any documents or instruments related thereto, provided that:
      (1)   Such action is not inconsistent with applicable law or an existing
directive, policy or budget adopted by the City Council;
      (2)   The contract does not involve the conveyance of any tangible
property belonging to the city; and
      (3)   The projected cost to the city thereunder does not exceed $25,000.
   (B)   The City Secretary shall file and maintain the originals of all
contracts signed pursuant to this section, and make them available for
inspection and copying in accordance with the Public Information Act and
applicable records retention requirements.
   (C)   This section shall not be construed to delegate authority for the City
Manager to approve any contract, amendment, or other legal instrument that is
required by law to be approved by the City Council.
(Ord. 2014-24, passed 9-23-14)
CHAPTER 32:  POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section
Police Reserve Force
   
32.01   Creation; positions
   
32.02   Appointment; powers and duties
   
32.03   Duration of service
   
32.04   Resignation
   
32.05   Dismissal
   
32.06   Appeal of dismissal
   
32.07   Subject to rules and regulations of Police Department
   
32.08   Compensation
   
32.09   Uniforms, weapons, and the like
Cross-reference:
   Police force, see
Charter, § 2.14
   Fire Marshal; summoning witnesses, see
§ 91.28
POLICE RESERVE FORCE
§ 32.01  CREATION; POSITIONS.
   (A)   There is hereby created the City Police Reserve Force which shall
operate under the guidance and supervision of the Chief of Police.
   (B)   There are hereby created not to exceed 28 positions for Police Reserve
officers, to be appointed at the discretion of the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 80-05, passed 6-10-80)
§ 32.02  APPOINTMENT; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Police Reserve officers appointed pursuant to §
32.01 of this subchapter shall have all the powers, rights, and authorities
vested in city police officers while they are on duty or when called upon to
perform duties by the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 80-05, passed 6-10-80)
§ 32.03  DURATION OF SERVICE.
   Upon appointment, Police Reserve officers shall serve until their day of
resignation or dismissal.
(Ord. 80-05, passed 6-10-80)
§ 32.04  RESIGNATION.
   Should a Police Reserve officer desire to resign his appointment, he shall
do so by written notice to the Chief of Police at least two weeks in advance of
his effective date of resignation.
(Ord. 80-05, passed 6-10-80)
§ 32.05  DISMISSAL.
   In the event the Chief of Police determines that it would be in the best
interests of the Police Department, he may dismiss any Police Reserve officer
on written notice.
(Ord. 80-05, passed 6-10-80)
§ 32.06  APPEAL OF DISMISSAL.
   Any Police Reserve officer desiring to appeal his dismissal may do so by
giving written notice to the City Manager within ten days after receiving his
notice of dismissal. Upon receipt of a notice of appeal, the City Manager shall
rule on the appeal. His decision shall be final.
(Ord. 80-05, passed 6-10-80; Am. Ord. 83-03, passed 5-10-83)
§ 32.07  SUBJECT TO RULES AND REGULATIONS OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   Police Reserve officers shall be subject to and governed by the rules and
regulations of the Police Department of the city, and the Commission on Law
Enforcement Officer Standards and Education of the State of Texas. No Police
Reserve officer may be appointed by the Chief of Police prior to issuance of a
Qualification Certificate to such individual by the Texas Commission on Law
Enforcement Officer Standards and Education.
(Ord. 80-05, passed 6-10-80)
§ 32.08  COMPENSATION.
   Police Reserve officers shall serve without monetary compensation from the
city.
(Ord. 80-05, passed 6-10-80)
§ 32.09  UNIFORMS, WEAPONS, AND THE LIKE.
   Police Reserve officers will be required to provide their own uniforms,
weapons, and handcuffs, badge, and cap device. Uniforms will be as prescribed
by the regulations for city police officers.
(Ord. 80-05, passed 6-10-80)
CHAPTER 33:  DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS, AND COMMISSIONS
Section
Library Department
   
33.01   Established; membership; function
   
33.02   Terms of members; filling vacancies; removal
   
33.03   Qualifications of members
   
33.04   Meetings
   
33.05   Powers and duties
Public Safety Commission
   
33.20   Established; membership; function
   
33.21   Terms of members; filling vacancies; removal
   
33.22   Qualifications of members
   
33.23   Meetings
   
33.24   Powers and duties
Parks and Recreation Advisory Board
   
33.35   Established; membership; function
   
33.36   Terms of members; filling vacancies; removal
   
33.37   Qualification of members
   
33.38   Meetings
   
33.39   Powers and duties
Animal Advisory Committee
   
33.45   Established; function
   
33.46   Terms of members; filling vacancies; removal
   
33.47   Qualifications of members
   
33.48   Meetings
   
33.49   Powers and duties
Storm Water Committee
   
33.60   Established; membership
   
33.61   Function
   
33.62   Meetings
Tree Advisory Board
   
33.70   Established
   
33.71   Function; powers and duties
   
33.72   Membership; terms of members; filling vacancies; removal
   
33.73   Meetings
Building and Standards Commission
   
33.80   Established; function
   
33.81   Appointment, term, alternates, vacancy, and removal
   
33.82   Qualifications of members
   
33.83   Proceedings
Cross-reference:
   Animals, see
Ch. 90
LIBRARY BOARD
§ 33.01  ESTABLISHED; MEMBERSHIP; FUNCTION.
   The Library Board of Trustees constituted in the city on March 21, 1981, is
hereby abolished. There is hereby established in its place a Harker Heights
Library Board composed of seven members and two alternates, to be appointed by
the City Council. It is established as an advisory board to the City Council in
matters concerning the Harker Heights Public Library.
(Ord. 81-01, passed 3-24-81; Am. Ord. 97-33, passed 12-9-97)
§ 33.02  TERMS OF MEMBERS; FILLING VACANCIES; REMOVAL.
   (A)   The term of the members of the Library Board shall be for three years
or until their respective successors are appointed and have qualified. No
member shall serve more than two full consecutive terms on the Library Board.
Board members may be removed at any time upon the affirmative vote of a
majority of the City Council.
   (B)   For purposes of the initial appointments, three members shall be
appointed for a three year term, two members shall be appointed for a two year
term, and two members shall be appointed for a one year term. Those initial
members appointed for terms of less than three years shall be considered to
have served partial terms, and shall be eligible to serve two full terms
subsequent to the completion of their respective initial appointments.
   (C)   During the month of September of each year, or as soon thereafter as
is reasonably practicable, the City Council shall appoint members to fill all
vacancies expected to occur on the Library Board during the succeeding twelve
month period. The term of each member shall begin on January 1 of the following
year in which the member was appointed.
   (D)   Alternates shall serve in the order specified by the Council, and a
person named as an alternate shall be eligible until January 1 of the following
year in which such person was named as an alternate. Immediately following a
vacancy, and without the necessity of further action by the Council, the first
eligible alternate shall take the oath of office and begin to serve the
unexpired term of his or her predecessor.
(Ord. 81-01, passed 3-24-81; Am. Ord. 93-32, passed 11-29-93; Am. Ord. 97-33,
passed 12-9-97; Am. Ord. 99-38, passed 11-9-99)
§ 33.03  QUALIFICATION OF MEMBERS.
   The members of the Library Board must be qualified electors within the city.
A member of the Library Board shall not be an employee or an appointed or
elected official of the city.
(Ord. 97-33, passed 12-9-97)
§ 33.04  MEETINGS.
   A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business. Meetings of the Library Board shall be held at a location open to the
public on a quarterly basis at minimum, or more frequently at the call of the
Board or City Council. A written agenda and time and location of the meeting
shall be posted as required by state statutes. Meetings will be open to the
public except when closed sessions are authorized by state statutes.
(Ord. 97-33, passed 12-9-97)
§ 33.05  POWERS AND DUTIES.
   Powers and duties include the following:
   (A)   Entertain issues and subjects requested by the City Council, City
Manager, Library Department, citizens of Harker Heights, and members of the
Board that pertain to the provision of library services and functions within
the city.
   (B)   Establish priorities and projected dates of completion for addressing
issues and subjects of interest tendered to the Board.
   (C)   Have access to statistical data, plans, policies, reports, records,
ordinances, budgets, and such other information pertinent to library functions,
except those reports subject to the open records restrictions or considered
confidential, as may be necessary to support studies and reviews and to develop
recommendations.
   (D)   Complete objective reviews and studies concerning library functions in
the city and forward written recommendations to the City Council, City Manager,
and Library Director for action, if applicable. Recommendations so developed
will be presented by the Chairperson of the Board to the City Council at a
scheduled meeting in order to respond to any inquiries by Council members.
   (E)   Assure that subjects and projects contemplated or in progress that
contain overlapping areas of interest are made known to the senior official of
the city departments, commissions, committees, or other entities concerned.
   (F)   Establish and elect members to fill the offices of Chairperson, Vice
Chairperson and Second Vice Chairperson so that business may be conducted in an
orderly and responsible manner whenever a quorum is present.
   (G)   Develop bylaws to govern the internal functioning of the Board
consistent with ordinance establishing the Library Board and submit them for
approval by the City Council.
   (H)   Conduct meetings in accordance with applicable state statutes and the
current edition of Roberts Rules of Order Newly Revised.
   (I)   Provide minutes of Board meetings to the City Council.
   (J)   Schedule the Chairperson of the Board to present a verbal synopsis to
the City Council, on at least a quarterly basis, of the activities completed
and projects planned by the Board.
(Ord. 97-33, passed 12-9-97)
PUBLIC SAFETY COMMISSION
§ 33.20  ESTABLISHED; MEMBERSHIP; FUNCTION.
   There is hereby established a Public Safety Commission composed of five
members and two alternates, to be appointed by the City Council. It is
established  as  an  advisory  commission  to the City Council in matters
concerning the Police, Fire, and Emergency Medical Services Departments of the
City of Harker Heights.
(Ord. 95-32, passed 9-12-95; Am. Ord. 97-33, passed 12-9-97)
§ 33.21  TERMS OF MEMBERS; FILLING VACANCIES; REMOVAL.
   (A)   The term of the members of the Commission shall be for three years or
until their respective successors are appointed and have qualified. No member
shall serve more than two full consecutive terms on the Commission. Commission
members may be removed at any time upon the affirmative vote of a majority of
the City Council.
   (B)   During the month of September of each year, or as soon thereafter as
is reasonably practicable, the City Council shall appoint members to fill all
vacancies expected to occur on the Public Safety Commission during the
succeeding twelve month period. The term of each member shall begin on January
1 of the following year in which the member was appointed.
   (C)   Alternates shall serve in the order specified by the Council, and a
person named as an alternate shall be eligible until January 1 of the following
year in which such person was named as an alternate. Immediately following a
vacancy, and without the necessity of further action by the Council, the first
eligible alternate shall take the oath of office and begin to serve the
unexpired term of his or her predecessor.
(Ord. 95-32, passed 9-12-95; Am. Ord. 97-33, passed 12-9-97; Am. Ord. 99-38,
passed 11-9-99)
§ 33.22  QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS.
   The members of the Commission should be qualified electors of the city. A
member of the Commission shall not be an employee of the city, member of the
Police, Fire, or Emergency Medical Services Department or an elected or
appointed official of the city.
(Ord. 95-32, passed 9-12-95; Am. Ord. 97-33, passed 12-9-97)
§ 33.23  MEETINGS.
   A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business. Meetings of the Commission shall be held at a location open to the
public on a quarterly basis at minimum, or more frequently as the Commission
may elect, or at the call of the City Council, with a written agenda and the
time and location of the meeting being posted as required by state statutes.
Meetings will be open to the public except when closed sessions are authorized
by state statutes.
(Ord. 95-32, passed 9-12-95; Am. Ord. 97-33, passed 12-9-97)
§ 33.24  POWERS AND DUTIES.
   Powers and duties include the following:
   (A)   Entertain issues and subjects requested by the City Council, City
Manager, Police, Fire, and Emergency Medical Services Department, citizens of
Harker Heights, and members of the Commission that pertain to the provision of
Public Safety within the city.
   (B)   Establish priorities and projected dates of completion for addressing
issues and subjects of interest tendered to the Commission.
   (C)   Have access to statistical data, plans, policies, reports, records,
ordinances, budgets and such other information pertinent to public safety
services and functions, except those reports subject to the open records
restrictions or considered confidential, as may be necessary to support studies
and reviews and to develop recommendations.
   (D)   Complete objective reviews and studies concerning public safety in the
city and forward written recommendations to the City Council, City Manager,
Police Chief and Director of Emergency Services, for their action, if
applicable. Recommendations so developed will be presented by the Chairperson
of the Commission to the City Council at a scheduled meeting in order to
respond to any inquiries by Councilmembers.
   (E)   Assure that subjects and projects contemplated or in progress that
contain overlapping areas of interest are made known to the senior official of
the city departments, commissions, committees, or other entities concerned.
   (F)   Establish and elect members to fill the offices of Chairperson, Vice
Chairperson and Second Vice Chairperson so that business may be conducted in an
orderly and responsible manner whenever a quorum is present.
   (G)   Develop bylaws to govern the internal functioning of the Commission
consistent with ordinance establishing the Public Safety Commission and submit
them for approval by the City Council.
   (H)   Conduct meetings in accordance with applicable Texas state statutes
and the current edition of Roberts Rules of Order Newly Revised.
   (I)   Provide minutes of Commission meetings to the City Council.
   (J)   Schedule the Chairperson of the Commission to present a verbal
synopsis to the City Council, on at least a quarterly basis, of the activities
completed and projects planned by the Commission.
   (K)   Participate in selection boards, promotion boards, and other forums as
appropriate, at the request of the senior departmental officer of the Police,
Fire, and Emergency Medical Service Departments, or City Manager.
   (L)   Under conditions which cause the Mayor to implement the City's
Emergency Management Plan, and as an organized group, and at the request of the
Emergency Management Director or Emergency Management Coordinator, assist the
operations of the Emergency Operations Center under supervision of the
Emergency Management Coordinator.
(Ord. 95-32, passed 9-12-95; Am. Ord. 97-33, passed 12-9-97)
PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD
§ 33.35  ESTABLISHED; MEMBERSHIP; FUNCTION.
   The Parks and Recreation Advisory Board constituted in the city on October
25, 1995 is hereby abolished. There is hereby established in its place a Harker
Heights Parks and Recreation Advisory Board composed of six members and two
alternates, to be appointed by the City Council. It is established as an
advisory board to the City Council in matters concerning the Harker Heights
Parks and Recreation Department.
(Ord. 94-49, passed 10-25-94; Am. Ord. 97-33, passed 12-9-97)
§ 33.36  TERMS OF MEMBERS; FILLING VACANCIES; REMOVAL.
   (A)   The term of the members of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board
shall be for three years or until their respective successors are appointed and
have qualified. No member shall serve more than two full consecutive terms on
the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board. Board members may be removed at any
time, upon the affirmative vote of a majority of the City Council.
   (B)   For purposes of the initial appointments, two members shall be
appointed for a three year term, two members shall be appointed for a two year
term, and two members shall be appointed for a one year term. Those initial
members appointed for terms of less than three years shall be considered to
have served partial terms, and shall be eligible to serve two full terms
subsequent to the completion of their respective initial appointments.
   (C)   One High School representative and one Middle School representative
shall be appointed to the board, with the right to enter discussion but not to
vote. Each shall serve a one year term and shall not serve more than two
consecutive terms in either capacity. The representatives shall at all times be
a resident of the City of Harker Heights.
   (D)   During the month of September of each year, or as soon thereafter as
is reasonably practicable, the City Council shall appoint members to fill all
vacancies expected to occur on the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board during
the succeeding twelve month period. The term of each member shall begin on
January 1 of the following year in which the member was appointed.
   (E)   Alternates shall serve in the order specified by the Council, and a
person named as an alternate shall be eligible until January 1 of the following
year in which such person was named as an alternate. Immediately following a
vacancy, and without the necessity of further action by the Council, the first
eligible alternate shall take the oath of office and begin to serve the
unexpired term of his or her predecessor.
(Ord. 94-49, passed 10-25-94; Am. Ord. 95-05, passed 2-28-95; Ord. 96-13,
passed 2-27-96; Am. Ord. 97-33, passed 12-9-97; Am. Ord. 99-38, passed 11-9-99)
§ 33.37  QUALIFICATION OF MEMBERS.
   The members of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board must be qualified
electors within the City of Harker Heights. A member of the Parks and
Recreation Advisory Board shall not be an employee or an appointed or elected
official of the city.
(Ord. 94-49, passed 10-25-94; Am. Ord. 95-05, passed 2-28-95; Ord. 96-13,
passed 2-27-96; Am. Ord. 97-33, passed 12-9-97)
§ 33.38  MEETINGS.
   A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business. Meetings of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall be held at
a location open to the public on a quarterly basis at minimum, or more
frequently at the call of the Board or City Council. A written agenda and time
and location of the meeting shall be posted as required by state statutes.
Meetings will be open to the public except when closed sessions are authorized
by state statutes.
(Ord. 94-49, passed 10-25-94; Am. Ord. 97-33, passed 12-9-97)
§ 33.39  POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Harker Heights Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall have no
supervisory function and shall have no rulemaking or quasi-judicial authority.
The Board is organized to advise the City Council on policy and programs and
shall generally have the following duties and responsibilities:
   (A)   To act in an advisory capacity to the City Council in all matters
pertaining to the Parks and Recreation services and activities in the city.
   (B)   To assist in the development of a Master Parks Plan for the city.
   (C)   To review and recommend changes to the Master Parks Plan, as
necessary, to the City Council.
   (D)   To annually review and make changes to the Master Parks Plan, as
necessary, to the City Council.
   (E)   To analyze and make recommendations concerning the long range Parks
and Recreation facility needs of the community.
   (F)   To provide opportunities for citizen input regarding appropriate Parks
and Recreation facility needs of the community.
   (G)   To recommend names for Parks and Recreation facilities.
   (H)   To work with the city officials in planning and maintenance of city
parks and in planning recreation programs.
   (I)   To create and stimulate public interest in the Parks and Recreation
activities of the city and solicit to the fullest extent possible the
cooperation of the school authorities and other public and private agencies.
   (J)   To make periodic, but no less frequently than quarterly, reports to
the City Council concerning the work of the Board, and such special reports as
may be requested by the City Council or as the Board may deem appropriate.
   (K)   To make recommendations on requests for special use of any of the
city's parks or recreation facilities.
   (L)   To carry out and perform such other matters as the City Council may
deem beneficial to the city.
   (M)   To make recommendations on fees and charges for Parks and Recreational
facility use.
   (N)   To help promote and provide volunteer support for special recreational
programs offered throughout the city.
(Ord. 94-49, passed 10-25-94; Am. Ord. 97-33, passed 12-9-97)
ANIMAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE
§ 33.45  ESTABLISHED; FUNCTION.
   There is hereby established an Animal Advisory Committee to assist in
complying with the requirements of Tex. Health & Safety Code Chapter 823.
(Ord. 2005-14, passed 5-10-05)
§ 33.46  TERMS OF MEMBERS; FILLING VACANCIES; REMOVAL.
   (A)   The term of the members of the Committee shall be three years, or
until their respective successors are appointed and have qualified.
      (1)   No member shall serve more than two full consecutive terms on the
Committee.
      (2)   Upon the affirmative vote of a majority of the entire Council, the
City Council may remove a member of the Committee with or without cause.
   (B)   (1)   For purposes of the initial appointments, two members shall be
appointed for a three-year term, one member shall be appointed for a two-year
term, and one member shall be appointed for a one-year term.
      (2)   Those initial members appointed for terms of less than three years
shall be considered to have served partial terms, and shall be eligible to
serve two full terms subsequent to the completion of their respective initial
appointments.
   (C)   (1)   During the month of September of each year, or as soon
thereafter as is reasonably practicable, the City Council shall appoint members
to fill all vacancies expected to occur on the Committee during the succeeding
12-month period.
      (2)   The term of each member (other than the initial members) shall
begin on January 1 of the following year in which the member was appointed.
   (D)   (1)   Alternates shall serve in the order specified by the Council,
and a person named as an alternate shall be eligible until January 1 of the
year following the year in which such person was named as an alternate.
      (2)   Immediately following a vacancy, and without the necessity of
further action by the Council, the first eligible alternate shall take the oath
of office and begin to serve the unexpired term of his or her predecessor.
(Ord. 2005-14, passed 5-10-05)
§ 33.47  QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS.
   The Committee must be composed of at least one licensed veterinarian, one
county or municipal official, one person whose duties include the daily
operation of an animal shelter, and one representative from an animal welfare
organization.
(Ord. 2005-14, passed 5-10-05; Am. Ord. 2005-18, passed 6-28-05; Am. Ord. 2014-
26, passed 10-28-14)
§ 33.48     MEETINGS.
   (A)   A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business.
   (B)   Meetings of the Committee shall be held at a location open to the
public at least three times each calendar year, or more frequently at the call
of the Committee or City Council.
   (C)   A written agenda and time and location of the meeting shall be posted,
as required by state statutes.
   (D)   Meetings will be open to the public, except when closed meetings are
authorized by state statutes.
(Ord. 2005-14, passed 5-10-05)
§ 33.49  POWERS AND DUTIES
   Powers and duties of the Committee include the following:
   (A)   To provide advice and recommendations to assist the City Council and
the City Animal Control Division in complying and enforcing compliance with
Tex. Health & Safety Code Chapter 823.
   (B)   To assure that subjects and projects contemplated or in progress that
contain overlapping areas of interest are made known to the senior official of
the city departments, commissions, committees or other entities concerned.
   (C)   To establish and elect members to fill the offices of Chairperson and
Vice Chairperson so that business may be conducted in an orderly and
responsible manner whenever a quorum is present.
   (D)   To develop rules or bylaws to govern the internal functioning of the
Committee consistent with the ordinance establishing the Committee, and to
submit them for approval by the City Council.
   (E)   To conduct meetings in accordance with applicable state statutes and
the current edition of Roberts Rules of Order, Newly Revised.
   (F)   To provide minutes of Committee meetings to the City Council.
   (G)   To schedule, on at least an annual basis,  the Chairperson of the
Committee to present a verbal synopsis to the City Council of the activities
completed and the projects planned by the Committee.
(Ord. 2005-14, passed 5-10-05)
STORM WATER COMMITTEE
§ 33.60  ESTABLISHED; MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   There is hereby established an advisory committee to be known as the
Storm Water Committee.
   (B)   The Public Works Director shall serve as the Storm Water Coordinator,
who shall Chair the meetings of the Committee. The Coordinator shall not vote
upon matters considered by the Committee except in the event of a tie vote.
   (C)   The Committee shall consist of the Storm Water Coordinator, the
Planning and Development Director, the Building Official, the City Planner, the
Utility Superintendent, the Street, Drainage and Sanitation Field Supervisor,
the Public Works Administrative Assistant, the Chief Wastewater Plan Operator,
and one City Council member.
      (1)   The City Council member shall be appointed to the Committee by the
Mayor on an annual basis, and shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor.  The
Mayor shall appoint a replacement to any vacancy in that position to fill the
unexpired term.
      (2)   Any other Committee member who shall cease to hold the title of
office required for membership shall automatically cease to be a member, and
any person subsequently employed to that office shall automatically become a
member.
(Ord. 2009-18, passed 6-23-09; Am. Ord. 2015-01, passed 1-13-15)
§ 33.61  FUNCTION.
   The purposes of the Storm Water Committee are to make recommendations to the
City Council to ensure compliance with the pertinent Best Management Practices,
to track Best Management Practices implementation and documentation, to keep
department heads up to date with ongoing storm water issues, to solicit input
from the public and stakeholders, and to make such other recommendations as may
be appropriate to assist the city in complying with its Storm Water Program and
General Permit.
(Ord. 2009-18, passed 6-23-09)
§ 33.62  MEETINGS.
   (A)   A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business. Meetings of the Committee shall be held at a location
open to the public at least once each calendar year, or more frequently at the
call of the Storm Water Coordinator or City Council.
   (B)   The Committee may develop rules or bylaws to govern the internal
functioning of the Committee consistent with ordinance establishing the
Committee, subject to approval by the City Council.
   (C)   A written agenda and time and location of the meeting shall be posted
as required by the Open Meetings Act. Meetings will be open to the public
except when closed meetings are authorized by state statutes.
   (D)   The Committee shall keep regular minutes of its meetings, and provide
copies thereof to the City Council.
(Ord. 2009-18, passed 6-23-09)
TREE ADVISORY BOARD
§ 33.70  ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby established an advisory board to be known as the Harker
Heights Tree Advisory Board.
(Ord. 2011-22, passed 8-9-11)
§ 33.71  FUNCTION; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Board shall:
   (A)   Review the Tree Management Plan and the Tree Care Program and make
recommendations to the City Council as may be necessary;
   (B)   Promote the protection of healthy trees;
   (C)   Recommend guidelines for the replacement and/or replanting of trees
necessarily removed during construction, development, and redevelopment;
   (D)   Develop public awareness and education programs relating to trees;
   (E)   Coordinate and promote Arbor Day activities;
   (F)   Submit the annual application to renew the Tree City USA designation;
and
   (G)   Subject to approval by the City Council, establish rules of procedure
to govern the functioning of the Board consistent with this code and the
requirements of law;
   (H)   Make periodic reports to the City Council; and
   (I)   Perform any other duties requested by the City Council.
(Ord. 2011-22, passed 8-9-11)
§ 33.72  MEMBERSHIP; TERMS OF MEMBERS; FILLING VACANCIES; REMOVAL.
   (A)   The Board will be comprised of five members who must be qualified
electors within the City of Harker Heights.
   (B)   Except as provided herein, the term of the members shall be for three
years or until their respective successors are appointed and have qualified. No
member shall serve more than two consecutive terms on the Board.
   (C)   For purposes of the initial appointments, two members shall be
appointed for a three year term, two members shall be appointed for a two year
term and one member shall be appointed for a one year term. Those initial
members appointed for terms of less than three years shall be considered to
have served partial terms, and shall be eligible to serve two full terms
subsequent to the completion of their respective initial appointments.
   (D)   During the month of September of each year, or as soon thereafter as
is reasonably practicable, the City Council shall appoint members to fill all
vacancies expected to occur on the Board during the succeeding 12-month period.
The term of each member shall begin on January 1 of the following year.
   (E)   Alternates shall serve in the order specified by the City Council, and
a person named as an alternate shall be eligible until January 1 following the
expiration of one year from the date such person was named as an alternate.
Immediately following a vacancy, and without the necessity of further action by
the City Council, the first eligible alternate shall take the oath of office
and begin to serve the unexpired term of his or her predecessor.
   (F)   Board members may be removed at any time, with or without cause, upon
the affirmative vote of a majority of the City Council.
(Ord. 2011-22, passed 8-9-11)
§ 33.73  MEETINGS.
   Meetings of the Board shall be held at a location open to the public on a
quarterly basis at minimum, or more frequently at the call of the Parks and
Recreation Director or City Council. A written agenda and time and location of
the meeting shall be posted as required by state statutes. Meetings will be
open to the public except when closed sessions are authorized by statutes. A
majority of the members shad constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business.
(Ord. 2011-22, passed 8-9-11)
BUILDING AND STANDARDS COMMISSION
§ 33.80  ESTABLISHED; FUNCTION.
   There is hereby established a Building and Standards Commission which shall
consist of one or more panels, each composed of at least five regular members.
The Commission shall have the powers and duties granted by §§
150.02(G) and (J), Chapter 160, and V.T.C.A., Local Government Code Chapters 54
and 214.
(Ord. 2011-07, passed 4-12-11)
§ 33.81  APPOINTMENT, TERM, ALTERNATES, VACANCY, AND REMOVAL.
   (A)   The City Council shall appoint both regular and alternate members to
the Commission. The term of the regular and alternate members of the Commission
shall be three years, or until their respective successors are appointed and
have been qualified. The term of each regular and alternate member (other than
the initial members) shall begin on January 1 of the following year in which
the member was appointed. No regular member shall serve more than three full
consecutive terms on the Commission. The City Council shall fill a vacancy for
the unexpired term.
   (B)   The City Council may appoint four alternate members of the Commission
who shall serve in the absence of one or more regular members when requested to
do so by the Mayor or City Manager. A vacancy shall be filled in the same
manner as a vacancy among the regular members.
   (C)   The City Council may, upon a written charge and the affirmative vote
of a majority of the entire City Council, remove a member of the Commission for
cause. Before a decision regarding removal is made, a public hearing shall be
held on the removal if requested by the member.
(Ord. 2011-07, passed 4-12-11)
§ 33.82  QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS.
   All regular and alternate members of the Commission must be residents of the
city and must be standing members or alternate members of the current Planning
and Zoning Commission of the City of Harker Heights.
(Ord. 2011-07, passed 4-12-11)
§ 33.83  PROCEEDINGS.
   (A)   Meetings of the Commission shall be held at the call of the chairman,
or in the chairman's absence, the acting chairman, the Mayor or the City
Manager.
   (B)   The Commission shall adopt rules for its proceedings consistent with
the requirements of law. The rules shall establish procedures for use in
hearings, providing ample opportunity for presentation of evidence and
testimony by respondents or persons opposing charges being brought by the city
relating to alleged violations of ordinances.
   (C)   The Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote
of each member on each question or the fact that a member is absent or fails to
vote. Each Commission panel shall keep records of its examinations and other
official actions. The minutes and records shall be filed immediately in the
office of the City Secretary as public records.
   (D)   All meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public.
(Ord. 2011-07, passed 4-12-11)
CHAPTER 34:  RECORDS MANAGEMENT
Section
   
34.01   Definitions
   
34.02   City records declared public property
   
34.03   Policy
   
34.04   Designation of Records Management Officer
   
34.05   Duties of Records Management Officer
   
34.06   Establishment of Records Management Committee; duties
   
34.07   Duties and responsibilities of department heads
   
34.08   Development of records management plan
   
34.09   Designation of Records Liaison Officers
   
34.10   Duties and responsibilities of Records Liaison Officers
   
34.11   Records retention schedules to be adopted or developed; approval;
filing with state
   
34.12   Implementation of records retention schedules; destruction of records
under schedule
   
34.13   Destruction of unscheduled records
   
34.14   Records center
§ 34.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY RECORDS.  All documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs,
sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape, electronic media, or other
information recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and
regardless of whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws
of the state, created or received by the city or any of its officers or
employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business are hereby
declared to be the records of the city and shall be created, maintained, and
disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or procedures
authorized by it and in no other manner.
   DEPARTMENT HEAD.  The officer who by ordinance, order, or administrative
policy is in charge of an office of the city that creates or receives records.
   ESSENTIAL RECORD.  Any record of the city necessary to the resumption or
continuation of operations of the city in an emergency or disaster, to the
recreation of the legal and financial status of the city, or to the protection
and fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state.
   PERMANENT RECORD.  Any record of the city for which the retention period on
a records retention schedule is given permanent.
   RECORDS LIAISON OFFICERS.  The persons designated under §
34.09 of this chapter.
   RECORDS MANAGEMENT.  The application of management techniques to the
creation, use, maintenance, retention, preservation, and disposal of records
for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of record-
keeping. The term includes the development of records retention schedules, the
management of filing and information retrieval systems, the protection of
essential and permanent records, the economical and space-effective storage of
inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports,
and correspondence, and the management of micrographics and electronic and
other records storage systems.
   RECORDS MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE. The committee established in §
34.06 of this chapter.
   RECORDS MANAGEMENT OFFICER.  The person designated in §
34.04 of this chapter.
   RECORDS MANAGEMENT PLAN.  The plan developed under §
34.08 of this chapter.
   RECORDS RETENTION SCHEDULE. A document prepared by or under the authority of
the Records Management Officer listing the records maintained by the city,
their retention periods, and other records disposition information that the
records management program may require. It may also mean the appropriate local
retention schedules issued by the Texas State Library and Archives Commission
adopted by the Records Management Officer for use in the city, as provided by
law.
   RETENTION PERIOD.  The minimum time that must pass after the creation,
recording, or receipt of a record, or the fulfillment of certain actions
associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction.
(Ord. 90-05, passed 5-20-90; Am. Ord. 2010-33, passed 11-9-10)
§ 34.02  CITY RECORDS DECLARED PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   All city records as defined in § 34.01 of this chapter are hereby declared
to be the property of the city. No city official or employee has, by virtue of
his or her position, any personal or property right to such records even though
he or she may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction,
removal from files, or use of such records is prohibited.
(Ord. 90-05, passed 5-20-90) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 34.03  POLICY.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient,
economical, and effective controls over the creation, distribution,
organization, maintenance, use, and disposition of all city records through a
comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records
from their creation to their ultimate disposition, consistent with the
requirements of the Texas Local Government Records Act and accepted records
management practice.
(Ord. 90-05, passed 5-20-90)
§ 34.04  DESIGNATION OF RECORDS MANAGEMENT OFFICER.
   The Records Management Coordinator, and the successive holders of the
office, shall serve as Records Management Officer for the city. As provided by
state law, each successive holder of the office shall file his or her name with
the director and librarian of the Texas State Library within 30 days of the
initial designation or of taking up the office, as applicable.
(Am. Ord. 2010-33, passed 11-9-10)
§ 34.05  DUTIES OF RECORDS MANAGEMENT OFFICER.
   In addition to other duties assigned in this chapter, the Records Management
Officer shall:
   (A)   Administer the records management program and provide assistance to
department heads in its implementation.
   (B)   Plan, formulate, and prescribe records disposition policies, systems,
standards, and procedures.
   (C)   In cooperation with department heads identify essential records and
establish a disaster plan for each city office and department to ensure maximum
availability of the records in order to re-establish operations quickly and
with minimum disruption and expense.
   (D)   Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the
historically valuable records of the city.
   (E)   Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for record-
keeping supplies.
   (F)   Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform
filing system and a forms design and control system for the city.
   (G)   Provide records management advice and assistance to all city
departments by preparation of a manual or manuals of procedure and policy and
by on-site consultation.
   (H)   Monitor records retention schedules and rules issued by the Texas
State Library and Archives Commission to determine if the records management
program and the city's records retention schedules are in compliance with state
regulations.
   (I)   Disseminate to the city and department heads information concerning
state laws and administrative rules relating to local government records.
   (J)   Instruct Records Liaison Officers and other personnel in policies and
procedures of the records management plan and their duties in the records
management program.
   (K)   Direct Records Liaison Officers or other personnel in the conduct of
records inventories in preparation for the development of records retention
schedules as required by state law and this chapter.
   (L)   Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction,
or other disposition of the city records is carried out in accordance with the
policies and procedures of the records management program and the requirements
of state law.
   (M)   Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved
records retention schedules, the volume of records microfilmed or stored elec-
tronically, and the estimated cost of space savings as the result of such
disposal or disposition.
   (N)   Report annually to the city on the implementation of the records
management plan in each department of the city, including summaries of the
statistical and fiscal data compiled under division (M) of this section.
   (O)   Bring to the attention of the city non-compliance by department heads
or other city personnel with the policies and procedures of the records
management program or the Local Government Records Act.
(Ord. 90-05, passed 5-20-90; Am. Ord. 2010-33, passed 11-9-10)
§ 34.06  ESTABLISHMENT OF RECORDS MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE; DUTIES.
   A Records Management Committee consisting of all the department heads is
hereby established. The Committee shall:
   (A)   Assist the Records Management Officer in the development of policies
and procedures governing the records management program.
   (B)   Review the performance of the program on a regular basis and propose
changes and improve- ments if needed.
   (C)   Review and approve records retention schedules submitted by the
Records Management Officer.
   (D)   Give final approval to the destruction of records in accordance with
approved records retention schedules.
   (E)   Actively support and promote the records management program throughout
the city.
(Ord. 90-05, passed 5-20-90; Am. Ord. 2010-33, passed 11-9-10)
§ 34.07  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF DEPARTMENT HEADS.
   In addition to the other duties assigned in this chapter, department heads
shall:
   (A)   Cooperate with the Records Management Officer in carrying out the
policies and procedures established in the city for the efficient and
economical management of records and in carrying out the requirements of this
chapter.
   (B)   Adequately document the transaction of government business and the
services, programs, and duties for which the department head and his or her
staff are responsible.
   (C)   Maintain the records in his or her care and carry out their
preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition only in
accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program
of the city and the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 90-05, passed 5-20-90)
§ 34.08  DEVELOPMENT OF RECORDS MANAGEMENT PLAN.
   (A)   The Records Management Officer and the Records Management Committee
shall develop a records management plan for the city for submission to the
city. The plan must contain policies and procedures designed to reduce the
costs and improve the efficiency of record-keeping, to adequately protect the
essential records of the city, and to properly preserve those records of the
city that are of historical value. The plan must be designed to enable the
Records Management Officer to carry out his or her duties prescribed by state
law and this chapter effectively.
   (B)   Once approved by the city the records management plan shall be binding
on all offices, departments, divisions, programs, commissions, bureaus, boards,
committees, or similar entities of the city and records shall be created,
maintained, stored, microfilmed, or disposed of in accordance with the plan.
   (C)   State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or record-
keeping requirements of a department head do not exempt the department head or
the records in the department head's care from the application of this chapter
and the records management plan adopted under it and may not be used by the
department head as a basis for refusal to participate in the records management
program of the city.
(Ord. 90-05, passed 5-20-90; Am. Ord. 2010-33, passed 11-9-10)
§ 34.09  DESIGNATION OF RECORDS LIAISON OFFICERS.
   Each department head shall designate a member of his or her staff to serve
as Records Liaison Officer for the implementation of the records management
program in the department. If the Records Management Officer determines that in
the best interests of the records management program more than one Records
Liaison Officer should be designated for a department, the department head
shall designate the number of Records Liaison Officers specified by the Records
Management Officer. Persons designated as Records Liaison Officers shall be
thoroughly familiar with all the records created and maintained by the
department. In the event of the resignation, retirement, dismissal, or removal
by action of the department head of a person designated as a Records Liaison
Officer, the department head shall promptly designate another person to fill
the vacancy. A department head may serve as Records Liaison Officer for his or
her department.
(Ord. 90-05, passed 5-20-90; Am. Ord. 2010-33, passed 11-9-10)
§ 34.10  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF RECORDS LIAISON OFFICERS.
   In addition to the other duties assigned in this chapter, the Records
Liaison Officers shall:
   (A)   Conduct or supervise the conduct of inventories of the records of the
department in preparation for the development of records retention schedules.
   (B)   In cooperation with the Records Manage- ment Officer coordinate and
implement the policies and procedures of the records management program in
their department.
   (C)   Disseminate information to department staff concerning the records
management program.
(Ord. 90-05, passed 5-20-90; Am. Ord. 2010-33, passed 11-9-10)
§ 34.11  RECORDS RETENTION SCHEDULES TO BE ADOPTED OR DEVELOPED; APPROVAL;
FILING WITH STATE.
   (A)   The Records Management Officer shall either adopt the appropriate
local retention schedules issued by the Texas State Library and Archives
Commission or prepare records retention schedules, in cooperation with
department heads and Records Liaison Officers, on a department by department
basis listing all records created or received by the department and the
retention period for each record. Records retention schedules shall also
contain such other information regarding the disposition of city records as the
records management plan may require.
   (B)   Each records retention schedule shall be monitored and amended as
needed by the Records Management Officer on a regular basis to ensure that it
is in compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state and that
it continues to reflect the record-keeping procedures and needs of the depart-
ment and the records management program of the city.
   (C)   Before its adoption, a records retention schedule or amended schedule
for a department must be approved by the department head and the members of the
Records Management Committee.
   (D)   Before its adoption, a records retention schedule must be submitted to
and accepted for filing by the director and librarian as provided by state law.
If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule will be amended to make
it acceptable for filing. The Records Management Officer shall submit the
records retention schedules to the director and librarian.
(Ord. 90-05, passed 5-20-90; Am. Ord. 2010-33, passed 11-9-10)
§ 34.12  IMPLEMENTATION OF RECORDS RETENTION SCHEDULES; DESTRUCTION OF RECORDS
UNDER SCHEDULE.
   (A)   A records retention schedule for a department that has been approved
and adopted under §
34.08 of this chapter shall be implemented by department heads and Records
Liaison Officers according to the policies and procedures of the records
management plan.
   (B)   A record whose retention period has expired on a records retention
schedule may be destroyed unless an open records request is pending on the
record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending law suit, or
the department head requests in writing to the Records Management Committee
that the record be retained for an additional period.
   (C)   Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records
retention schedule, authorization for the destruction must be obtained by the
Records Management Officer from the Records Management Committee.
(Ord. 90-05, passed 5-20-90; Am. Ord. 2010-33, passed 11-9-10)
§ 34.13  DESTRUCTION OF UNSCHEDULED RECORDS.
   A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records retention
schedule may be destroyed if its destruction has been approved in the same
manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the Records
Management Officer has submitted to and received back from the director and
librarian an approved destruction authorization request.
(Ord. 90-05, passed 5-20-90; Am. Ord. 2010-33, passed 11-9-10)
§ 34.14  RECORDS CENTER.
   A records center, developed pursuant to the plan required by §
34.08 of this chapter, shall be under direct control and supervision of the
Records Management Officer. Policies and procedures regulating the operations
and use of the records center shall be contained in the records management plan
developed under §
34.08 of this chapter.
(Ord. 90-05, passed 5-20-90)
CHAPTER 35:  FINANCE AND TAXATION
Section
Taxation
   
35.01   Residence homestead exemption
   
35.02   Gross receipt tax on bingo games
Drainage Utility System and Fund
   
35.20   Adoption of Municipal Drainage Utility systems Act
   
35.21   Purpose
   
35.22   Definitions
   
35.23   Effect of subchapter
   
35.24   Drainage utility system
   
35.25   Administration of drainage utility system
   
35.26   Drainage charge established
   
35.27   Billing and payment penalties
   
35.28   Adjustment of charges
   
35.29   Special revenue drainage fund
   
35.30   Exemptions
Payment By Credit Card
   
35.50   Definitions
   
35.51   Payment and collection authorized
   
35.52   Processing fee
   
35.53   Service charge
   
35.54   Encumbrance of credit cards; fee
   
35.55   Disposition of fees and charges
Non-Payment of Delinquent Charges
   
35.60   Definitions
   
35.61   Delinquent charges list
   
35.62   Warning notice
   
35.63   Denial, revocation and suspension for delinquent charges
   
35.64   Appeal
   
35.65   No refund of fee
   
35.66   Effect on other powers
Cross-reference:
   Taxation see
Charter, Article VI
TAXATION
§ 35.01  RESIDENCE HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION.
   (A)   All persons living within the city who are 65 years-of-age or older
are hereby entitled to an exemption of $10,000 from the assessed value of their
residence homesteads as such homesteads are defined by state law, if they
comply with requisites of the divisions of this section.
   (B)   Such exemption includes those individuals who are married or unmarried
and also includes those individuals living alone.
   (C)   In order to qualify for the exemption granted herein, all persons who
will be 65 years-of-age or older on January 1 of the year in which they seek
the exemption provided in this section must register in the office of the Tax
Assessor/Collector between January 1 and April 30 of that year.
   (D)   All individuals who are eligible for the exemption provided herein
must apply each year in which they want to take advantage of such exemption.
   (E)   The Tax Assessor/Collector shall determine the eligibility of all
individuals applying for the exemption provided by this section, and his
determination shall be final.
   (F)   The first taxable year in which any individual may qualify for the
exemption herein is the taxable year beginning January 1, 1975.
(Ord. 75-8, passed 4-15-75)
§ 35.02  GROSS RECEIPT TAX ON BINGO GAMES.
   There shall be required a 2% gross receipts tax imposed on the conduct of
bingo games within the city.
(Ord. 86-06, passed 8-12-86)
DRAINAGE UTILITY SYSTEM AND FUND
§ 35.20  ADOPTION OF MUNICIPAL DRAINAGE UTILITY SYSTEMS ACT.
   The City Council  hereby adopts Subchapter C of Tex. Loc. Gov't Code Chapter
402, commonly known as the Municipal Drainage Utility Systems Act, as such
subchapter may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 2002-16, passed 9-24-02)
§ 35.21  PURPOSE.
   This subchapter is adopted in order to provide rules for the use, operation
and financing of the city's drainage utility system, and to protect public
health and safety from loss of life and property caused by surface water
overflows, surface water stagnation, and pollution arising from nonpoint source
runoff within the boundaries of the established service area. Drainage service
will be offered on nondiscriminatory, reasonable and equitable terms within the
service area.
(Ord. 2002-16, passed 9-24-02)
§ 35.22  DEFINITI0NS.
   For purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BENEFITED PROPERTY .  An improved lot or tract to which a drainage service
is made available under this subchapter.
   BUILDING SQUARE FOOTAGE. The total square footage of structures or
improvements, as determined by the Bell County Central Appraisal District, that
causes an impervious coverage of the soil under the structure or improvement.
   COST OF SERVICE as applied to a drainage system service to any benefited
property means:
      (1)   The prorated cost of the acquisition, whether by eminent domain or
otherwise, of land, rights-of-way, options to purchase land, easements and
interests in land relating to structures, equipment and facilities used in
draining the benefited property;
      (2)   The prorated cost of the acquisition, construction, repair and
maintenance of structures, equipment and facilities used in draining the
benefited property;
      (3)   The prorated cost of architectural, engineering, legal and related
services, plans and specifications, studies, surveys, estimates of cost and of
revenue, and all other expenses necessary or incident to planning, providing or
determining the feasibility and practicability of structures, equipment and
facilities used in draining the benefited property;
      (4)   The prorated cost of all machinery, equipment, furniture and
facilities necessary or incident to the provision and operation of draining the
benefited property;
      (5)   The prorated cost of funding and financing charges and interest
arising from construction projects and the start-up cost of a drainage facility
used in draining the benefited property;
      (6)   The prorated cost of debt service and reserve requirements of
structures, equipment, and facilities provided by revenue bonds or other
drainage revenue-pledge securities or obligations issued by the municipality;
and
      (7)   The administrative costs of a drainage utility system.
   DRAINAGE .  Bridges, catch basins, channels, conduits, creeks, culverts,
detention ponds, ditches, draws, flumes, pipes, pumps, sloughs, treatment works
and appurtenances to those items, whether natural or artificial, or using force
or gravity, that are used to draw off surface water from land, carry the water
away, collect store, or treat the water, or divert the water into natural or
artificial watercourses.
   DRAINAGE CHARGE .
      (1)   The levy imposed to recover the cost of the service of the
municipality in furnishing drainage for any benefited property; and
      (2)   An amount made in contribution to funding of future drainage system
construction by the city.
   DRAINAGE SYSTEM .  Drainage owned or controlled in whole or in part by the
city and dedicated to the service of benefited property, including provisions
for additions to the system.
   FACILITIES .  Property, either real, personal or mixed, that is used in
providing drainage and included in the system.
   IMPROVED LOT OR TRACT .  Lot or tract that has a structure or other
improvement on it that causes an impervious coverage of the soil under the
structure or improvement.
   NON-RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPED PROPERTY .  Any improved lot or tract used for
something other than residential use, including commercial, religious,
industrial, institutional (including non-profit organizations) and governmental
activities.
   OTHER RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY.   Structures with more than one dwelling unit,
and manufactured homes within manufactured home parks. A duplex shall equal two
dwelling units, a triplex shall equal three dwelling units, a fourplex shall
equal four dwelling units, a fiveplex shall equal five dwelling units, a
sixplex shall equal six dwelling units, a sevenplex shall equal seven dwelling
units, an eightplex shall equal eight dwelling units, and so on. Structures
larger than a eightplex shall equal the number of dwelling units for that
structure.
   PUBLIC UTILITY .  Drainage service that is regularly provided by the city
through municipal property dedicated to that service to the users of benefited
property within the service area and that is based on:
      (1)   An established schedule of charges;
      (2)   The use of police power to implement the service; and
      (3)   Nondiscriminatory, reasonable, and equitable terms as declared
under this subchapter.
   SERVICE AREA .  Municipal boundaries of the city as they may be amended from
time to time.
   SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNIT .  The number of dwelling units
contained within any property or used for single-family residential purposes. 
For purposes of this subchapter, a single family detached structure shall equal
one dwelling unit.
   SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY . Any improved lot or tract used for
single-family residential purposes, such as single-family residences and
manufactured homes not located in manufactured home parks.
   TRACT .  One or more lots or portions of lots which are contiguous and under
single ownership using one water meter.
   USER .  The person or entity who owns or occupies a benefited property.
   WHOLLY SUFFICIENT AND PRIVATELY OWNED DRAINAGE SYSTEM .  Land owned and
operated by a person other than a municipal drainage utility system the
drainage of which does not discharge into a creek, river, slough, culvert, or
other channel that is part of the city's drainage utility system.
(Ord. 2002-16, passed 9-24-02)
§ 35.23  EFFECT OF SUBCHAPTER.
   (A)   This subchapter does not:
      (1)   Enhance or diminish the authority of the city to establish a
drainage utility under Article XI, Section S, of the Texas Constitution;
      (2)   Preclude the city from utilizing other revenues, in addition to
drainage utility revenues, for drainage purposes, or
      (3)   Preclude the city from imposing impact fees or other charges for
drainage charges for drainage authorized by law.
   (B)   Floods from drainage and stormwater runoff may occasionally occur
which exceed the capacity of the drainage system.  In addition, surface water
stagnation and pollution arising from nonpoint source runoff may occasionally
occur which exceed the capacity of the drainage system.  The city does not
warrant, and this subchapter does not imply, that properties subject to charges
shall always be free from flooding or flood damage, surface water stagnation,
or nonpoint source pollution, or that all flood control and water treatment
projects to control the quantity and quality of runoff can be constructed
effectively. Nothing whatsoever in this subchapter should be construed as or be
deemed to create additional duties on the part of the city, or to establish
liability on the part of the city for any damages incurred in a flood or from
adverse water quality due to drainage runoff. Nothing in this subchapter shall
be deemed to waive the city's immunity under state law or reduce the need or
necessity far flood insurance by property owners within or without the city.
(Ord. 2002-16, passed 9-24-02)
§ 35.24  DRAINAGE UTILITY SYSTEM.
   (A)   The City Council declares the city's drainage system to be a public
utility, and dedicates and incorporates all existing drainage facilities,
materials and supplies to the drainage, utility system on the effective date of
this subchapter.  All future acquisitions of real or personal property related
to drainage shall be maintained as a part of the drainage utility system.
   (B)   Unless a person's lot or tract is exempted under this subchapter, the
person may not use the drainage system for the lot or tract unless the person
pays the full established drainage charge.
   (C)   City employees shall have access, at all reasonable times, to any
benefited properties served by the drainage utility system for the purposes of
inspection or repair of such system, and for the enforcement of the provisions
of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2002-16, passed 9-24-02)
§ 35.25  ADMINISTRATION OF DRAINAGE UTILITY SYSTEM.
   The City Manager, acting through the Director of Public Works, shall be
responsible for the administration of this subchapter including, but not
limited to, enacting any procedures necessary for the administration of the
drainage charges and the consideration of variances, developing maintenance
programs, and establishing drainage criteria and standards for operation of the
drainage system.
(Ord. 2002-16, passed 9-24-02)
§ 35.26  DRAINAGE CHARGE ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, a drainage charge in
the amount set forth in the city fee schedule adopted by the city is levied and
imposed upon each improved lot or tract of benefited property within the
service area regardless of whether or not the city bills such lot or tract for
water, sewage or garbage service.  For purposes of this subchapter, all
improved lots and parcels or tracts of benefited property within the service
area are classified into the following three customer categories:
      (1)   Single-family detached dwelling, including manufactured homes on
individual lots;
      (2)   Other residential dwellings, including structures with more than
one dwelling unit, and manufactured homes within manufactured home parks; or
      (3)   Non-residential developed property.
   (B)   The City Manager shall be responsible for determining the building
square footage area of non-single family residential property based on data
obtained from the Bell County Appraisal District.  If such information is
unavailable from the Appraisal District files, the user may submit a certified
survey or a foundation survey to assist the City Manager in determining
building area.  The City Manager may require additional information as
necessary to make the determination.  The drainage charge levied against a lot
or tract may be revised by the City Manager based on additions to the
impervious area as approved through the city building permit process or as
shown front the records of the Bell County Appraisal District.
   (C)   The City Council may review the schedule of drainage charges at any
time and may change, adjust, and readjust the rates and charges from time to
time, provided that such rates are equitable for similar services for all areas
of the service area.
   (D)   No deposit for drainage service shall be required as a condition
precedent to accepting surface flow in the drainage utility system.
(Ord. 2002-16, passed 9-24-02)
§ 35.27  BILLING AND PAYMENT PENALTIES.
   (A)   Bills or statements for the drainage charge shall be rendered monthly
by the city to users for drainage for the preceding month.  The drainage charge
may be billed with other public utility billings, but must be identified
separately from other charges. 
   (B)   Bills shall be payable when rendered and shall be considered as
received by the user, whether actually received or not, when deposited in the
United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the utility customer.
   (C)   Any drainage charge due hereunder which is not paid when due may be
recovered in an action at law by the city.
   (D)   In addition to any other remedies or penalties provided at law or in
this subchapter, failure of a user to pay the drainage charges promptly when
due shall subject the user to late charges, disconnection of any municipal
utility service, and reconnection fees set forth in Chapters
52 and
53 of this code.
   (E)   Unless such lot or tract is exempted under this subchapter, it shall
be unlawful for any person to use the city's drainage system for such lot or
tract unless the person pays the full established drainage charge applicable to
such lot or tract.  Proof of a culpable mental state is not required for
conviction of an offense under this subsection, it being the intent of the City
Council to dispense with the requirement of any culpable mental state in
prosecutions filed hereunder.  A conviction under this subsection is punishable
by a fine not exceeding $1,000.
(Ord. 2002-16, passed 9-24-02)
§ 35.28  ADJUSTMENT OF CHARGES.
   (A)   Any user who has paid drainage charges and who believes the
calculation or determination of the drainage charge to be incorrect may,
subject to the restrictions set forth an this subchapter, submit an adjustment
request to the Director of Public Works. Requests for adjustment of drainage
charges paid by the user making the request shall be in writing and set forth
in detail the grounds upon which relief is sought.
      (1)   Adjustment requests made during the first fiscal year that the
drainage charge is imposed will be reviewed by the Director of Public Works
within four months from the date of receipt of the adjustment request. 
Adjustments resulting from such request shall be retroactive to the beginning
of billings, but shall not exceed one year.
      (2)   Adjustment requests made after the first fiscal year that the
drainage charge is imposed will be reviewed by the Director of Public Works
within 30 days from the date of receipt of an adjustment request. Adjustments
resulting from such a request shall be prospective, but may be made retroactive
for no more than three months prior to the receipt of the request, at the
discretion of the Director of Public Works.
      (3)   The user requesting an adjustment may be required, at the user's
own cost, to provide supplemental information to the Director of Public Works,
including, but not limited to, survey data approved by a Texas registered
professional land surveyor, or detailed development plan approved by the city. 
Failure to timely provide requested information may result in the denial of the
adjustment request.
      (4)   The only basis for an adjustment shall be an error in the
calculation or determination of the drainage charge applicable to the subject
lot or tract. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing sentence, no
drainage charge credit shall be given for the installation of facilities
otherwise required by law.
      (5)   Adjustments to the drainage charge will be made upon the granting
of the adjustment request, in writing, by the Director of Public Works. 
Denials of adjustment requests shall be made in writing by the Director of
Public Works.  Any request for an adjustment not granted within the time
required by this section shall be deemed denied on the first business day
following the expiration of the period specified for review of the request.
   (B)   Within 30 days of denial of an adjustment request, the user who
initially requested the adjustment may apply to the City Manager for review of
the denial.
      (1)   The City Manager shall complete this review within 60 days of
receipt of the request for review, and the review shall be deemed denied if no
other determination is made with this time.  The City Manager's determination
on the review shall be in writing and set forth in detail the reasons for the
decision.
      (2)   In reviewing denial of adjustment requests, the City Manager,
exclusive of his or her designee, shall apply the standards and review criteria
contained in this section.
      (3)   All findings and determinations made by the City Manager arising
out of this section will be final.
(Ord. 2002-16, passed 9-24-02)
§ 35.29  SPECIAL REVENUE DRAINAGE FUND.
   A separate special revenue drainage fund is established within the city's
fund structure as of the effective date of this subchapter, known as the
Special Revenue Drainage Fund, for the purpose of completely segregating,
identifying the controlling of all revenues and expenses attributable to
municipal drainage.  All drainage charges collected by the city after the
effective date of this subchapter and such other monies as may be available by
or to the city for the purpose of drainage shall be deposited in the Special
Revenue Drainage Fund.  Such drainage revenues shall be used for the purpose of
the creation, operation, planning, engineering, inspection, construction,
repair, maintenance, improvement, reconstruction, replacement, extension, new
construction, administration, and other reasonable and customary charges
associated with the operation of the drainage system.  It shall not be
necessary that the expenses from the Special Revenue Drainage Fund for any
authorized purpose specifically relate to any particular benefited property
from which the revenues for such purposes were collected.  The income derived
from the operation of the drainage system must be segregated in one or more
accounts and completely identifiable from other city accounts.  Drainage
charges will be used for the sole purpose of drainage and will not be
transferred to other municipal fund accounts for non-drainage purposes, accept
where specifically permitted by Subchapter C of the Tex. Loc. Gov't Code
Chapter 402.
(Ord. 2002-16, passed 9-24-02)
§ 35.30  EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   This subchapter, and any ordinances, resolutions and rules adopted
pursuant hereto, shall not apply to any lot or tract in which the city owns a
freehold interest.
   (B)   The following shall be exempt from the provisions of any rules or
ordinances adopted by the city pursuant to the Municipal Drainage Utility
Systems Act:
      (1)   Property with proper construction and maintenance of a wholly
sufficient and privately owned drainage system;
      (2)   Property held and maintained in its natural state, until such time
that the property is developed and all of the public infrastructure constructed
has been accepted by the city for maintenance; and
      (3)   A subdivided lot, until a structure has been built on the lot and a
certificate of occupancy has been issued by the city.
(Ord. 2002-16, passed 9-24-02)
PAYMENT BY CREDIT CARD
§ 35.50  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CREDIT CARD.  A card, plate or similar device used to make purchases on
credit or to borrow money.
(Ord. 97-30, passed 11-14-97)
§ 35.51  PAYMENT AND COLLECTION AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   Each city employee who is authorized by his or her employment position
to collect fees, fines, court costs or other charges on behalf of the city is
hereby authorized to accept payment of any such fees, fines, court costs or
other charges by credit card.
   (B)   This section does not authorize payment of ad valorem taxes by credit
card.  This section does not authorize payment by credit card of fees, fines,
court costs or other charges if such payment is otherwise prohibited by law.
(Ord. 97-30, passed 11-14-97)
§ 35.52  PROCESSING FEE.
   (A)   Each city employee who accepts payment by credit card of fees, fines,
court costs or other charges shall simultaneously collect, in addition to the
original amount of the fee, fine, court cost or other charge, a processing fee
in an amount specified in the then-current fee schedule adopted by the City
Council.
   (B)   The processing fee established by the City Council shall be reasonably
related to the expense incurred by the city in processing payments by credit
card.  However, in no event shall the processing fee exceed five percent of the
amount of the fee, fine, court cost or other charge being paid.
(Ord. 97-30, passed 11-14-97)
§ 35.53  SERVICE CHARGE.
   (A)   If, for any reason, a payment by credit card is not honored by the
credit card company on which the funds are drawn, the person who owes the fee,
fine, court cost or other charge shall pay, in addition to the original amount
of the fee, fine, court cost or other charge, a service charge as herein
provided.
   (B)   The service charge shall be in an amount equal to the charge for the
collection of a check drawn on an account with insufficient funds as specified
in the then-current fee schedule adopted by the City Council.
(Ord. 97-30, passed 11-14-97)
§ 35.54  ENCUMBRANCE OF CREDIT CARDS; FEE.
   The City Manager may negotiate a contract with any company that issues
credit cards to collect and seize cards issued by that company that are
outdated or otherwise unauthorized.  However, no such contract shall be binding
upon the city until formally approved by the City Council in the form of a
duly-enacted ordinance or resolution.  Each such contract shall require the
company to pay the city a specified fee for the return of the credit cards to
the company.
(Ord. 97-30, passed 11-14-97)
§ 35.55  DISPOSITION OF FEES AND CHARGES.
   The city employee collecting a fee, fine, court cost or other charge under
this subchapter shall promptly deposit such fee, fine, court cost or other
charge in the city's general fund.
(Ord. 97-30, passed 11-14-97)
NON-PAYMENT OF DELINQUENT CHARGES
§ 35.60  DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DELINQUENT CHARGES.   Any taxes, fines, fees, assessments, or other
municipal charges that have been due and unpaid to the city for not less than a
12 month period.  Charges are not delinquent to the extent that they are
subject to:
      (1)   A pending good faith application for an abatement of such charges;
      (2)   Automatic stay protection under bankruptcy laws or other statutes
or orders having the effect of staying action under this subchapter; or
      (3)   An existing payment agreement with the city for the repayment of
sums owed, provided that payments under such agreement are not in default.
   LICENSE.   Any license, permit, certificate, registration, or other official
permission given by a licensing authority to do a particular thing, and which
is subject before expiration to suspension, revocation, forfeiture, or
termination by the licensing authority. The term does not include any license
or permit issued by any other governmental or regulatory body which merely
requires approval from a city official or department.
   LICENSEE.   The holder of, or an applicant for, a license.
   LICENSING AUTHORITY.   Any city department, board, commission, officer or
employee authorized by this code to approve the issuance, renewal, revocation,
suspension, termination, denial or transfer of a license.
(Ord. 2002-10, passed 6-25-02)
§ 35.61  DELINQUENT CHARGES LIST.
   The Finance Director shall annually generate a list of all persons and
business enterprises that owe delinquent charges, and shall furnish a copy of
such list to each licensing authority.
(Ord. 2002-10, passed 6-25-02)
§ 35.62  WARNING NOTICE.
   (A)   Any invoice, billing, statement, or other demand for payment sent by
the city to a person or business enterprise owing delinquent charges shall
include the following warning in boldfaced type, capital letters, or
underlined:
   "WARNING: PURSUANT TO CHAPTER 35, CODE OF HARKER HEIGHTS, FAILURE TO PAY
DELINQUENT CHARGES MAY RESULT IN THE DENIAL, SUSPENSION, OR REVOCATION OF
LICENSES, PERMITS, CERTIFICATES, OR REGISTRATIONS ISSUED BY THE CITY."
   (B)   Failure to include the warning required by division (A) of this
section on any invoice, billing, statement, or other demand for payment shall
not in any way release any person or entity from liability for payment thereof,
nor shall such failure in any way affect the validity of a denial, revocation
or suspension under §
35.63.
(Ord. 2002-10, passed 6-25-02)
§ 35.63  DENIAL, REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION FOR DELINQUENT CHARGES.
   (A)   If the licensing authority determines that a licensee owes delinquent
charges the licensing authority shall immediately notify the licensee by
certified mail, return receipt requested, at the last known address of the
licensee. The notice shall include a copy of the most recent invoice, billing,
statement, or other demand for payment of the delinquent charges at issue,
shall state that the license, or a renewal or transfer thereof, as the case may
be, may be subject to denial, revocation or suspension as provided herein, and
shall direct the licensee to contact the Finance Director for further
information. A copy of the notice shall be contemporaneously delivered to the
Finance Director, the City Manager, and the City Attorney.
   (B)   Not later than the 3rd business day after receiving the notice
required by division (A) of this section, the Finance Director shall certify in
writing to the licensing authority whether the licensee still owes delinquent
charges. After receiving written confirmation from the Finance Director that
the delinquent charges are still owed, the licensing authority may deny, revoke
or suspend any license, including renewals and transfers thereof, applied for
or held by any person or business entity whose name appears on the list
required by §
35.61.
   (C)   The licensing authority shall promptly notify the licensee of a
denial, revocation, or suspension under this section, and of the reason
therefore, and of the right to appeal as provided in §
35.64. Such notice shall be given by certified mail, return receipt requested,
to the last known address of the licensee.
   (D)   Any license denied, suspended or revoked under this section shall not
be issued, reissued or renewed until the licensing authority receives a
certificate issued by the Finance Director that the licensee does not owe any
delinquent charges as the date of issuance of said certificate.
(Ord. 2002-10, passed 6-25-02)
§ 35.64  APPEAL.
   (A)   Any person denied a permit, or the renewal or transfer thereof, or
whose permit is revoked or suspended under the provisions of this subchapter
shall have the right to appeal such action to the City Council as provided by
this section.
   (B)   Appeals pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter shall be made by
filing a notice of appeal with the City Secretary not later than ten days
following the date of written notice of such decision, provided that the City
Council may extend the time for filing such notice of appeal for good cause
shown. Such notice of appeal shall be in a form prescribed by the City Manager,
shall contain a brief statement of the grounds for the appeal, and shall set
forth the relief requested by the appellant from such decision.
   (C)   The City Council shall conduct a hearing on the appeal. The formal
rules of evidence do not apply at an appeal hearing, but the City Council may
adopt rules for the orderly conduct of the hearing and shall make a decision on
the basis of a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing. The City
Council shall render a decision within 15 days after the request for an appeal
hearing is filed, and if no decision is made within that time the decision
under appeal shall be deemed affirmed. The City Council may affirm, reverse, or
modify the action under appeal, and its decision is final as to administrative
remedies of the city.
(Ord. 2002-10, passed 6-25-02)
§ 35.65  NO REFUND OF FEE.
   A licensee is not entitled to a refund of any fee or deposit paid to a
licensing authority prior to the denial, suspension or revocation of a license
under this subchapter.
(Ord. 2002-10, passed 6-25-02)
§ 35.66  EFFECT ON OTHER POWERS.
   (A)   Nothing in this subchapter shall have the effect of waiving or
otherwise limiting in any way any other right, power, or remedy the city may
have at law or in equity to collect delinquent charges.
   (B)   Nothing in this subchapter affects the power of a licensing authority
to grant, deny, suspend, revoke, terminate, or renew a license as otherwise
provided by law.
(Ord. 2002-10, passed 6-25-02)
CHAPTER 36:  MUNICIPAL COURT
Section
   
36.01   Special expenses
   
36.02   Municipal Court Building Security Fund
   
36.03   Municipal Court Technology Fund
   
36.04   Fee for failure to appear in certain cases
   
36.05   [Reserved]
   
36.06   Employment of juvenile case managers
   
36.07   Additional fee for collection through a private law firm
Cross-reference:
   Municipal court, see
Charter § 2.12
§ 36.01  SPECIAL EXPENSES.
   (A)   The Municipal Court is authorized to collect a special expense for the
issuance of warrant of arrest under the circumstances set forth in division (A)
(1) of this section.
      (1)   The special expense may be collected for the issuance and service
of a warrant of arrest authorized by the following:
         (a)   Tex. Penal Code § 38.10;
         (b)   Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways, § 543.009 (Texas
Transportation Code); and
         (c)   Tex. Code of Crim. Proc. Art. 17.04.
      (2)   The amount of special expense is set at $35 for the issuance and
service of the warrant for arrest.
      (3)   The special expense may not be assessed until after due notice has
been sent to the defendant notifying him or her that a warrant has been issued
and that the warrant will be served if the requisite fine is not paid.
(Ord. 87-29, passed 9-8-87)
   (B)   The Municipal Court is hereby authorized to collect a special expense
for services performed in cases which the laws of the state require that a case
in the Court be dismissed because of actions by or on behalf of the defendant,
which actions were subsequent to the date of the alleged offense.
      (1)   The actions set forth in division (B) of this section are limited
to compliance with the provisions of §§ 543.102, 543.103, 543.104, Uniform Act
Regulating Traffic on Highways (Texas Transportation Code).
      (2)   The special expense authorized by division (B) of this section
shall not exceed the actual expenses incurred for the services, not to exceed
$25, whichever is less.
(Ord. 87-30, passed 9-8-87)
   (C)   (1)   The Municipal Court is authorized to collect a special expense
for services performed in cases in which a minor requests that an alleged
offense be processed in Teen Court.
      (2)   The special expense authorized by division (C) of this section
shall not exceed the actual expenses incurred for the services, or $10,
whichever is less.
(Ord. 87-31, passed 9-8-87)
§ 36.02  MUNICIPAL COURT BUILDING SECURITY FUND.
   (A)   Fund established.  There is hereby created a Municipal Court Building
Security Fund. This fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the
City Council.
   (B)   Fee assessed.  All defendants convicted in a trial for a misdemeanor
offense in the Harker Heights Municipal Court shall be required to pay, in
addition to such other fines, fees and costs assessed, a $3 security fee as
cost of court. A person is considered convicted for purposes of this section if
a sentence is imposed on the person, the person receives community supervision,
including deferred adjudication, or the court defers final disposition of the
person's case. The security fee shall be collected by the Municipal Court Clerk
and paid to the Harker Heights Director of Finance for deposit in the Municipal
Court Building Security Fund.
   (C)   Fund purposes.  The Municipal Court Building Security Fund may be used
only to finance the following items when used for the purpose of providing
security services for any buildings housing the Municipal Court of the city,
including:
      (1)   The purchase or repair of x-ray machines and conveying systems;
      (2)   The purchase or repair of hand-held metal detectors;
      (3)   The purchase or repair of walk-through metal detectors;
§ 36.03  MUNICIPAL COURT TECHNOLOGY FUND.
   (A)   Fund Established.  There is hereby created a Municipal Court
Technology Fund.  This Fund shall be administered by or under the direction of
the City Council.
   (B)   Fee Assessed.  All defendants convicted of a misdemeanor offense in
the Municipal Court shall be required to pay, in addition to such other fines,
fees and costs as may be assessed, a $4 technology fee as cost of court.  A
person is considered convicted for purposes of this section if a sentence is
imposed on the person, if the person is placed on community supervision
(including deferred adjudication community supervision), or if the court defers
final disposition of the person's case.  The technology fee shall be collected
by the Municipal Court Clerk and paid to the Director of Finance for deposit in
the Municipal Court Technology Fund.
   (C)   Fund Purposes.  The Municipal Court Technology Fund may be used only
to finance the purchase of or to maintain technological enhancements for the
municipal court, including without limitation:
      (1)   Computer systems, networks, hardware, and software;
      (2)   Imagining systems;
      (3)   Electronic kiosks;
      (4)   Electronic ticket writers;
      (5)   Docket management systems; and
      (6)   Any other item or service permitted by law.
(Ord. 99-19, passed 8-24-99; Am. Ord. 2004-11, passed 4-13-04)
§ 36.04  FEE FOR FAILURE TO APPEAR IN CERTAIN CASES.
   Unless a person has been acquitted of the offense for which the person
failed to appear for a complaint, citation or court order to pay a fine
involving a violation of a traffic law or an offense described by Texas
Transportation Code § 706.002(a)(2), (3), or (4), the person shall pay an
administrative fee in the amount specified by Texas Transportation Code §
706.006(a) for each violation for which the person failed to appear. Such
administrative fee is in addition to any other fee required by law.
(Ord. 2001-30, passed 9-25-01)
§ 36.05  [RESERVED].
§ 36.06  EMPLOYMENT OF JUVENILE CASE MANAGERS.
   (A)   Authorized.  Pursuant to Tex. Code of Crim. Proc. Art. 45.056, the
City Council authorizes the employment of one or more case managers to provide
services in cases involving juvenile offenders before the Municipal Court
consistent with the Court's statutory powers, to assist in administering the
Court's juvenile docket and in supervising its court orders in juvenile cases,
and to perform any other function or service authorized by law.
   (B)   Salary and benefits.  The salary and other employment benefits of each
juvenile case manager may be paid from the Fund established in §
36.05.
(Ord. 2011-24, passed 8-23-11)
§ 36.07  ADDITIONAL FEE FOR COLLECTION THROUGH A PRIVATE LAW FIRM.
   In accordance with Tex. Code of Crim. Proc. Art. 103.0031, there is hereby
imposed an additional fee of 30% on all municipal court debts and accounts
receivable, i.e., fines, fees, court costs, restitution, and other debts that
are more than 60 days past due and have been referred to a private law firm for
collection.
(Ord. 2015-26, passed 12-8-15)
CHAPTER 37:  EMPLOYMENT PROVISIONS
Section
Texas Municipal Retirement System
   
37.01   Participation
   
37.02   Notification of Board of Trustees
   
37.03   All employees of participating department members
   
37.04   Deposits to be made
   
37.05   City Secretary to remit contributions
   
37.06   Authorization for updated service credits
   
37.061   Authorization of restricted prior service credits
   
37.07   Increase in retirement annuities
   
37.08   Dates of allowances and increases
   
37.09   Provisions affecting participation
   
37.10   Supplemental death benefits fund
   
37.11   Notification
   
37.12   Current and prior service contributions to city’s account in the
Benefit Accumulation Fund
Cross-reference:
   Departments, Boards, and Commissions, see
Ch. 33
TEXAS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM
§ 37.01  PARTICIPATION.
   On behalf of the city, the City Council hereby exercises its option and
elects to have the city and all of the employees of all departments now
existing or hereafter established participate in the Texas Municipal Retirement
System, as provided in Ch. 75, Acts of the 50th Legislature, as amended (Tex.
Gov't Code §§ 851.001 et seq.), and all of the benefits and obligations of such
system are hereby accepted as to such employees.
(Ord. 72-10, passed 8-8-72)
§ 37.02  NOTIFICATION OF BOARD OF TRUSTEES.
   The City Manager is hereby directed to notify the Board of Trustees of the
Texas Municipal Retirement System that the city has elected to participate and
have the employees of the above departments participate in the system.
(Ord. 72-10, passed 8-8-72)
§ 37.03  ALL EMPLOYEES OF PARTICIPATING DEPARTMENT MEMBERS.
   Each person who becomes an employee of any participating department on or
after the effective date of participation of such department, shall become a
member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System as a condition of his
employment. The city may in the future refuse to add new departments or new
employees to such System, but shall never discontinue as to any participants.
(Ord. 72-10, passed 8-8-72)
§ 37.04  DEPOSITS TO BE MADE.
   All Employees of the city, who are members of the Texas Municipal Retirement
System, shall make deposits to the System at the rate of 7% of their individual
earnings effective on January 1, 2003.
(Ord. 2002-23, passed 10-8-02)
§ 37.05  CITY SECRETARY TO REMIT CONTRIBUTIONS.
   The City Secretary is hereby directed to remit to the Board of Trustees of
the Texas Municipal Retirement System, at its office in Austin, Texas, the
city's contributions to the System and the amounts which shall be deducted from
the compensation or payroll of employees, all as required by the Board under
the provisions of Chapter 75, Acts of the 50th Legislature of the State of
Texas, as amended (Tex. Gov't Code § 851.001 et seq.), and the City Secretary
is hereby authorized and directed to ascertain and certify officially on behalf
of the city, the prior service rendered to the municipality by each of the
employees of the participating departments, and the average prior service
compensation received by each, and to make and execute all prior service
certifications and all other reports and certifications which may be required
of the city under the provisions of Chapter 75, Acts Regular Session, 50th
Legislature, as amended (Tex. Gov't Code § 851.001 et seq.), or in compliance
with the rules and regulations of the Board of Trustees of the Texas Municipal
Retirement System.
(Ord. 72-10, passed 8-8-72)
§ 37.06  AUTHORIZATION FOR UPDATED SERVICE CREDITS.
   (A)   On the terms and conditions set out in Tex. Gov't Code Title 8,
Subtitle G, §§ 853.401 through 853.404, as amended (hereinafter referred to as
the “TMRS ACT”), each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System
(hereinafter referred to as the “System”) who has current service credit or
prior service credit in the System in force and effect on the 1st day of
January of the calendar year preceding such allowance, by reason of service in
the employment of the city, and on such date had at least 36 months of credited
service with the System, shall be and is hereby allowed “Updated Service
Credit” (as that term is defined in Tex. Gov't Code § 853.402(d).
   (B)   On the terms and conditions set out in Tex. Gov't Code § 853.601 of
the TMRS Act, any member  of  the System who is eligible  for  Updated Service
Credits on the basis of service with this city, who has unforfeited credit for
prior service and/or current service with another participating municipality or
municipalities by reason of previous service, and was a contributing member on
the 1st day of January of the calendar year preceding such allowance, shall be
credited with Updated Service Credits pursuant to, calculated in accordance
with, and subject to adjustment as set forth in said Tex. Gov't Code § 853.601,
both as to the initial grant hereunder and all future grants under this
section.
   (C)   In accordance with the provisions of Tex. Gov't Code § 853.401(d) of
the TMRS Act, the deposits required to be made to the System by employees of
the several participating departments on account of current service shall be
calculated from and after January 1, 2003 on the full amount of such person's
compensation as an employee of the city.
   (D)   The updated service credit hereby allowed and provided for shall be
100% of the base updated service credit of the member (calculated as provided
in subsection (c) of § 853.402 of the TMRS Act.)
   (E)   Each updated service credit allowed hereunder shall replace any
updated service credit, prior service credit, special prior service credit, or
antecedent service credit previously authorized for part of the same service.
(Ord. 72-10, passed 8-8-72; Am. Ord. 95-41, passed 10-4-95; Am. Ord. 99-27,
passed 9-14-99; Am. Ord. 2002-23)
§ 37.061  AUTHORIZATION OF RESTRICTED PRIOR SERVICE CREDIT.
   (A)   On the terms and conditions set out in Tex. Gov't Code, Title 8,
Subtitle G, § 853.305, as amended (hereinafter referred to as the “TMRS Act”).
Each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereinafter referred to
as the “system”) who is now or who hereafter becomes an employee of this city
shall receive restricted prior service credit for service previously performed
as an employee of any of the entities described in said § 853.305 provided that
(1) the person does not otherwise have credited service in the system for that
service, and (2) the service meets the requirements of said § 853.305.
   (B)   The service credit hereby granted may be used only to satisfy length-
of-service requirements for retirement eligibility, has no monetary value in
computing the annuity payments allowable to the member, and may not be used in
other computations, including computation of Updated Service Credits.
   (C)   A member seeking to establish restricted prior service credit under
this section must take the action required under the § 853.305 while still an
employee of this city.
(Ord. 97-24, passed 8-26-97)
§ 37.07  INCREASE IN RETIREMENT ANNUITIES.
   (A)   On terms and conditions set out in Tex. Gov't Code Subtitle G of Title
8, § 854.203, the city hereby elects to allow and to provide for payment of the
increases below stated in monthly benefits payable by the System to retired
employees and to beneficiaries of deceased employees of the city under current
service annuities and prior service annuities arising from service by such
employees to the city. An annuity increased under this section replaces any
annuity or increased annuity previously granted to the same person.
   (B)   The amount of the annuity increase under this section is computed as
the sum of the prior service and current service annuities on the effective
date of retirement of the person on whose service the annuities are based,
multiplied by 70% of the percentage change in Consumer Price Index for All
Urban Consumers, from December of the year immediately preceding the effective
date of the person's retirement to the December that is 13 months before the
effective date of this section.
   (C)   An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option
selection is reducible in the same proportion and in the same manner that the
original annuity was reduced.
   (D)   If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the
amount of an annuity, the amount of the annuity will not be changed hereby.
   (E)   The amount by which increase under this section exceeds all previously
granted increases to an annuitant is an obligation of the city and of its
account in the municipality accumulation and of the system.
(Ord. 72-10, passed 8-8-72; Am. Ord. 95-41, passed 10-4-95; Am. Ord. 2002-23,
passed 10-8-02)
§ 37.08  DATES OF ALLOWANCES AND INCREASES.
   The initial allowance of updated service credit and increase in retirement
annuities hereunder  shall be effective on January 1, 2003, subject to approval
by the Board of Trustees of the System.  An allowance of updated service
credits and an increase in retirement annuities shall be made hereunder on
January 1 of each subsequent year until this subchapter ceases to be in effect
under subsection (e) of  § 853.404 of the TMRS Act, provided that, as to such
subsequent year, the actuary for the System has made the determination set
forth in subsection (d) of § 853.404 of the TMRS Act.
(Ord. 91-11, passed 9-26-91; Am. Ord. 99-27, passed 9-14-99; Am. Ord. 2002-23,
passed 10-8-02)
§ 37.09  PROVISIONS AFFECTING PARTICIPATION.
   Pursuant to the provisions of Tex. Gov't Code, Title 8, G, §§ 852.105,
854.202, 854.204, 854.405, 854.406, and 854.410, as amended, which subtitle
shall herein be referred to as the “TMRS Act,” the city adopts the following
provisions affecting the participation of its employees in the Texas Municipal
Retirement System (which retirement system shall herein be referred to as the
System):
   (A)   An employee of the city who is a member of the System may terminate
employment and remain eligible to retire and receive a service retirement
annuity at any time after that member attains an applicable age as provided by
law if the member has at least five years of credited service performed for one
or more municipalities that have authorized eligibility under Tex. Gov't Code,
§ 854.205(b), TMRS Act.
   (B)   An employee of the city who is a member of the System may retire and
receive a service retirement annuity if the member is at least 60 years old and
has at least five years of credited service in the retirement system that is
performed for one or more municipalities that have authorized eligibility under
Tex. Gov't Code, §§ 854.205 and 854.102(h), TMRS Act.
   (C)   Any employee of this city who is a member of the System is eligible to
retire and receive a service retirement annuity, if the member has at least 20
years of credited service in that System performed for one or more
municipalities that have adopted a like provision under Tex. Gov't Code, §
854.202(g), TMRS Act.
   (D)   If a member shall die before becoming eligible for service retirement,
and leaves a surviving lawful spouse whom the member has designated as
beneficiary entitled to the payment of the member's accumulated contributions
in the event of the member's death before retirement, the surviving spouse may,
by written notice filed with the System, elect to leave the accumulated
deposits on deposit with the System, subject to the terms and conditions of
Tex. Gov't Code, § 854.204(b), TMRS Act. If the accumulated deposits have not
been withdrawn before such time as the member, if living, would have become
entitled to service retirement, the surviving spouse may elect to receive, in
lieu of the accumulated deposits, an annuity payable monthly thereafter during
the lifetime of the surviving spouse in such amount as would have been payable
had the member lived and retired at that date, under a joint and survivor
annuity (Option 1), payable during the life-time of the member and continuing
during the lifetime of the surviving spouse.
   (E)   At any time before the payment of the first monthly benefit of an
annuity, a surviving spouse to whom division (D) of this section applies may,
upon written application filed with the System, receive payment of the
accumulated contributions standing to the account of the member in lieu of any
benefits otherwise payable under this section. In the event such  a surviving
spouse shall die before payment  of the first monthly benefit of an annuity
allowed under this section, the accumulated contributions credited to the
account of the member shall be paid to the estate of such spouse.
   (F)   Any employee of the city who is a member of the System and who
performed service for the city prior to September 1, 1987 (for which service
that employee did not receive credit with the System because the employee was
not at the time a member of the System due to his or her age at the date of his
or her employment) is hereby granted service credit with the System for all
such service (performed after the date of his or her latest employment by the
city) that is prior to September 1, 1987, for which the employee has not
previously received credit with the System, pursuant to Tex. Gov't Code, §
852.105, TMRS Act.
   (G)   The rights hereinabove authorized shall be in addition to the plan
provisions heretofore adopted in force at the effective date of this section
pursuant to the TMRS Act.
   (H)   (1)   Any employee of the city who is a member of the System is
eligible to retire and receive a “standard occupational disability annuity”
under Tex. Gov't Code, § 854.408, TMRS Act, or an “optional occupational
disability retirement annuity” under Tex. Gov't Code, § 854.410, TMRS Act, upon
making application therefor upon such form and in such manner as may be
prescribed by the Board of Trustees of the System, provided that the System's
medical board has certified to the Board of Trustees that:
         (a)   The member is physically or mentally disabled for further
performance of the duties of the member's employment;
         (b)   The disability is likely to be permanent; and
         (c)   The member should be retired.
      (2)   Any annuity granted under this division (H) shall be subject to the
provisions of Tex. Gov't Code, § 854.409, TMRS Act.
   (I)   The provisions relating to the occupational disability program as set
forth in division (H) of this section are in lieu of the disability program
heretofore provided for under Tex. Gov't Code, §§ 854.301 through 854.308, TMRS
Act.
   (J)   Pursuant to Tex. Gov't Code, Title 8, Subtitle G, § 853.003, as
amended, the city hereby elects to allow any member of the Texas Municipal
Retirement System who is an employee of the city on October 11, 2005, who has
terminated a previous membership in the System by withdrawal of deposits while
absent from service, but who has at least 24 months of credited service as an
employee of the city since resuming membership to deposit with the System in a
lump sum the amount withdrawn, plus a withdrawal charge of 5% of that amount
for each year from the date of the withdrawal to the date of redeposit, and
thereupon the member shall be allowed credit for all service to which the
member has been entitled at the date of termination of the earlier membership,
with like effect as if all the service had been rendered as an employee of the
city, whether so rendered or not. The city agrees to underwrite and hereby
assumes obligations arising out of the granting of all of the credits, and
agrees that all obligations and reserves required to provide the credits shall
be charged to the city’s account in the municipality accumulation fund. The 5%
per annum withdrawal charge paid by the member shall be deposited to the credit
of the city’s account in the municipality accumulation fund; and the deposits
of the amount previously withdrawn by the member shall be credited to his or
her individual account in the employee’s savings fund of the System.
(Ord. 91-11, passed 9-26-91; Am. Ord. 99-28, passed 9-14-99; Am. Ord. 2002-23,
passed 10-8-02; Am. Ord. 2005-37, passed 10-11-05)
§ 37.10  SUPPLEMENTAL DEATH BENEFITS FUND.
   The city hereby elects to participate in the Supplemental Death Benefits
Fund of the Texas Municipal Retirement System for the purpose of providing in-
service death benefits for each of the city's employees who are members of the
System, and for the purpose of providing post-retirement death benefits for
annuitants whose last covered employment was an employee of the city, in the
amounts and on the terms provided for in Tex. Gov't Code, Title 8, §§ 852.004,
854.601 through 854.605, 855.314, 855.408, 855.502, as amended.
(Ord. 91-11, passed 9-26-91)
§ 37.11  NOTIFICATION.
   The city is hereby authorized and directed to notify the Director of the
System of adoption of §§
37.06 through
37.11 of this subchapter, and of participation of the city in said Fund.
(Ord. 91-11, passed 9-26-91)
§ 37.12  CURRENT AND PRIOR SERVICE CONTRIBUTION TO CITY’S ACCOUNT IN THE
BENEFIT ACCUMULATION FUND.
   Pursuant to Tex. Gov’t Code Title 9, Subtitle G (the TMRS Act), the city
hereby elects to make future normal and prior service contributions to its
account in the Benefit Accumulation Fund of the system at such combined rate of
the total compensation paid by the city to employees who are members of the
system, as the system’s actuary shall annually determine as the rate necessary
to fund, within the amortization period determined as applicable to the city
under the TMRS Act, the costs of all benefits which are or may become
chargeable to or are to be paid out of the city’s account in the Accumulation
Fund, regardless of other provisions of the TMRS Act limiting the combined rate
of city contributions.
(Ord. 2012-16, passed 8-28-12)
CHAPTER 38:  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Section
   
38.01   Emergency Management Director; Coordinator
   
38.02   Development of emergency management plan
   
38.03   Emergency Management Council
   
38.04   Duties and responsibilities of Director
   
38.05   Operational Emergency Management Organization; oath
   
38.06   Unauthorized use of siren or warning signal prohibited
   
38.07   Conflict with other rules
   
38.08   City not liable
   
38.09   Obstruction of emergency management; falsification
 
   
38.99   Penalty
§ 38.01  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT DIRECTOR; COORDINATOR.
   (A)   There exists the office of Emergency Management Director of the city,
which shall be held by the Mayor in accordance with state law.
   (B)   An Emergency Management Coordinator may be appointed by and serve at
the pleasure of the Director.
   (C)   The Director shall be responsible for conducting a program of
comprehensive emergency management within the city and for carrying out the
duties and responsibilities set forth in § 38.04 of this chapter. He may
delegate authority for execution of these duties to the Coordinator, but
ultimate responsibility for such execution shall remain with the Director.
(Ord. 82-10, passed 11-23-82)
§ 38.02  DEVELOPMENT OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PLAN.
   The powers and duties of the Director shall include an on-going survey of
actual or potential major hazards which may threaten life and property within
the city; and an on-going program of identifying and requiring or recommending
the implementation of measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence or
reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur. As part of his
responsibility in hazard mitigation, the Director shall supervise the
development of an emergency management plan for the city, and shall recommend
that plan for adoption by the City Council along with any and all mutual aid
plans and agreements which are deemed essential for the implementation of such
emergency management plan. The duties of the Director shall also include the
causing of a survey of the availability of existing personnel, equipment,
supplies, and services which could be used during a disaster, as provided for
herein, as well as a continuing study of the need for amendments and
improvements in the emergency management plan.
(Ord. 82-10, passed 11-23-82; Am. Ord. 2009-12, passed 5-5-09)
§ 38.03  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT COUNCIL.
   The Mayor is hereby authorized to join with the Bell County Judge and the
Mayors of the cities in the county in the formation of an Emergency Management
Council for the county and shall have the authority to cooperate on the
preparation of a joint emergency management plan and in the appointment of a
joint Emergency Management Coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to
participate in a county-wide program of emergency management in so far as the
program may affect the city.
(Ord. 82-10, passed 11-23-82)
§ 38.04  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF DIRECTOR.
   The duties and responsibilities of the Emergency Management Director shall
include the following:
   (A)   If the Director determines that a local disaster exists, the Director
shall declare a local state of disaster and invoke emergency powers. Emergency
powers may not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven days
except by or with the consent of the City Council. An order or proclamation
declaring, continuing, or terminating a local state of disaster shall be given
prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the City
Secretary.
   (B)   The direction and control of the actual disaster operations of the
City Emergency Management Organization as well as the training of emergency
management personnel.
   (C)   The determination of all questions of authority and responsibility
that may arise within the Emergency Management Organization of the city.
   (D)   The maintenance of necessary liaison with other municipal, county,
district, state, regional, federal, or other emergency management organization.
   (E)   The marshalling, after declaration of a disaster as provided for
above, of all necessary personnel, equipment, or supplies from any department
of the city to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency
management plan.
   (F)   The issuance of all necessary proclamations as to the existence of a
disaster and the immediate operational effectiveness of the emergency
management plan.
   (G)   The issuance of reasonable rules, regulations, or directives which are
necessary for the protection of life and property in the city. Such rules and
regulations shall be filed in the office of the City Secretary and shall
receive widespread publicity unless publicity would be of aid and comfort to
the enemy.
   (H)   The supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid
agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of the state and of other
local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if
deemed desirable, of an agreement with other municipalities within the county,
for the county- wide coordination of emergency management efforts.
   (I)   The supervision of, and final authorization for the procurement of all
necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private contributions
which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency management within
the city.
   (J)   The authorizing of agreements, after approval by the City Attorney,
for use of private property for public shelter and other purposes.
(Ord. 82-10, passed 11-23-82; Am. Ord. 2009-12, passed 5-5-09)
§ 38.05  OPERATIONAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION; OATH.
   (A)   The operational Emergency Management Organization shall consist of the
officers and employees of the city so designated by the Director in the
emergency management plan as well as all organized volunteer groups. The
functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such
officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management
plan. Such plan shall set forth the form of the organization, establish and
designate divisions and functions, assign tasks, duties, and powers, and
designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of this chapter.
Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles, and terminology shall
conform to the recommendations of the State Division of Emergency Management of
the State of Texas and of the Federal Government.
   (B)   Each employee or any individual that is assigned a function or
responsibility shall solemnly swear or affirm to support and defend the
Constitution of the United States, laws of the State of Texas, and the
ordinances of the city.
(Ord. 82-10, passed 11-23-82)
§ 38.06  UNAUTHORIZED USE OF SIREN OR WARNING SIGNAL PROHIBITED.
   Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so as to
simulate a warning signal, or the termination of a warning, shall be deemed
guilty of a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the penalties
imposed by §
38.99.
(Ord. 82-10, passed 11-23-82) 
Penalty, see § 38.99
§ 38.07  CONFLICT WITH OTHER RULES.
   (A)   At all times when the orders, rules, and regulations made and
promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall be in effect, they shall supersede
and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules, and regulations insofar as
the latter may be inconsistent therewith.
   (B)   This chapter shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state
or federal statute or with any military or naval order, rule, or regulation.
(Ord. 82-10, passed 11-23-82)
§ 38.08  CITY NOT LIABLE.
   This chapter is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for
the protection of the public peace, health, and safety and neither the city,
the agents and representatives of the city, nor any individual, receiver, firm,
partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, nor any of the agents
thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with, or attempting to comply
with, any order, rule, or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result
of the activity. Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises
who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the city a license of
privilege, or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate, and use the
whole or any part or parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of
sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice enemy attack shall,
together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the
death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises
under such license, privilege, or other permission, or for loss of, or damage
to, the property of such person.
(Ord. 82-10, passed 11-23-82)
§ 38.09  OBSTRUCTION OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT; FALSIFICATION.
   The following acts shall be unlawful:
   (A)   Failure to comply with lawful orders, regulations, rules, or
directives issued by authority of the city during a declared state of disaster;
   (B)   Any act that endangers the lives, or obstructs, hinders, or delays the
activities of authorized emergency management personnel, emergency management
volunteers, or other authorized city personnel in the lawful exercise of any
authority under this chapter, Chapter 418 of the Texas Government Code, or
other city, state, or federal law;
   (C)   Any act that adversely contributes to the extent or intensity of a
disaster; and
   (D)   The wearing, carrying, or displaying of any emblem, insignia, or any
other means of identification as a member of the office, unless authority to do
so has been granted to the person by the emergency management coordinator.
(Ord. 82-10, passed 11-23-82; Am. Ord. 2009-12, passed 5-5-09)  Penalty, see §
38.99
§ 38.99  PENALTY.
   Convictions for violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be
punishable by fine not to exceed $500.
(Ord. 82-10, passed 11-23-82)
CHAPTER 39:  CITY POLICIES
Section
Volunteer Acknowledgement
   
39.01   Volunteer recognition
   
39.02   Activities to be recognized
   
39.03   Types of recognition
   
39.04   Identification of members
   
39.05   Approval; location
Nondiscrimination on the Basis of Disability
   
39.10   Definitions
   
39.11   Prohibited practices
   
39.12   Assurance form to be submitted by applicants for contractual financial
assistance
   
39.13   ADA Coordinator
   
39.14   Notice of non-discrimination
   
39.15   Requirements to insure accessibility
   
39.16   Administration
   
39.17   General enforcement guidelines
   
39.18   Filing complaints; procedure
   
39.19   Investigation and conciliation procedure
   
39.20   Remedial and/or voluntary action
VOLUNTEER ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
§ 39.01  VOLUNTEER RECOGNITION.
   It shall be the policy of the city to recognize volunteer service to the
people of the city. This recognition shall be in addition to recognition given
by private organizations and the individual departments or committees of the
city served. The recognition shall be private and/or public in its scope. Such
recognition, as given by the City Manager, Mayor, and/or the City Council,
shall be in measure to the service rendered, and may take any one of several
forms.
(Ord. 91-13, passed 10-10-91)
§ 39.02  ACTIVITIES TO BE RECOGNIZED.
   Activities to be recognized shall include, but are not limited to the
following:
   (A)   Service on standing and/or special commissions and committees of the
city and its City Council (such as Planning and Zoning, Public Safety, Library
Board, and the like.)
   (B)   Service to city departments, such as Parks and Recreation (coaches,
sponsors, instructors/ leaders), Library (literacy tutors, story-tellers/
readers, library aides), Police Department (uncompensated volunteers), Fire
Department, and the like.
   (C)   Service outside of the municipal government and its committees and
commissions, such as service to individual citizens, groups of citizens, or
out-standing service to the community at large.
(Ord. 91-13, passed 10-10-91)
§ 39.03  TYPES OF RECOGNITION.
   Types of recognition to be given shall include:
   (A)   Letter of appreciation from the City Manager.
   (B)   Letter of appreciation from the Mayor and the City Council, or by the
Mayor.
   (C)   Certificate of appreciation signed by the Mayor and the City Council
and presented at a regular City Council meeting.
   (D)   Public ceremony, reception, or dinner given in conjunction with
presentation of any of the above.
(Ord. 91-13, passed 10-10-91)
§ 39.04  IDENTIFICATION OF MEMBERS.
   (A)   The responsibility for the identification of volunteers to be
recognized shall rest with the appointed or elected head of the department,
committee, commission, or other agency served by the volunteer's services; or
by any citizen, city staff member, or City Councilmember who has knowledge of
such service, which has gone unrecognized. The time frame for identifying
volunteers shall be as close to the completion of their service as practical,
but in no case shall it exceed one year's time unless such recognition is given
for a lifetime of service.
   (B)   An individual will be nominated to the office of the City Manager for
recognition. The nominator shall be responsible for the documentation of the
services offered and the time given. Further, the nominator shall prepare a
draft letter of the appreciation or the draft wording for a certificate of
appreciation; and shall recommend the level of award to be given.
(Ord. 91-13, passed 10-10-91)
§ 39.05  APPROVAL; LOCATION.
   (A)   The approval of volunteer recognition shall rest with those empowered
to sign the appropriate document. The City Manager shall determine that the
recognition is compatible with the services rendered.
   (B)   Recognition of volunteers is limited only by the resourcefulness in
locating and identifying those who make the city a better place to live and
work. Such recognition can be expected to encourage further volunteer efforts
within the city.
(Ord. 91-13, passed 10-10-91)
NONDISCRIMINATION ON THE BASIS OF DISABILITY
§ 39.10  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. The Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, as amended.
   ADA COORDINATOR. The Director of Emergency Services.
   DISABILITY. The meaning defined in the Act.
   FACILITY. The meaning defined in the Act.
   FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE. Any grant, loan, contract (other than procurement
contract or a contract of insurance or guaranty), or any other arrangement by
which the city provides or otherwise makes available assistance in the form of:
funds; services of city personnel; or real or personal property or any interest
in or use of such property, including transfers or leases of such property for
less than fair market value or for reduced consideration; and proceeds from a
subsequent transfer or lease of such property if the city share of its fair
market value is not returned to the city.
(Ord. 2005-22, passed 8-9-05)
§  39.11 PROHIBITED PRACTICES.
   (A)   The city shall seek to ensure compliance with the Act, and no
qualified individual with a disability shall, by reason of such disability, be
excluded from participation in or be denied the benefits of the services,
programs, or activities of the city, or be subjected to discrimination by the
city, directly or through contractual, licensing, or other arrangements.
   (B)   For purposes of this subchapter, aids, benefits, and services, to be
equally effective, are not required to produce the identical result or level of
achievement for people with disabilities and nondisabled persons, but must
afford people with disabilities equal opportunity to obtain the same result, to
gain the same benefit, or to reach the same level of achievement, in the most
integrated setting appropriate to the person's needs.
   (C)   The city shall not, directly or through contractual or other
arrangements, utilize criteria or methods of administration that have the
effect of subjecting qualified people with disabilities to discrimination on
the basis of disability, or have the purpose or effect of defeating or
substantially impairing accomplishment of the objectives of the city's program
with respect to people with disabilities.
   (D)   In determining the site or location of a facility, the city and its
contractors shall not make selections that have the effect of excluding people
with disabilities from, denying them the benefits of, or otherwise subjecting
them to discrimination under any program or activity, or have the purpose or
effect of defeating or substantially impairing the accomplishment of the
objectives of the program or activity with respect to people with disabilities.
   (E)   The aid, benefit, or service provided under a program or activity
receiving or benefiting from city financial assistance includes any aid,
benefit, or service provided in or through a facility that has been
constructed, expanded, altered, leased or rented, or otherwise acquired, in
whole or in part, with city funds.
(Ord. 2005-22, passed 8-9-05)
§ 39.12 ASSURANCE FORM TO BE SUBMITTED BY APPLICANTS FOR CONTRACTUAL FINANCIAL
ASSISTANCE.
   An applicant for contractual financial assistance from the city shall submit
an assurance, on a form specified by the ADA Coordinator, that the program will
be operated in compliance with this subchapter. An applicant may incorporate
these assurances by reference in subsequent applications to the city.
(Ord. 2005-22, passed 8-9-05)
§ 39.13 ADA COORDINATOR.
   There is hereby designated and established an ADA Coordinator to coordinate
the city's efforts to comply with this subchapter.
(Ord. 2005-22, passed 8-9-05)
§ 39.14 NOTICE OF NON-DISCRIMINATION.
   (A)   The city shall take appropriate initial and continuing steps to notify
participants, beneficiaries, applicants, and employees, including those with
impaired vision or hearing, and unions or professional organizations holding
professional agreements with the city that it does not discriminate on the
basis of disability in violation of this subchapter. The notification shall
state, where appropriate, that the city does not discriminate on the basis of
disability in violation of this subchapter. The notification shall state, where
appropriate, that the city does not discriminate in admission or access to, or
treatment or employment in, its programs and activities. The notification shall
also include an identification of the ADA Coordinator. Methods of initial and
continuing notification may include the posting of notices, publication in
newspapers and magazines, placement of notices in recipient's publication, and
distribution of memoranda or other written communications.
   (B)   If the city publishes or uses recruitment materials or publications
containing general information that it makes available to participants,
beneficiaries, applicants, or employees, it shall include in those materials or
publications a statement of the policy described in division (A). The city may
meet the requirement of this section either by including appropriate inserts in
existing materials and publications or by revising and reprinting the materials
and publications.
(Ord. 2005-22, passed 8-9-05)
§ 39.15 REQUIREMENTS TO INSURE ACCESSIBILITY.
   (A)   No qualified person with disabilities shall, because of
inaccessibility to or unusability of the city or its contractors facilities, be
denied the benefits of, be excluded from participation in, or otherwise be
subjected to discrimination under any program or activity to which this section
applies.
   (B)   The city and its contractors shall operate each program or activity to
which this section applies so that the program or activity, when viewed in its
entirety, is readily accessible to people with disabilities. This section does
not require that every existing facility or every part of a facility be made
accessible to and usable by people with disabilities.
   (C)   The city and its contractors may comply with the requirement of
division (B) through such means as redesign of equipment, reassignment of
classes or other services to accessible buildings, assignment of aides to
beneficiaries, home visits, delivery of health, welfare, or other social
services at alternate accessible sites, alteration of existing facilities and
construction of new facilities in conformance with federal and state
requirements or any other methods that result in making programs and activities
accessible to people with disabilities. Structural changes in existing
facilities are not required where other methods are effective in achieving
compliance with division (B). In choosing among available methods for meeting
the requirement of division (B) priority shall be given to those methods that
offer programs and activities to people with disabilities in the most
integrated setting appropriate.
   (D)   In the event that structural changes to facilities are necessary to
meet the requirements of division (B), a transition plan shall be developed
within six months of the effective date of this subchapter setting forth steps
necessary to complete such changes. A copy of the transition plan shall be made
available for public inspection. The plan shall, at a minimum:
      (1)   Identify physical obstacles in facilities that limit the
accessibility of programs or activities to people with disabilities;
      (2)   Describe in detail the methods that will be used to make the
facilities accessible;
      (3)   Specify the schedule for taking the steps necessary to achieve full
program accessibility and, if the time period of the transition plan is longer
than one year, identify steps that will be taken during each year of the
transition period; and
      (4)   Indicate the person responsible for implementation of the plan.
   (E)   Procedures will be adopted and implemented to ensure that interested
persons, including persons with impaired vision or hearing, can obtain
information as to the existence and location of services, activities, and
facilities that are accessible to and usable by people with disabilities.
   (F)   Each facility or part of a facility constructed by, on behalf of, or
for the use of the city or its contractors shall be designed and constructed in
such manner that the facility or part of the facility is readily accessible to
and usable by people with disabilities.
   (G)   Each facility or part of a facility which is altered by, on behalf of,
or for the use of the city or its contractors in a manner that affects or could
affect the usability of the facility or part of the facility shall, to the
maximum extent feasible, be altered in such manner that the altered portion of
the facility is readily accessible to and usable by people with disabilities.
   (H)   Design, construction, or alteration of facilities in conformance with
the American National Standard Specifications for Making Buildings and
Facilities Accessible to, and Usable by, the Physically Handicapped published
by the American National Standards Institute, Inc. shall constitute compliance
with divisions (B) and (C). Departures from particular requirements of those
standards by the use of other methods shall be permitted when it is clearly
evident that equivalent access to the facility or part of the facility is
thereby provided.
(Ord. 2005-22, passed 8-9-05)
§ 39.16 ADMINISTRATION.
   As a means of implementing and enforcing this subchapter, the ADA
Coordinator will serve as the city's focal point for implementing this
subchapter. The director will have the following responsibilities:
   (A)   Prepare and disseminate information regarding disability rights to the
public, city departments, and community agencies;
   (B)   Research administrative policies and procedures to identify for city
management, modifications required for accessibility to disabled persons;
   (C)   Monitor city activities related to people with disabilities and
conduct periodic compliance reviews to assure that all city departments are
providing services that are accessible to disabled persons;
   (D)   Recommend training programs for various groups of the city
organization in which accessibility and employment related needs are provided
to assure that all city services are available to the disabled community;
   (E)   Provide technical assistance and consultation to all city departments
in areas related to accessibility as defined by law;
   (F)   Establish and maintain community relations such as representation on
boards, attendance at conferences, and the like; and
   (G)   Develop long-range planning activities to accomplish compliance.
(Ord. 2005-22, passed 8-9-05)
§ 39.17 GENERAL ENFORCEMENT GUIDELINES.
   (A)   Any person who believes that he or she has been discriminated against
in violation of the provisions of this subchapter may file with the ADA
Coordinator a request to have the ADA Coordinator investigate and mediate the
complaint.
   (B)   Nothing in this subchapter shall create a civil cause of action for
damages against the city or preclude any aggrieved person from seeking any
other remedy provided by law. Nothing herein shall authorize criminal
enforcement of this subchapter against the city or its agents, employees,
officials, and the like, acting within the scope of their employment.
   (C)   A complaint to the ADA Coordinator is not a prerequisite or a bar to
the filing of a complaint with the Texas Commission on Human Rights or to the
pursuit of any other remedy provided by law. The pendency of a complaint before
the ADA Coordinator shall not bar any aggrieved party from seeking civil
action, but a final judgment in any civil action shall bar any further
investigation of a complaint.
   (D)   In connection with any investigation of a charge filed under this
subchapter, the ADA Coordinator shall at all reasonable times have access to,
for the purposes of examination and the right to copy, any evidence of any
person being investigated or proceeded against that relates to the charge under
investigation and is not privileged as provided by law.
   (E)   No person shall knowingly, intentionally or recklessly obstruct, or
prevent compliance with this subchapter or hinder or interfere with the
performance of the proper exercise of a duty, obligation, right or power of the
ADA Coordinator, or other officials with duties, obligations, rights and powers
established by ordinance.
(Ord. 2005-22, passed 8-9-05)
§ 39.18 FILING COMPLAINTS; PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Any person who claims to have been injured by an activity prohibited
by this subchapter may file a complaint with the ADA Coordinator. Such
complaints shall be in writing and shall identify the person(s) alleged to have
committed or alleged to be committing a discriminatory practice and shall state
the facts upon which the allegations of a discriminatory practice are based. In
situations where the grievant's disability requires assistance to submit a
complaint in writing, the ADA Coordinator may receive the complaint verbally.
The ADA Coordinator shall prepare complaint forms and furnish them without
charge to any person, upon request.
   (B)   All complaints must be filed 180 days following the occurrence of an
alleged discriminatory practice. Upon filing or referral of any complaint, the
ADA Coordinator shall within 10 days provide notice of the complaint by
furnishing a copy of such complaint to the persons named therein who allegedly
committed an alleged discriminatory practice (hereinafter referred to as
respondent). The respondent may file an answer to the complaint within 15 days
of receipt of the written complaint.
(Ord. 2005-22, passed 8-9-05)
§ 39.19 INVESTIGATION AND CONCILIATION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Upon the filing or referral of a complaint as herein provided, the ADA
Coordinator shall cause to be made a prompt and full investigation of the
matter stated in the complaint. Provided, however, that before any charge
becomes accepted for investigative purposes the ADA Coordinator shall have
personally reviewed with the grievant the allegations contained therein and
shall have determined that said complaint comes within the provisions of this
subchapter. In the event such review results in the determination that the
charge does not come within the provisions of this subchapter, the grievant
shall be given a clear and concise explanation of the reasons why it does not
and may appeal such determination to the City Manager in accordance with the
appeals procedure set forth in division (B) and any procedure established by
the City Manager for hearing appeals.
   (B)    If the ADA Coordinator determines that there is not reasonable cause
to believe that a particular alleged discriminatory practice has been
committed, the ADA Coordinator shall dismiss the charge and promptly notify the
person claiming to be aggrieved and the respondent of its action. Within 10
days from the receipt of such notice, and not thereafter, the complainant, or
his/her attorney, may file with the City Manager a request for review and the
City Manager shall provide the person claiming to be aggrieved and his/her
attorney an opportunity to appeal the determination of the ADA Coordinator.
Such appeal may be conducted in writing. Upon conclusion of such appeal, the
City Manager may affirm, reverse, modify the finding of the ADA Coordinator or
remand the case to the ADA Coordinator for further investigation, as
appropriate.
   (C)   Complaints filed with the ADA Coordinator shall be made under oath or
affirmation, and shall contain such information and be in such form as the ADA
Coordinator requires. Such complaints shall not be made public by the ADA
Coordinator and/or the City Manager unless otherwise required to be disclosed
by law.
   (D)   If after investigation it is determined that there is reasonable cause
to believe that a charge is true, the ADA Coordinator or a conciliator who has
not participated in that investigation, shall endeavor to eliminate any such
alleged unlawful practice(s) by informal methods of conference, conciliation
and persuasion. All determinations of the ADA Coordinator as to whether
discrimination occurred shall be made as promptly as possible. At any time
should a respondent desire to enter into a predetermination settlement, same
shall be allowed provided the aggrieved party and the ADA Coordinator agree
such is acceptable and promotes the objectives of this subchapter.
   (E)   If, after determining that there is reasonable cause to believe
discrimination occurred, and the ADA Coordinator or conciliator is unable to
secure from the respondent an acceptable conciliation agreement, the ADA
Coordinator shall present his/her findings to the City Manager. If after review
of the case, the City Manager agrees with the findings of the ADA Coordinator,
the City Manager may, in cases where the respondent is a city department, take
corrective measures as deemed appropriate to be taken to eliminate the
discriminatory activity. If the respondent is a city contractor, the City
Manager shall forward findings to the parties involved and to the City Council
together with recommendations. After receipt of the findings of the City
Manager, the City Council, if it concurs in such findings, may cause the
contract with such contractor to be canceled, terminated or suspended in whole
or in part, as the city council deems advisable under the circumstances. If
after review of the case, the city council disagrees with the findings of the
City Manager, the City Council may reverse or modify the findings of the City
Manager.
   (F)   Notice shall be provided in the city contracts that noncompliance with
this subchapter by city contractors may result in termination of such
contracts.
(Ord. 2005-22, passed 8-9-05)
§ 39.20 REMEDIAL AND/OR VOLUNTARY ACTION.
   (A)   All remedial and voluntary actions that are required by this
subchapter will be processed through the ADA Coordinator.
   (B)   If the outcome of the investigation and conciliation process finds
that a city program or activity has discriminated against persons on the basis
of disability in violation of this subchapter, the responsible program area
shall take such remedial and/or voluntary action(s) as may be appropriate and
necessary.
   (C)   All appeals of a grievance will follow established appeal procedures
through the city general grievance procedure for disabled program participants/
citizens.
   (D)   Where a city program or activity is found to have discriminated
against persons on the basis of having a disability in violation of this
subchapter and where a contractor of the program area has discriminated, the
City Manager may require either or both entities to take remedial action.
   (E)   The City Manager may, where necessary to overcome the effects of
discrimination in violation of this subchapter, require a city program or
activity to take remedial action.
   (F)   The city may take steps, in addition to any action that is required by
this subchapter, to overcome the effects of conditions that resulted in limited
participation in the city's program or activity by qualified people with
disabilities.
(Ord. 2005-22, passed 8-9-05)
TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   PUBLIC UTILITIES
      
51.   SOLID WASTE
      
52.   WATER AND SEWERS
      
53.   SEWER REGULATIONS
      
54.   CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL
CHAPTER 50:  PUBLIC UTILITIES
Section
   
50.01   Connection of utilities to commercial property
   
50.02   Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction adopted
 
   
50.99   Penalty
§ 50.01  CONNECTION OF UTILITIES TO COMMERCIAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   No utilities shall be connected to any commercial property by any
person, firm, or corporation unless a certificate of occupancy has been issued
by the city and is posted in a conspicuous place upon the property.
   (B)   A copy of Ordinance 88-16 shall be mailed by the City Secretary to all
utility companies which serve the city.
(Ord. 88-16, passed 6-28-88) 
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.02  STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS FOR PUBLIC WORKS CONSTRUCTION ADOPTED.
   (A)   The Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, North-
Central Texas Council of Governments, Third Edition 1998, with all of its
amendments as issued, are hereby adopted by reference as though they were
copied fully herein.
   (B)   Any construction standards in said Standards which are contrary or in
conflict to any existing ordinances of the city shall prevail, and all existing
ordinances to the contrary are hereby repealed in that respect only.
   (C)   Within the Specifications when reference is made to the duties of
certain officials named therein, that designated official in the city who has
duties corresponding to those of the named official in the Specifications shall
be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of
the Specifications is concerned.
(Ord. 87-10, passed 4-14-87; Am. Ord. 2002-01, passed 2-12-02) 
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate any of the
provisions of
§ 50.01 of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction in the Municipal Court shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500
for each offense.  Each and every day any such violation shall continue shall
be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. 88-16, passed 6-28-88)
   (B)   Any person or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
§ 50.02 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof in
the Municipal Court of the city shall be fined in any sum not exceeding
$2,000.  Each offense and each day such violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
(Ord. 87-10, passed 4-14-87; Am. Ord. 87-12, passed 4-28-87)
CHAPTER 51:  SOLID WASTE
Section
General Provisions
   
51.01   Definitions
   
51.02   General offenses
   
51.03   Inspection and enforcement
Container Requirements
   
51.15   Residential owner or occupant to provide containers
   
51.16   Dumpster requirements
   
51.17   Other types of containers; nonregulation
   
51.18   Location of containers for collection
   
51.19   Owner or occupant responsible for containers
   
51.20   Existing nonconforming dumpsters
Collection and Disposal Procedures
   
51.30   Monthly charges for collection
   
51.31   Holiday collection
   
51.32   Disposal of certain items
 
   
51.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUNDLED BRUSH. Brush bundled in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter.
   HEAVY BRUSH. Trees, limbs, shrubs, root balls, weeds, other plant matter, or
portions thereof that:
      (1)   Will not physically fit within, or that exceed the weight limits
of, the containers required by this chapter; and
      (2)   Cannot be tied and bundled as provided in this chapter.
   BULKY ITEMS. Any items, other than heavy brush and construction debris, that
will not physically fit within, or that exceed the weight limits of, the
containers required by this chapter.
   COLLECTION CONTRACTOR. The person or entity hired or employed by the city to
collect and dispose of solid waste from within the corporate limits of the
city.
   CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS. Dirt, brick, scrap, concrete, tile, plaster, rocks,
fence pickets, carpet, carpet padding, lumber, and other materials generally
used in construction that will not physically fit within, or that exceed the
weight limits of, the containers required by this chapter.
   SOLID WASTE, TRASH or GARBAGE. All manner of wasted or spoiled food,
discarded matter, or refuse, other than heavy brush, bulky items and
construction debris, including:
      (1)   All wasted, discarded or spoiled animal and vegetable matter,
including dead animals and waste material and refuse from kitchens, residences,
grocery stores, butcher shops, cafes, restaurants, drugstores, hotels, rooming,
boarding, and apartment houses; and
      (2)   All rubbish, such as, but not limited to, feathers, coffee grounds,
ashes, tin cans, paper bags, boxes, glass, newspaper, handbills, magazines,
other such paper products, product packaging, grass, shrubs, flowers, yard
cleaning, bundled brush, grass clippings, leaves and tree trimmings that can be
contained within the containers and weight limits for said containers as
described in this chapter.
(Ord. 85-18, passed 10-22-85; Am Ord. 99-34, passed 10-12-99; Am. Ord. 2009-17,
passed 6-9-09)
§ 51.02  GENERAL OFFENSES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sweep, haul, throw, or deposit
any construction debris, solid waste, bulky items, or heavy brush into, upon or
along, any drain, gutter, alley, sidewalk, parkway, or street within the
corporate limits of the city, or in or upon any automobile except with the
consent of the owner thereof.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or scatter construction
debris, solid waste, heavy brush, or bulky items into, onto or alongside any
public street, alley, or sidewalk in the city, or any private property except
with the consent of the owner thereof.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to store, collect, or dispose of
any construction debris, solid waste, bulky items, or heavy brush within the
corporate limits of the city except as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 85-18, passed 10-22-85; Am. Ord. 98-08, passed 4-28-98; Am. Ord. 99-34,
passed 10-12-99; Am. Ord. 2009-17, passed 6-9-09) 
Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.03  INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   It is hereby the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to make regular
inspections as necessary to evaluate compliance with this chapter, and to file
a complaint against any person violating any provision of this chapter in order
that such person may be prosecuted therefore.
(Ord. 85-18, passed 10-22-85; Am. Ord. 99-34, passed 10-12-99; Am. Ord. 2009-
17, passed 6-9-09) 
Penalty, see § 51.99
CONTAINER REQUIREMENTS
§ 51.15  RESIDENTIAL OWNER OR OCCUPANT TO PROVIDE CONTAINERS.
   (A)   Every owner, occupant, or lessee using or occupying any building,
house, or structure for residential purposes within the corporate limits of the
city shall maintain on such premises containers adequate in number to hold all
solid waste that will normally accumulate on the premises between collections.
   (B)   Containers required by this section shall be maintained in good
condition, and shall meet the following specifications:
      (1)   Single-family and duplex residential structures:
         (a)   Plastic tie-top bags at least 1.5 millimeters in thickness and
not less than 20 gallons in capacity, nor more than 40 gallon capacity, with a
total weight when filled not to exceed 75 pounds; or
         (b)   Plastic or metal trash cans with lids, such cans having a
capacity of not less than 20 gallons nor more than 44 gallons, with total
weight when filled not to exceed 75 pounds.
      (2)  All other residential structures.
         (a)   Dumpsters meeting the requirements for dumpsters in §
51.16; or
         (b)   Unless otherwise prohibited, plastic or metal trash cans with
lids, such cans having a capacity of not less than 20 gallons nor more than 44
gallons, with total weight when filled not to exceed 75 pounds. All trash cans
shall have the following clearly and legibly stenciled onto both the can and
lid the owner's:
            1.   Apartment or unit number; and
            2.   Address number. The address number shall be stenciled below
the apartment number.
            3.   The lid shall be securely tethered to the can. On non-
collection days, trash cans and their lids shall be to or near the side of the
residential structure in a location that is not visible from any public
roadways,
   (C)   All residential structures other than single-family and duplex
structures constructed after June 9, 2009, shall be designed in such a manner
and shall utilize dumpster collection per the requirements as set forth in §
51.16. Trash cans shall not be used as collection containers for such
structures.
(Ord. 85-18, passed 10-22-85; Am. Ord. 99-34, passed 10-12-99; Am. Ord. 2009-
17, passed 6-9-09) 
Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.16  DUMPSTER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided herein, every owner, occupant, or lessee
using or occupying a building or structure within the corporate limits of the
city for other than residential purposes, and all residential structures
required by this chapter to have a dumpster, or have an adequate area for a
dumpster pad site as described herein, or purposes accessory thereto, shall
maintain on such premises a dumpster meeting the requirements of this section.
   (B)   Dumpsters and associated screening required by this section shall be
maintained in good order and condition. When the Code Enforcement Officer
determines a container to be unsafe or unsightly, notice shall be given to the
occupant of the premises upon which the dumpster is located for corrective
action. The occupant of the premises upon which the dumpster is located shall
cause corrective action to be taken in conformity with such notice within ten
days of receiving such notice.
   (C)   Dumpsters shall be placed on a concrete pad that meets or exceeds the
standards shown in drawings shown in Appendix A.
   (D)   All dumpsters must be fully screened from view by an enclosure
consisting of two side walls and a rear wall, plus a gate in the front, as
required by this subsection.
      (1)   Minimum height. Screening walls and gates must be not less than six
feet nor more than eight feet in height.
      (2)   Screening materials. Materials approved for use in screening walls
are based upon the dumpster’s location on the site.
         (a)   If the enclosure is visible from any public street or right-of-
way, dumpster screening must be masonry, brick, stone, reinforced concrete, or
other similar masonry materials. Materials allowed by this section must match
the materials, style, finish and appearance of the principal building located
on the same lot.
         (b)   If the enclosure is not visible from any public street or right-
of-way, dumpster screening must be wood, metal, masonry, brick, stone,
reinforced concrete, or other similar masonry materials. Any metal screening
must be painted to blend with the primary building on the same lot. Corrugated
metal, R panel and U panel sheet metal, and fiberglass panels are prohibited
and may not be used as screening material.
      (3)   Gates. Screening gates must be solid metal and must screen the
dumpster from view when closed. Gates must swing out to an angle greater than
90 degrees and create an opening at least 12 feet wide for the collection truck
to enter the enclosure. Each gate must be equipped with a pin capable of
holding the gate in its fully opened position while the dumpster is being
accessed. Gates must swing clear of all fire lanes. Persons authorized to use
the dumpster must keep the gates closed unless the dumpster or enclosure is in
the actual process of being emptied, filled, painted, cleaned, constructed,
installed, repaired, or otherwise maintained.
         (a)   There shall be affixed to the exterior of each gate a sign that
is conspicuous and readily visible. The sign shall state “GATES TO REMAIN
CLOSED WHEN NOT IN USE” in block letters at least three inches high. All sign
lettering must appear in contrasting colors against the background.
      (4)   Bollards. A minimum of four bollards shall be provided within the
enclosure, two in the rear, and one on each side, to prevent the dumpster from
striking or damaging the screening enclosure. The city’s Planning and
Development Director may approve another type of protection device in writing
if the Director determines that such device protects the enclosure as well as
bollards.
      (5)   Additional items. Dumpster pads and screening shall be constructed
as displayed in Appendix A.
   (E)   Notwithstanding division (A) of this section, the City Manager may
permit persons using or occupying a structure for commercial purposes to use
commercial hand pickup not to exceed 300 pounds per pickup. However, if at any
time the amount of garbage removed from such structure exceeds 300 pounds per
pickup, the City Manager may thereafter require the use of a commercial
dumpster as provided herein.
(Ord. 85-18, passed 10-22-85; Am. Ord. 98-08, passed 4-28-98; Am. Ord. 99-08,
passed 4-27-99; Am. Ord. 99-34, passed 10-12-99; Am. Ord. 2009-17, passed 6-9-
09; Am. Ord. 2018-12, passed 4-10-18)  Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.17  OTHER TYPES OF CONTAINERS; NONREGULATION.
   Trash and garbage containers not meeting the requirements of either §§
51.15 or
51.16 may be considered solid waste and may be disposed of as such time of
collection.
(Ord. 85-18, passed 10-22-85; Am. Ord. 99-34, passed 10-12-99; Am. Ord. 2009-
17, passed 6-9-09)
Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.18  LOCATION OF CONTAINERS FOR COLLECTION.
   (A)   This section does not apply to dumpsters.
   (B)   Not earlier than 6:00 p.m. on the day before the day of collection,
nor later than 8:00 a.m. on the day of collection, the owner, occupant or
lessee of the premises from which the solid waste is to be collected and
removed shall place the containers for collection in a readily-accessible
location within three feet of the nearest public street.
   (C)   Containers and bundled brush shall not be placed beneath any overhead
utility lines, such as electrical lines, telephone lines, and cable television
lines, nor over electrical, gas, or water meters, nor in such a manner as to
block or unreasonably impede access to a driveway or mailbox.
   (D)   The collection contractor shall not be required to service containers
or bundled brush situated within a fence or other unopened enclosure other than
a dumpster with screening per this chapter.
   (E)   In the event it is not practical to place the containers for
collection as required by this section, the City Manager shall specify an
appropriate location for placement of the containers.
   (F)   Containers shall be removed from the front of the premises by the
owner, occupant, tenant, or lessee no later than 11:00 p.m. on the evening of
collection.
   (G)   Except on the designated collection day, solid waste containers and
bundled brush shall be stored not closer to the nearest public road than the
front of the house or building from where collection is made, provided that if
the house or building is situated more than 200 feet from the nearest public
road, the containers or bundled brush may be stored at any location which does
not pose a hazard and is not visible from the nearest public road.
(Ord. 85-18, passed 10-22-85; Am. Ord. 98-08, passed 4-18-98; Am. Ord. 99-08,
passed 4-27-99, Am. Ord. 99-34, passed 10-12-99; Am. Ord. 2009-17, passed 6-9-
09) 
Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.19  OWNER OR OCCUPANT RESPONSIBLE FOR CONTAINERS.
   Every owner, occupant, tenant, or lessee of a house or building used for
residential, public, business, or commercial purposes is required to maintain
supervision and surveillance over the containers or dumpsters servicing their
premises. If the contents of solid waste containers or bundled brush are not
removed by the collection contractor for a period exceeding seven days, such
owner, occupant, or lessee must thereafter immediately notify the City Manager.
The City Manager shall promptly investigate the matter, and if he finds that
the contractor has failed to collect trash or garbage from the subject premises
without cause, he shall issue a collection order requiring the contractor to
collect such solid waste or bundled brush within 12 hours.
(Ord. 85-18, passed 10-22-85; Am. Ord. 99-34, passed 10-12-99; Am. Ord. 2009-
17, passed 6-9-09)
§ 51.20  EXISTING NONCONFORMING DUMPSTERS.
   (A)   The nonconforming use of a dumpster (such as those dumpsters without
concrete pad(s), or screening or gating) at a structure in existence and
legally utilizing a dumpster prior to October 12,1999, may continue until one
of the following occurs:
      (1)   The property the dumpster serves has become vacant and remains
unoccupied for a period of one year;
      (2)   Any structures on the property are enlarged, reconstructed,
altered, or moved;
      (3)   Any structure on the property is damaged by fire, explosion, flood,
wind, earthquake, or other calamity or act of God or the public enemy to the
extent of 50% or more of its reasonable value; or
      (4)   The dumpster(s) becomes a hazard to public safety, or a public
nuisance.
   (B)   Thereafter, each dumpster serving the property must be brought into
compliance with §
51.16.
(Ord. 2004-44, passed 9-28-04; Am. Ord. 2009-17, passed 6-9-09)
COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL PROCEDURES
§ 51.30  MONTHLY CHARGES FOR COLLECTION.
   (A)   Monthly charges for trash and garbage collections shall be set by the
City Council.
   (B)   Each person who opens an account with the city tor trash and garbage
collection is required to pay the regular collection fees as set by the City
Council.
(Ord. 85-18, passed 10-22-85; Am. Ord. 99-34, passed 10-12-99; Am. Ord. 2000-
27, passed 9-5-00; Am. Ord. 2001-25, passed 8-28-01; Am. Ord. 2002-19, passed
9-24-02; Am. Ord. 2004-27, passed 8-10-04; Am. Ord. 2009-17, passed 6-9-09)
§ 51.31  HOLIDAY COLLECTION.
   There will not be garbage collections on regular holidays. Collections
scheduled on a holiday will be picked up on the next regularly scheduled
collection day. Holidays are New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Fourth of July,
Labor Day, Thanksgiving and Christmas. The collection contractor shall post
notice of such holidays in the local paper.
(Ord. 85-18, passed 10-22-85; Am. Ord. 99-34, passed 10-12-99; Am. Ord. 2009-
17, passed 6-9-09)
§ 51.32  DISPOSAL OF CERTAIN ITEMS.
   (A)   Bundled brush. Brush may be tied and bundled in lengths of four feet
or less, with a weight per bundle not to exceed 50 pounds. No more than five
bundles of brush will be collected per residence, per collection day.
   (B)   Heavy brush, bulky items and construction debris.
      (1)   Heavy brush, bulky items and construction debris may be hauled by
the owner of the property where such brush or debris originates to the city's
solid waste drop site located at 1761 FM 2410 during normal hours of operation.
The property owner must provide proof that he or she is a resident of the city
as shown on a recent city utility bill and drivers license.
      (2)   Alternatively, property owners may contract with a hauler to have
their brush, bulky items and construction debris hauled to a landfill at the
property owner's expense.
      (3)   Professional landscapes, tree trimming services, construction
companies, fence builders, contractors, and other commercial operations shall,
at their own expense, haul off all brush and construction debris created by
their operations, and dispose of same in a lawful manner at the disposal site
of their choosing. The city's solid waste drop site shall not accept brush or
construction debris from commercial services.
   (C)   Dead animals and fowl.
      (1)   Except for animals and fowl kept by veterinarians or persons
engaged in medical or scientific research, and those mounted by a taxidermist,
dead animals and fowl shall be disposed of within 24 hours of the time of
death. The manner in which dead animals and fowl are disposed of shall, at
minimum, comply with the established regulations of the County Health
Department and applicable state laws and regulations.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any dead animal
or fowl upon public property within the city. Public property includes without
limitation public streets, alleys, parks, and any drainage channels whether
maintained privately or by the city. Public property also includes without
limitation trash cans, dumpsters, buildings, and grounds owned, operated, or
used by any level of government, including school property.
(Ord. 92-08, passed 4-23-92; Am. Ord. 99-34, passed 10-12-99; Am. Ord. 2009-17,
passed 6-9-09)
Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.99  PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provisions of this chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined in an
amount not exceeding $1,000. Each day on which a violation of, or failure to
comply with, this chapter continues shall constitute a separate violation and
shall be punishable as such. The city also is entitled to pursue all other
criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under the authority of
other statutes or other ordinances.
(Ord. 85-18, passed 10-22-85; Am. Ord. 99-34, passed 10-12-99; Am. Ord. 2000-
27, passed 9-5-00; Am. Ord. 2002-19, passed 9-24-02; Am. Ord. 2009-17, passed
6-9-09)
Appendix A
   To view Appendix A in a PDF format, please click HERE
CHAPTER 52:  WATER AND SEWERS
Section
Water and Sewer Rates and Charges
   
52.01   Water and sewer rates and other related charges
   
52.02   Taking water unlawfully
   
52.03   Tampering with water distribution system
   
52.04   Disconnection for late payment
   
52.05   Failure to pay
   
52.06   Interference with duties
Drought Contingency Plan
   
52.20   Definitions
   
52.21   Trigger conditions
   
52.22   Drought response stages
   
52.23   Notification and public education
   
52.24   Variances
Water Conservation Plan
   
52.40   Reduction of use goals
   
52.41   Water resource management goals
   
52.42   Education and information
   
52.43   Water Conservation Plumbing Code
   
52.44   Water conservation plumbing retrofits
   
52.45   Water conservation rate structure
   
52.46   Universal metering and meter repair/replacement program
   
52.47   Water conserving landscaping
   
52.48   Water audits and leak detection
   
52.49   Recycling and reuse
   
52.50   Implementation and enforcement
   
52.51   Administration and reporting
   
52.52    Contracts with other political subdivisions
 
   
52.99   Offenses and penalty
WATER AND SEWER RATES AND CHARGES
§ 52.01  WATER AND SEWER RATES AND OTHER RELATED CHARGES.
   Water and sewer rates and other related charges will be established by the
City Council during the annual budgeting process.
(Ord. 88-15, passed 6-28-88; Am. Ord. 93-04, passed 2-25-93; Am. Ord. 93-21,
passed 9-2-93; Am. Ord. 94-40, passed 9-13-94; Am. Ord. 95-29, passed 9-26-95;
Am. Ord. 96-52, passed 9-10-96; Am. Ord. 97-25, passed 9-9-97; Am. Ord. 98-38,
passed 9-8-98; Am. Ord. 2000-27, passed 9-5-00; Am. Ord. 2001-25, passed 8-28-
01; Am. Ord. 2002-19, passed 9-24-02; Am. Ord. 2003-11, passed 9-9-03; Am. Ord.
2004-05, passed 2-24-04; Am. Ord. 2004-37, passed 9-21-04; Am. Ord. 2005-35,
passed 9-27-05; Am. Ord. 2006-32, passed 9-5-06)   
Penalty, see § 52.99
§ 52.02  TAKING WATER UNLAWFULLY.
   It shall be an offense for any person to take, use or receive water from the
city’s water distribution system (i) except through a city authorized meter
properly measuring the water flow, (ii) for any property that does not have
either a city authorized master meter or a separate meter to measure water for
each household or business receiving the water thereon, or (iii) for any
purpose not specified in the application, contract or permit with the city. It
is a defense to prosecution under this section that the actor was a city
employee or contractor acting within the course and scope of his official
duties, or that the action was otherwise authorized by the Director of Public
Works.
(Ord. 2013-18, passed 7-9-13)  Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.03  TAMPERING WITH WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM.
   (A)   It shall be an offense for any person to knowingly or intentionally
destroy, deface, vandalize, injure, interfere with, alter, obstruct, bypass, or
tamper with, or attempt to destroy, deface, vandalize, injure, interfere with,
alter, obstruct, bypass or tamper with any portion of the city’s water
distribution system, including without limitation any reservoir, tank, pump
station, main, fountain, fireplug, hydrant, stopcock, valve, pipe connection,
meter, meter box, meter cover, seal or locking device, or other apparatus.
   (B)   It is prima facie evidence that a person has intentionally or
knowingly violated division (A) if the person is an owner, occupant or manager
of the premises, or otherwise benefits from the supply of city water to the
premises, and:
      (1)   Water is prevented from passing through a meter used or furnished
by the city to supply water to the premises;
      (2)   A meter used or furnished by the city is prevented from correctly
registering the quantity of water supplied to the premises;
      (3)   Water is diverted or bypassed by the use of a device from or around
a pipe, main, meter, hydrant or other connection of the city;
      (4)   A meter or service connection of the city used for service to the
premises is removed; or
      (5)   Wastewater is prevented or diverted from flowing from the premises
into the wastewater system.
   (C)   This section does not apply to a city employee or contractor acting
within the course and scope of his official duties, or to a person whose
actions were duly authorized by the Director of Public Works.
(Ord. 2013-18, passed 7-9-13)  Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.04  DISCONNECTION FOR LATE PAYMENT.
   (A)   It is the policy of the city to discontinue utility service to
customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a meaningful
opportunity to be heard on disputed bills.  The city's form for application for
utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to the title, address,
room number, and telephone number of the official in charge of billing, clearly
visible and easily readable provisions to the effect:
      (1)   That all bills are due and payable on or before the date set forth
on the bill; and
      (2)   That if any bill is not paid by or before that date, a second bill
will be mailed containing a cutoff notice that if the bill is not paid within
ten days of the mailing of the second bill, service will be discontinued for
nonpayment; and
      (3)   That any customer disputing the correctness of his bill shall have
a right to a hearing at which time he may be represented in person and by
counsel or any other person of his choosing and may present orally or in
writing his complaint and contentions to the city official in charge of utility
billing.  This official shall be authorized to order that the customer's
service not be discontinued and shall have the authority to make a final
determination of the customer's complaint.
   (B)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be entertained; only
questions of proper and correct billing will be considered.  In the absence of
payment of the bill rendered or resort to the hearing procedure provided
herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified, but in no event
until the charges have been due and unpaid for at least 30 days.
   (C)   When it becomes necessary for the city to discontinue utility service
to a customer for non-payment of bills, service will be reinstated only after
the applicant for service has (i) paid all bills for service then due, all
civil penalties authorized by this chapter, and an administrative charge of
$15, and (ii) provided a receipt, certificate, or other proof reasonably
acceptable to the Director of Public Works that any damage or unauthorized
alteration to the privately-maintained portion of the water line serving the
premises has been repaired by a reputable licensed plumbing contractor.
   (D)   It shall also be the policy of the city that a customer pay $30 for a
returned check.
(Am. Ord. 2008-23, passed 9-2-08; Am. Ord. 2013-18, passed 7-9-13)
§ 52.05  FAILURE TO PAY.
   In addition to sanctions provided for by this chapter, the city is entitled
to exercise sanctions provided for by the other ordinances of the city for
failure to pay the bill for water and sanitary sewer service when due.
(Ord. 88-15, passed 6-28-88; Am. Ord. 93-04, passed 2-25-93; Am. Ord. 93-21,
passed 9-2-93; Am. Ord. 94-40, passed 9-13-94)
§ 52.06  INTERFERENCE WITH DUTIES.
   It is unlawful for any person to intentionally or knowingly obstruct, impede
or interfere with a city employee in the performance of his lawful duty to
maintain, read or repair a city water meter, water line leak detection meter,
or other portion of the city’s water distribution system.
(Ord. 2013-18, passed 7-9-13)  Penalty, see §
52.99
DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLAN
§ 52.20  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONSERVATION.  Those practices, techniques, and technologies that reduce the
consumption of water, reduce the loss or waste of water, improve the efficiency
in the use of water or increase the recycling and reuse of water so that a
supply is conserved and made available for future or alternative uses.
   CUSTOMER.  Any person, company, or organization using water supplied by the
city, other than the city itself or a city employee acting within the course
and scope of such employment.
   DESIGNATED WATERING DAYS.  Means Sundays and Thursdays for street addresses
ending in an even number (0, 2, 4, 6, or 8), and Saturdays and Wednesdays for
street addresses ending in an odd number (1, 3, 5, 7 or 9).
   DROUGHTCONTINGENCY PLAN.  A plan which prescribes short-term measures to
cause a temporary but significant reduction in water use during drought or
periods of extended high temperatures.
   NON-ESSENTIAL WATER USE.  Water uses that are not essential, nor required
for the protection of public health, safety, and welfare including but not
limited to:
      (1)   Irrigation of landscaped areas, including parks, athletic fields,
and golf courses, except as otherwise provided by this subchapter;
      (2)   Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer,
airplane or other vehicle;
      (3)   Use of water to wash down any sidewalks, walkways, driveways,
parking lots, tennis courts, or other hard-surfaced areas except to maintain
health and safety conditions;
      (4)   Use of water to wash down buildings or structures for purposes
other than immediate fire protection;
      (5)   Flushing gutters or permitting water to run or accumulate in any
gutter or street;
      (6)   Use of water to fill, refill, or add to any swimming pools or
Jacuzzi-type pools;
      (7)   Use of water in a fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes
except where necessary to support aquatic life;
      (8)   Failure to repair a controllable leak within a reasonable period
after becoming aware of such leak; and
      (9)   Use of water from hydrants for any other purposes other than fire
fighting.
   OUTDOOR WATER USE.  Any outdoor use of water, including but not limited to
watering lawns, shrubs, and other types of outdoor vegetation; washing
vehicles, boats, and trailers; use of landscape irrigation systems; the
refilling or adding water to outdoor swimming pools, wading pools or ponds; the
operation of any outdoor ornamental fountain or other similar structure; the
use of water from fire hydrants for uses other than fire fighting or other
activities necessary to maintain health and safety conditions; the washing down
of patios, driveways, parking areas, streets, tennis courts, sidewalks or other
paved areas; and the washing down of ground foundations.
(Ord. 94-21, passed 6-14-94; Am. Ord. 2005-40, passed 11-8-05; Am. Ord. 2009-
31, passed 10-27-09; Am. Ord. 2011-32, passed 12-13-11; Am. Ord. 2015-03,
passed 2-24-15)
§ 52.21  TRIGGER CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Daily water demand will be monitored for emergency conditions by the
city. The City Manager, on recommendation of the Public Works Department, shall
determine when conditions warrant initiation or termination of each stage of
this subchapter. Weather conditions are to be considered in drought
classification determination. Predicted long, cold, or dry periods are to be
considered in impact analysis.
   (B)   The city shall conduct a feasibility study about an interconnection
with Central Texas Water Supply Corporation. The interconnection would be
utilized to provide water in emergency conditions provided it does not create
an additional emergency situation for either entity. This shared water resource
may be evaluated or implemented prior to initiation of the trigger conditions.
   (C)   Stage 1 - Mild Water Shortage Conditions, Voluntary Conservation.
Customers shall be requested to voluntarily conserve water and adhere to the
water restrictions on non-essential water use, as outlined in §
52.22(B) (Stage 1) conservation measures when any of the following trigger
events occur:
      (1)   The city's wholesale water provider initiates stage 1 conservation
conditions.
      (2)   The city's total daily water demand expressed as a percentage of
pumping capacity reaches 80%.
   (D)   Stage 2 - Moderate Water Shortage Conditions, Mandatory Conservation.
The City Manager will initiate Stage 2 conservation measures when any of the
following triggering events occur:
      (1)   The city's total storage capacity falls to 75% of maximum storage.
      (2)   The city's wholesale water provider initiates Stage 2 conservation
conditions.
      (3)   The city's total daily water demand expressed as a percentage of
pumping capacity reaches 85%.
   (E)   Stage 3 - Severe Water Shortage Conditions, Mandatory Conservation.
The City Manager will initiate Stage 3 conservation measures when any of the
following triggering events occur:
      (1)   The city's total storage capacity falls to 50% of maximum storage.
      (2)   The city's wholesale water provider initiates stage 3 conservation
conditions.
      (3)   The city's total daily water demand expressed as a percentage of
pumping capacity reaches 90%.
   (F)   Stage 4 - Emergency Water Shortage Conditions, Mandatory Conservation.
The City Manager will initiate Stage 4 conservation measures when any of the
following triggering events occur:
      (1)   The city's total storage capacity falls to 25% of maximum storage.
      (2)   The city's total daily water demand expressed as a percentage of
pumping capacity reaches 95%.
      (3)   The city water system is contaminated to the degree that the city's
ability to supply safe, potable water is impaired.
      (4)   Any mechanical failure of pumping equipment or system component
failure which in the opinion of the Public Works Director will require more
than 12 hours to repair, and which causes a loss of capability to provide water
service in the city.
      (5)   The City Manager declares that mandatory water restrictions are
necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare due to unusual
events, catastrophic occurrences, or severe weather, provided that such
declaration shall not extend beyond seven days unless authorized by the City
Council.
   (G)   Requirements for termination. The City Manager may rescind Stage 1 at
any time. Any other Stage may be rescinded by the City Manager when all of the
trigger conditions for that Stage cease to exist.
(Ord. 94-21, passed 6-14-94; Am. Ord. 98-41, passed 10-13-98; Am. Ord. 2005-40,
passed 11-8-05; Am. Ord. 2009-31, passed 10-27-09; Am. Ord. 2011-32, passed 12-
13-11; Am. Ord. 2015-03, passed  2-24-15)
§ 52.22  DROUGHT RESPONSE STAGES.
   (A)   The City Manager shall monitor water supply and demand conditions on a
daily basis and, upon initiating a drought response stage in accordance with
the triggering criteria set forth in §
52.21, shall provide notice as provided by §
53.23(B). The applicable restrictions are effective immediately on the making
of the public announcement.
   (B)   Stage 1 - Mild Water Shortage Conditions, Voluntary Conservation.
During Stage 1 the aspirational goals are to: raise public and customer
awareness of water demand conditions; encourage voluntary water conservation by
avoiding non- essential water uses and observance of the restrictions of this
subsection; and achieve a target reduction of 5% of the city's total water
demand expressed as a percentage of pumping capacity.
      (1)   Irrigation of landscaped areas with hose-end sprinklers or
automatic irrigation systems should be limited to any two days of the week
between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
      (2)   Outdoor water use is discouraged between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and
8:00 p.m. except with hand-held hoses equipped with a positive pistol grip
nozzle or other device that automatically shuts off water flow when the hose is
not being used, or hand-held buckets.
      (3)   All operations of the city shall minimize non-essential water uses.
   (C)   Stage 2 - Moderate Water Shortage Conditions, Mandatary Conservation.
During Stage 2 the aspirational goal is to achieve a target reduction of 10% of
the city's total water demand expressed as a percentage of pumping capacity.
Customers must comply with the water use requirements and restrictions of this
subsection under threat of penalty for violation.
      (1)   The following uses and activities are prohibited at all times:
         (a)   Washing sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis
courts, patios, or other hard-surfaced areas, except to alleviate immediate
health or safety hazards;
         (b)   Allowing water to run off a property or allowing water to pond
in the street or parking lot;
         (c)   Operating a permanently installed irrigation system with one or
more sprinkler heads that are broken, missing, out of adjustment, or spraying
more than 10% of the water on street or parking lots;
         (d)   Failure to repair a controllable leak within a reasonable period
after the customer becomes aware of such leak; and
         (e)   Charity car washes.
      (2)   Irrigation of landscaped areas, golf course greens, tees, and
fairways shall be limited to the hours of 8:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m. on designated
watering days.
      (3)   The washing of automobiles, trucks, motorbikes, boats, trailers,
airplanes, or other vehicles is prohibited except between the hours of 8:00
p.m. to 9:00 a.m. on designated watering days. Such washing, when allowed,
shall be done with a hand-held bucket or a hand-held hose equipped with a
positive shutoff nozzle for quick rinses. This prohibition does not apply to
washing of:
         (a)   Individual vehicles on the immediate premises of a commercial
car wash or commercial service station; or
         (b)   Vehicles or any other type of mobile equipment (such as garbage
trucks and vehicles to transport food and perishables) when the health, safety,
and welfare of the public is contingent upon frequent vehicle cleansing.
      (4)   Use of water to fill, refill, or add to any indoor or outdoor
swimming pools, wading pools, or jacuzzi-type pools is prohibited except
between the hours of 8:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m. on designated watering days.
      (5)   Operation of any ornamental fountain or pond for aesthetic or
scenic purposes is prohibited except where necessary to support aquatic life or
where such fountains or ponds are equipped with a recirculation system.
      (6)   Restaurants are prohibited from serving water to patrons except
when requested.
      (7)   All other outdoor water use is prohibited between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 8:00 p.m. except with hand-held hoses equipped with a positive pistol
grip nozzle or other device that automatically shuts off water flow when the
hose is not being used, or hand-held buckets. It shall be an affirmative
defense to a violation of using water outside the hours permitted by this
paragraph if customer was:
         (a)   At a commercial plant nursery and irrigating products for sale;
or
         (b)   Irrigating landscaping during installation thereof or within the
first ten days thereafter.
      (8)   Stage 2 restrictions do not apply to the following uses of water:
         (a)   The necessary use of water, other than for landscaping
irrigation, by a governmental entity in pursuit of its governmental functions
for the benefit of the public, such as for capital improvement construction
projects; and
         (b)   The necessary use of water, other than for landscape irrigation,
for land development (such as roadway base preparation, flushing of utility
lines, dust control, concrete and asphalt work) and for building construction
processes.
   (D)   Stage 3 - Severe Water Shortage Conditions, Mandatory Conservation.
During Stage 3 the aspirational goal is to achieve a target reduction of 15% of
the city's total water demand expressed as a percentage of pumping capacity.
      (1)   Supply Management Measures. The city will cease the flushing of
water mains except when necessary for reasons of health or safety. Irrigation
of public landscaped areas will be discontinued except when such areas are
irrigated with reclaimed water, domestic ground water, raw water sources, or
sources other than the city water supply system.
      (2)   Water Use Restrictions. During Stage 3 customers must comply with
the water use requirements and restrictions of this subsection, under threat of
penalty for violation. All requirements and restrictions of Stage 2 shall
remain in effect during Stage 3 except:
         (a)   The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, airplanes,
and other types of mobile equipment is prohibited except:
            (i)   On the immediate premises of a commercial car wash or a
commercial service station; or
            (ii)   When such washing is in the immediate interest of the public
health, safety, and welfare, and occurs between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00
a.m.
         (b)   The filling, refilling, or adding of potable water to swimming
or wading pools is prohibited.
         (c)   No new landscapes of any type may be installed.
         (d)   The use of water for land development, construction purposes,
and dust control is prohibited.
         (e)   All other outdoor water use is restricted to use of hand-held
hoses equipped with a positive pistol grip nozzle or other device that
automatically shuts off water flow when the hose is not being used, or hand-
held buckets, and may occur only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
and 8:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m. on designated watering days. The use of permanently
installed irrigation systems, drip irrigation systems, and hose end irrigation
is prohibited.
   (E)   Stage 4 - Emergency Water Shortage Conditions, Mandatory Conservation.
During Stage 4 the aspirational goal is to achieve a target reduction of 20% of
the city's total water demand expressed as a percentage of pumping capacity.
      (1)   Water Use Restrictions. During Stage 4 customers must comply with
the water use requirements and restrictions of this subsection, under threat of
penalty for violation. All requirements and restrictions of Stage 3 shall
remain in effect during Stage 4.
      (2)   The City Manager, upon recommendation of the Public Works Director,
may order water rationing and terminate service to selected users of the system
in accordance with the following sequence:
         (a)   Recreational users;
         (b)   Commercial users;
         (c)   Industrial users;
         (d)   School users;
         (e)   Residential users; and
         (f)   Public health and safety facilities.
(Ord. 94-21, passed 6-14-94; Am. Ord. 98-41, passed 10-13-98; Am. Ord. 2005-40,
passed 11-8-05; Am. Ord. 2009-31, passed 10-27-09; Am. Ord. 2011-32, passed 12-
13-11; Am. Ord. 2015-03, passed 2-24-15; Am. Ord. 2019-23, passed 8-13-19) 
Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.23  NOTIFICATION AND PUBLIC EDUCATION.
   (A)   The city is located within the Brazos Region Water Planning Group,
Region G. A copy of this subchapter has been provided to the Brazos Region
Water Planning Group, Region G, as well as the Brazos River Authority.
   (B)   Public notification of the initiation or termination of drought
response stages shall be by means of publication in the Killeen Daily Herald
newspaper, the City website and public service announcements on KWTX - Channel
10. Additional notification may be given by signs posted in public places,
utility bill inserts, and other means to be determined by the City Manager.
   (C)   When mandatory restrictions are enacted with the initiation of Stage
2, Stage 3 or Stage 4, the Executive Director of TCEQ will be notified, at a
minimum via telephone, within five business days.
   (D)   Public education of this subchapter will be provided periodically to
update the public with information about the conditions under which each stage
of this subchapter is to be initiated or terminated as well as the drought
measures to be implemented in each stage. This information may be provided
through utility bill inserts, public events, or other means to be determined by
the City Manager.
   (E)   In the event of an imminent or actual water supply emergency due to
either impairment of water supply source (including contamination) or system
failure, the following emergency actions will take place:
      (1)   The public will be notified of the need to boil water, use bottled
water, or use a designated alternate water source, as appropriate.
      (2)   The City Manager may seek assistance through the local and/or state
emergency management system.
(Ord. 94-21, passed 6-14-94; Am. Ord. 2005-40, passed 11-8-05; Am. Ord. 2009-
31, passed 10-27-09; Am. Ord. 2011-32, passed 12-13-11; Am. Ord. 2015-13,
passed 2-24-15)
§ 52.24  VARIANCES
   (A)   The City Manager may, in writing, grant temporary variance for
existing water uses otherwise prohibited under this subchapter if it is
determined that failure to grant such a variance would cause an emergency
condition adversely affecting the health, sanitation, or fire protection for
the public or the person requesting such variance, and if one or more of the
following conditions are met:
      (1)   Compliance with this subchapter cannot be technically accomplished
during the duration of the water supply shortage or other condition for which
the subchapter is in effect; or
      (2)   Alternative methods can be implemented which will achieve a
comparable reduction in water use.
   (B)   Persons requesting an exemption from the provisions of this subchapter
shall file a petition for variance with the City Secretary within five days
after a particular drought response stage has been invoked. All petitions for
variances shall be reviewed by the City Manager and shall include the
following:
      (1)   Name and address of each petitioner;
      (2)   Purpose of water use;
      (3)   Specific provision(s) of this subchapter from which the petitioner
is requesting relief;
      (4)   Detailed statement as to how the specific provision of this
subchapter adversely affects the petitioner or what damage or harm will occur
to the petitioner or others if petitioner complies with this subchapter;
      (5)   Description of the relief requested;
      (6)   Period of time for which the variance is sought;
      (7)   Alternative water use restrictions or other measures the petitioner
is taking or proposes to take to meet the intent of this subchapter and the
compliance date; and
      (8)   Any other pertinent information.
   (C)   Variances granted by the City Manager shall be subject to the
following conditions, unless waived or modified:
      (1)   Variances granted shall include a timetable for compliance;
      (2)   Variances granted shall expire when the particular drought response
stage for which the variance was granted is no longer in effect; and
      (3)   The City Manager may terminate a variance if the petitioner fails
to meet specified requirements.
   (D)   No variance shall be retroactive or otherwise justify any violation of
this subchapter occurring prior to the issuance of the variance.
(Ord. 2005-40, passed 11-8-05; Am. Ord. 2009-31, passed 10-27-09; Am. Ord.
2011-32, passed 12-13-11; Am. Ord. 2015-03, passed 2-24-15)
WATER CONSERVATION PLAN
§ 52.40  REDUCTION OF USE GOALS.
   (A)   It is the goal of the City Council to reduce the future water
requirements by adopting conservation measures that will prevent the otherwise
expected rise in per capita use of water, and endeavor to maintain the current
level of per capita demand. This goal recognizes that there are factors that
will increase the average per capita use of water unless additional
conservation actions are taken. These factors that may increase the per capita
use are projected increases in per capita income, increases in the employment-
population ratio, increases in the proportion of single-family homes, increases
in the number of persons living in each household, and uses by additional
industries as the economy of the community expands.
   (B)   Given these potentials for causing the per capita use to increase and
the fact that the City Council has already adopted and implemented all of those
conservation measures which are considered to have a large impact on water use,
a goal of further reducing the per capita demand would be unrealistic for water
resources planning purposes.
(Ord. 98-40, passed 10-13-98; Am. Ord. 2011-32, passed 12-13-11; Am. Ord. 2015-
03, passed 2-24-15)
§ 52.41  WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT GOALS.
   (A)   It is the goal of the City Council to reduce to the maximum extent
possible the rate of depletion of Lake Belton and Stillhouse Hollow Lake by the
utilization of sewage effluent water to substitute for potable water tor some
irrigation purposes.
   (B)   The Water Conservation Plan, when implemented, will serve as a program
to influence the long-term water use characteristics of the city's residents.
The five-year goal of the program is to reduce the percentage of water loss
from the city's water system to approximately 9%, while maintaining the base
per capita water use of 143 gallons per day or less. The ten-year goal of the
program is to further reduce the percentage of water loss to 8%, while
maintaining a per capita water use of 140 gallons per day or less.
(Ord. 98-40, passed 10-13-98; Am. Ord. 2009-16, passed 6-9-09; Am. Ord. 2011-
32, passed 12-13-11; Am. Ord. 2015-03, passed 2-24-15)
§ 52.42  EDUCATION AND INFORMATION.
   (A)   The education of the residents as to water conservation practices and
methods will be accomplished through a program of informing the citizens on the
city website, utility bills, local newspaper articles, brochures, radio, and
public education through schools. The information to be distributed will follow
the items of the "Guidelines for Municipal Water Conservation" and the Drought
Contingency Plan, §
52.20.
   (B)   The specific program of education and information will be as follows:
      (1)   Special articles will be printed in the Evening Star newspaper of
Harker Heights and the Killeen Daily Herald as needed.
      (2)   Water and wastewater billings shall be utilized to further inform
the residents of water conservation.
      (3)   All new customers shall be informed of the water conservation
program by a brochure. It will describe the program and explain its goals and
solicit the help and participation of the new customers.
(Ord. 98-40, passed 10-13-98; Am. Ord. 2011-32, passed 12-13-11; Am. Ord. 2015-
03, passed 2-24-15)
§ 52.43  WATER CONSERVATION PLUMBING CODE.
   As set forth in §
150.01, the Council has adopted plumbing regulations that include water saving
plumbing requirements consistent with Texas Water Development Board guidelines.
These regulations apply to all new construction and replacement of plumbing in
existing structures.
(Ord. 98-40, passed 10-13-98; Am. Ord. 2011-32, passed 12-13-11; Am. Ord. 2015-
03, pass 2-24-15)
§ 52.44  WATER CONSERVATION PLUMBING RETROFITS.
   Customers and/or owners of buildings that do not have water conserving
plumbing devices will be encouraged to retrofit their old fixtures. The
educational and advertising program will help inform them of advantages of
installing water savings devices as well as the availability of these items.
Customers will be informed of water conservation kits available at a low cost
to aid in their water conservation efforts.
(Ord. 98-40, passed 10-13-98; Am. Ord. 2011-32, passed 12-13-11; Am. Ord. 2015-
03, passed 2-24-15)
§ 52.45  WATER CONSERVATION RATE STRUCTURE.
   The city currently has a uniform rate structure that does not and will not
encourage water waste. All water customers are subject to the uniform rate
structure so that all customer classes (single-family residence, multi-family
residence, industrial, commercial, and the like) are equally encouraged to
conserve water.
(Ord. 98-40, passed 10-13-98; Am. Ord. 2011-32, passed 12-13-11; Am. Ord. 2015-
03, passed 2-24-15)
§ 52.46  UNIVERSAL METERING AND METER REPAIR/REPLACEMENT PROGRAM.
   (A)   The city currently has master meters located at the Maintenance Yard
pump station and Verna Lee pump station sites to provide accurate accounting of
water supply from the Bell County WCID #1 system.
   (B)   Currently, the city has a water accounting program that is implemented
by computerized water consumption tracking. Each meter is monitored for
consistency in water use. If water consumption increases or decreases
dramatically, the meter becomes suspect and is tested and repaired or replaced
as necessary.
   (C)   In addition to meters identified by the computerized water accounting
program, the city will establish a flow meter testing and replacement schedule
as follows:
      (1)   Pump station discharge meters - tested annually.
      (2)   Two inch meters or greater - tested once every two years.
      (3)   Establish meter change-out program after ten years of service.
   (D)   Metering and meter repair/replacement coupled with water accounting
and auditing will be used in conjunction with other programs such as leak
detection and repair to potentially save significant quantities of water.
(Ord. 98-40, passed 10-13-98; Am. Ord. 2009-16, passed 6-9-09; Am. Ord. 2011-
32, passed 12-13-11; Am. Ord. 2015-03, passed 2-24-15)
§ 52.47  WATER CONSERVING LANDSCAPING.
   The use of water conserving landscaping and irrigation techniques shall be
encouraged through education and information programs. This will be done
through a public education program that will include suggestions on landscaping
and irrigation procedures which will result in reduced water consumption and
reduced water bills. These practices will be implemented as much as possible on
public grounds in order to set an example for the general public. Nurseries and
other businesses that sell outdoor plants, grasses, and irrigation equipment
will be encouraged to make products available to the public that conserve
water.
(Ord. 98-40, passed 10-13-98; Am. Ord. 2011-32, passed 12-13-11; Am. Ord. 2015-
03, passed 2-24-15)
§ 52.48  WATER AUDITS AND LEAK DETECTION.
   The city currently has a continuous leak detection, location, and repair
program that includes an annual water audit. When a source of water loss is
located, corrective repairs or other actions are taken. The city has access to
a Fisher Model XLT-20 to conduct a thorough sonic or acoustic survey of the
system. Additionally, as set forth in §
52.46, the city is implementing metering of fire hydrants. The meter testing
program will aid in reducing water losses.
(Ord. 98-40, passed 10-13-98; Am. Ord. 2011-32, passed 12-13-11; Am. Ord. 2015-
03, passed 2-24-15)
§ 52.49  RECYCLING AND REUSE.
   There are a few commercial businesses or industries in Harker Heights that
recycle or reuse water, and the city is seriously considering using treated
effluent water from the wastewater plant to irrigate a 33-acre park owned by
the city. The city has already asked TCEQ to assist in administrative and
submittal requirements that must be followed when utilizing reclaimed water. In
addition, the city will continue to look for opportunities to recycle or reuse
water.
(Ord. 98-40, passed 10-13-98; Am. Ord. 2011-32, passed 12-13-11; Am. Ord. 2015-
03, passed 2-24-15)
§ 52.50  IMPLEMENTATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   The City Council has passed this ordinance as a means to implement and
enforce the Water Conservation Plan.
(Ord. 98-40, passed 10-13-98; Am. Ord. 2011-32, passed 12-13-11; Am. Ord. 2015-
03, passed 2-24-15)
§ 52.51  ADMINISTRATION AND REPORTING.
   (A)   The Public Works Director will act as the administrator of the Water
Conservation Plan. The administrator will oversee the execution and
implementation of all elements of the Plan. He will also be responsible to
oversee the keeping of adequate records for program verification.
   (B)   The administrator will be responsible for the submission of an updated
Drought Contingency Plan and Water Conservation Plan once every five years to
the Texas Water Development Board, the Texas Commission on Environmental
Quality, the Brazos River Authority, Region G and the Bell County Water Control
& Improvement District No. 1.
(Ord. 98-40, passed 10-13-98; Am. Ord. 2011-32, passed 12-13-11; Am. Ord. 2015-
03, passed 2-24-15)
§ 52.52  CONTRACTS WITH OTHER POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS.
   Although no necessity exists upon passage and approval of this Water
Conservation Plan for contracts with other political subdivisions, the city may
enter into such contracts from time to time in order to benefit the public and
to maximize the effectiveness of this plan.
(Ord. 98-40, passed 10-13-98; Am. Ord. 2011-32, passed 12-13-11; Am. Ord. 2015-
03, passed 2-24-15)
§ 52.99  OFFENSES AND PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of §§
52.01 through
52.05 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction,
shall be fined in an amount not exceeding $1,000. Each day on which a violation
of, or failure to comply with, this subchapter continues shall constitute a
separate violation and shall be punishable as such. The city also is entitled
to pursue all other criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under
the authority of other statutes or other ordinances.
   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of the
mandatory water use restrictions as set forth in §§
52.20 through
52.24 of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction in the Municipal Court of the city shall be punished by a fine not
to exceed the sum of $500 for each offense. Each and every day any such
violation shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense.
   (C)   In any prosecution for violation of any provision of the mandatory
water use restrictions as set forth in §§
52.20 through
52.24 of this chapter, it shall be an affirmative defense that:
      (1)   The person was using only reclaimed water, ground water, raw water,
or water obtained from any source other than the city water supply system;
      (2)   The use was necessary for testing or repair of water distribution
facilities, residential and commercial plumbing, or permanently installed
landscape irrigation systems; or
      (3)   The use was necessary for fire fighting, fire protection, or other
activities necessary to maintain public health, sanitation, safety, and
welfare.
   (D)   The city also is entitled to pursue all other criminal and civil
remedies to which it is entitled under the authority of other statutes or other
ordinances.
(Ord. 94-21, passed 6-14-94; Am. Ord. 94-40, passed 9-13-94; Am. Ord. 2002-19,
passed 9-24-02; Am. Ord. 2011-32, passed 12-13-11; Am. Ord. 2013-18, passed 7-
9-13; Am. Ord. 2015-03, passed 2-24-15)
CHAPTER 53:  SEWER REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
53.01   Definitions
   
53.02   Compliance with existing authority
   
53.03   Reserved
   
53.04   Permit required
   
53.05   User charge system
   
53.06   Tampering with sewers prohibited
   
53.07   Connection to city sewer; septic tanks prohibited
Sewer Use Requirements; Discharges
   
53.20   Prohibited discharges
   
53.21   Chemical discharges
   
53.22   Hazardous metals and toxic materials
   
53.23   Particulate size
   
53.24   Stormwater and other unpolluted drainage
   
53.25   Temperature
   
53.26   Radioactive wastes
   
53.27   Impairment of facilities
   
53.28   Fats, oils and greases; control and prevention
   
53.29   Building sewer requirements
   
53.30   Sampling and testing
Administration and Enforcement
   
53.40   Approving authority requirements
   
53.41   Review and approval
   
53.42   Power to enter property
   
53.43   Authority to disconnect service
   
53.44   Notice; continuing violations
   
53.45   Failure to pay bills
   
53.46   Appeal
 
   
53.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 53.01  DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ACT.  The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean
Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251, et seq.
      ANIMAL WASTE.  Includes the following waste regardless of whether the
waste has been exposed to pathogens: carcasses of animals; body parts of
animals; blood and blood products, serum, plasma, and other blood components
from animals; or bedding of animals.
      APPROVING AUTHORITY.  The City Manager.
      AUTOMOTIVE OIL.  Any lubricating oils or greases intended for use in an
internal combustion engine, crankcase, transmission, gear box, or differential
for an automobile, bus, lawnmower, tractor, trailer, motorcycle, boat, truck,
airplane, water craft, four-wheeler or other machine with such components. The
term includes oil or grease that is not labeled specifically for that use but
is suitable for that use according to generally accepted industry
specifications, including those of synthetic composition.
      BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD).  The quantity of biochemical oxidation
of organic matter over five days at a temperature of 20°C under standard
laboratory procedures, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l), as determined
by standard methods.
      BLOOD AND BLOOD PRODUCTS.  Human blood, serum, plasma and other blood
components.
      BUILDING SEWER.  The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal (also called the house lateral and house
connection).
      BYPASS.  The intentional diversion of waste or wastewater from any
portion of a user’s facility.
      CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD).  Measure of the oxygen consuming capacity
of inorganic and organic matter present in the water or wastewater expressed in
mg/l as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specific
test, but not differentiating between stable and unstable organic matter and
thus not necessarily correlating with biochemical oxygen demand as determined
by standard methods.
      COMPOSITE SAMPLE.  The sample resulting from the combination of
individual samples taken at selected intervals based on an increment of either
flow or time.
      CONTROL MANHOLE.  A manhole giving access to a building sewer at some
point before the building sewer discharge mixes with other discharges in the
public sewer.
      CONTROL POINT.  Point of access to a course of discharge before the
discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer.
      COOLING WATER.  The water discharged from any system of condensation,
such as air conditioning, cooling, and refrigeration systems.
      DIRECT DISCHARGE.  The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater
directly into the waters of the state under a permit issued by the TCEQ or EPA.
      DIRECTOR.  The Water, Wastewater and Stormwater Official of the city.
      DISCHARGE.  To deposit, conduct, drain, emit, throw, run, allow seeping,
or otherwise release or dispose of any wastewater, waste, or any other
substance into the wastewater system, or to allow, permit, or suffer any of
these acts or omissions to occur, without regard to intent.
      FATS, OILS AND GREASES (FOG). Organic polar compounds derived from animal
and/or plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules
detectable and measurable using analytical test procedures specified in the
standard methods, and sometimes referred to herein as “grease” or “greases.”
      FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT.  All commercial, institutional or industrial
restaurants, food courts, food packagers, grocery and convenience stores,
bakeries, lounges, bars, schools, food manufacturers, food processors,
hospitals, hotels, motels and nursing homes that (1) prepare, serve, process,
manufacture or conduct any food service type activity involving food or
beverage products of any kind and (2) generate industrial wastewater.
      GARBAGE.  Animal and vegetable wastes and residue from preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, processing, storage,
and sale of food products and produce.
      GENERATOR.  Any person who owns or operates a grease trap/grease
interceptor or grit trap or whose act or process produces a grease or grit trap
waste.
      GRAB SAMPLE.  An individual sample collected without regard to flow over
a period of time not exceeding 15 minutes.
      GREASE TRAP OR GREASE INTERCEPTOR.  A device designed to use differences
in specific gravities to separate and retain light density liquids, waterborne
fats, oils, and greases prior to the wastewater entering the sanitary sewer
collection system. These devices also serve to collect settleable solids,
generated by and from food preparation activities, prior to the water exiting
the trap and entering the sanitary sewer collection system. Grease traps and
interceptors are also referred to herein as “grease traps/interceptors.”
      GREASE TRAP WASTE.  Material collected in and from a grease trap/
interceptor in the sanitary sewer service line of a commercial, institutional,
or industrial food service or processing establishment, including the solids
resulting from de-watering processes.
      GRIT TRAP OR GRIT INTERCEPTOR.  A receptacle, structure, or mechanical
device used by a generator to intercept, collect, separate, and restrict the
passage of petroleum based oil and grease waste, and inorganic or other solids
or semi-solids from wastewater prior to discharge to the wastewater system.
      GRIT TRAP WASTE.  Petroleum based oil and grease waste, and inorganic or
other solids and semi-solids collected by and removed from a grit trap.
      HAZARDOUS METAL.  Each of the following metals in its elemental state and
any of its compounds expressed as that metal: arsenic, cadmium, chromium,
copper, cyanide, lead, mercury, molybdenum, nickel, selenium, silver and zinc.
      INDUSTRIAL WASTE CHARGE.  The charge made on those persons who discharge
industrial wastes into the city’s sewer system.
      INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER.  Waste or wastewater resulting from any process of
industry, manufacturing, trade, or business from the development of any natural
resource, or any mixture of the waste with water or normal wastewater, or
distinct from normal wastewater.
      MILLIGRAMS PER LITER, (mg/l).  The same as parts per million and is a
weight-to-volume ratio; the milligram-per-liter value multiplied by the factor
8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water.
      NATURAL OUTLET.  Any outlet into a water-course, ditch, lake, or other
body of surface water of groundwater.
      NORMAL DOMESTIC WASTEWATER. Wastewater excluding industrial wastewater
discharged by a person into sanitary sewers and in which the average
concentration of TSS is not more than 250 mg/l and in which the average
concentration of BOD is not more than 250 mg/l.
      OVERLOAD.  The imposition of organic or hydraulic loading on a treatment
facility in excess of its engineering design capacity.
      PERSON.  Any individual and includes any corporation, organization,
government or governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, estate,
trust, partnership association, or other legal entity.
      pH.  The logarithm (Base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion
concentration.
      POTW or PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS.  A treatment works which is owned
by a state or municipality as defined by section 502(4) of the Clean Water Act.
This definition includes any devices and systems used in the storage,
treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes
of a liquid nature. It also includes all sewers, pipes and other conveyances
that convey wastewater to a POTW treatment plant. The term also means the
municipality, as defined in section 502(4) of the Act, which has jurisdiction
over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from such a treatment works.
For purposes of this chapter, the terms “sanitary sewer system” and “POTW” may
be used interchangeably.
      PUBLIC SEWER.  A public sewer that conveys domestic waste water or
industrial wastes or a combination of both, and into which stormwater, surface
water, groundwater, and other unpolluted wastes are not intentionally passed.
      RESIDENTIAL USER.  A person discharging normal domestic wastewater from a
single family dwelling, duplex, or other dwelling unit that has complete
independent living facilities and that is used solely for residential use and
is not used in conjunction with a home occupation.
      SLUG.  Any discharge of water, wastewater, or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-
hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
      STANDARD METHODS.  The examination and analytical procedures set forth in
the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of “Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater” as prepared, approved, and published
jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works
Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation, or through the use of
approved test procedures found in 40 C.F.R. 136 or 30 Texas Administrative Code
§ 319.11.
      STORM SEWER.  A conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with
drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, inlets, gutters,
ditches, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, or storm drains)
owned or operated by the city and designed or used for collecting or conveying
storm water, and which is not used for collecting or conveying sewage and which
is not part of the wastewater system.
      STORM WATER.  Rainfall runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and
drainage.
      SUSPENDED SOLIDS (S.S.).  Solids measured in mg/l that either float on
the surface of, or  are in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids,
and which are largely removable by a laboratory filtration device.
      TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS).  The value of the test for total suspended
solids, as described in the latest edition of “Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water & Wastewater.”
      TRANSPORTER.  A person who is registered with and authorized by the TCEQ
to transport sewage sludge, water treatment sludge, domestic septage, chemical
toilet waste, grit trap waste, or grease trap waste in accordance with 30 Texas
Administrative Code § 312.142.
      TRAP.  A device designed to skim, settle, or otherwise remove grease,
oil, sand, flammable wastes, or other harmful substances.
      UNPOLLUTED WASTEWATER.  Water containing no free or emulsified grease or
oil; no acids or alkalis; no phenols or other substances producing taste or
odor in receiving water; no toxic or poisonous substances in suspension,
colloidal state, or solution; no noxious or otherwise obnoxious or odorous
gases; not more than an insignificant amount in mg/l each of suspended solids
and BOD, as determined by the TCEQ; and color not exceeding 50 units as
measured by the platinum-cobalt method of determination as specified in
standard methods.
      USER.  Any person, including those located outside the corporate limits
of the city, which by any means contributes, causes, or permits the
contribution or discharge of waste, wastewater, or other substances into the
wastewater system.
      WASTE.  Rejected, unutilized, or superfluous substances in liquid,
gaseous, or solid form resulting from domestic, agricultural, or industrial
activities.
      WASTEWATER.  A combination of the water-carried waste from residences,
business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments,  together with
any ground water, surface water, and storm water that may be present.
      WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGE.  The charge on all users of the public sewer
system whose wastes do not exceed in strength the concentration values
established as representative of normal wastewater.
      WATERCOURSE.  A natural or man-made channel in which a flow of water
occurs, cither continuously or intermittently.
      WATERS IN THE STATE.  Groundwater, percolating or otherwise, lakes, bays,
ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, rivers streams, creeks, estuaries,
marshes, inlets, canals, the Gulf of Mexico inside the territorial limits of
the state, and all other bodies of surface water, natural or artificial, inland
or coastal, fresh or salt, navigable or non-navigable, and including the beds
and banks of all watercourses and bodies of surface water, that are wholly or
partially inside or bordering the state or inside the jurisdiction of the
state.
   (B)   The abbreviations below shall have the following meanings:
      BOD:      Biochemical Oxygen Demand
      CFR:      Code of Federal Regulations
      COD:      Chemical Oxygen Demand
      EPA:      U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
      FOG:      Fats Oils and Greases
      Gpd:      Gallons per day
      l:      Liter
      mg:       Milligrams
      mg/l:      Milligrams per liter
      NPDES:   National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
      POTW:   System Publicly Owned Treatment Works
      RCRA:   Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
      SWDA:   Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.)
      TAC:      Texas Administrative Code
      TCEQ:   Texas Commission on Environmental Quality
      TPDES:   Texas Pollution Discharge Elimination System
      TSS:      Total Suspended Solids
      USC:      United States Code
(Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-25-11)
§ 53.02  COMPLIANCE WITH EXISTING AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Unless exception is granted by the approving authority, the public
sanitary sewer system shall be used by all persons discharging:
      (1)   Wastewater;
      (2)   Industrial wastes; or
      (3)   Polluted liquids.
   (B)   Unless authorized by the TCEQ, no person may deposit or discharge any
waste included in division (A) of this section on public or private property or
into or adjacent to any:
      (1)   Natural outlet;
      (2)   Watercourse;
      (3)   Storm sewer; or
      (4)   Other area within the jurisdiction of the city.
   (C)   The approving authority shall verify prior to discharge that wastes
authorized to be discharged will receive suitable treatment orders of federal,
state, and local governments.
(Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-25-11)  Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.03  RESERVED.
§ 53.04  PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge waste except as
authorized by a permit issued under this chapter.
   (B)   A person applying for a new discharge shall:
      (1)   Submit an application on forms supplied by the approving authority;
      (2)   Secure approval by the approving authority of plans and
specifications for the facilities when required;
      (3)   Comply with all requirements for agreements or arrangements
including but not limited to, provisions for:
         (a)   Payment of charges;
         (b)   Installation and operation of the facilities and of pretreatment
facilities, if required; and
         (c)   Sampling and analysis to determine quantity and strength when
directed by the city; and
      (4)   Provide a sampling point, when requested by the city, subject to
the provisions of this chapter and approval of the approving authority.
(Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-25-11)  Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.05  USER CHARGE SYSTEM.
   (A)   Persons making discharges of industrial waste into the city system
shall pay a charge to cover all costs of collection and treatment.
   (B)   When discharges of any waste into the city system are approved by the
approving authority, the city or its authorized representative shall enter into
any agreement or arrangement providing:
      (1)   Terms of acceptance by the city;
      (2)   Payment by the person making the discharge, in accordance with the
user charge system as established in division (C) of this section;
      (3)   New sewer construction and sewer connection procedures and
requirements shall be in accordance with the International Plumbing Code;
      (4)   A sewer application approved with connection fee paid; and
      (5)   Construction of sewer connections shall be approved by city
inspectors prior to sewer use.
   (C)   The industrial waste user of the city system shall pay one and one-
half times the rate established in § 52.01 for commercial users of the system.
(Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-25-11)
§ 53.06  TAMPERING WITH SEWERS PROHIBITED.
   No person may negligently, willfully, or maliciously cause loss or damage by
tampering with or destroying public sewers or treatment facilities. The city
may pursue all criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under
authority of statutes and ordinances against a person who violates this
section.
(Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-25-11)  Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.07  CONNECTION TO CITY SEWER; SEPTIC TANKS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The drainage system of every house or building within the city limits
shall be connected with the city sanitary sewer system when the city sewer is
available.
   (B)   All buildings presently connected with septic tanks will have the
drainage system changed to connect to the sanitary sewer line when such
sanitary sewer is reasonably available. “Reasonably available” is interpreted
to mean that a sanitary sewer line capable of providing service runs within 300
feet of the property upon which the building is located.
(Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-25-11)
SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS; DISCHARGES
§ 53.20  PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   (A)   No person may discharge any waste which by itself or by interaction
with other wastes may:
      (1)   Overload, injure or interfere with wastewater treatment processes
or facilities;
      (2)   Constitute a hazard to humans or animals; or
      (3)   Create a hazard in receiving waters of the wastewater treatment
plant effluent.
   (B)   All discharges shall conform to requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-25-11)  Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.21  CHEMICAL DISCHARGES.
   (A)   No discharge to public sewers may contain:
      (1)   Cyanide greater than 1.0 mg/l;
      (2)   Fluoride other than that contained in the public water supply;
      (3)   Chlorides in concentrations greater than 250 mg/l;
      (4)   Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid, or gas; or
      (5)   Substances causing an excessive chemical oxygen demand.
   (B)   No waste or wastewater discharged to waters in the state may contain:
      (1)   Strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating
solutions, whether neutralized or not;
      (2)   Fats, wax, grease, or oil, whether emulsified or not, in excess of
l00 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at
temperatures between 32 and 150°F (0 and 65°C);
      (3)   Objectionable or toxic substances, exerting an excessive chlorine
requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite
wastewater treatment works exceeds the limits established by the approving
authority for such materials; or
      (4)   Obnoxious, toxic, or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in
quantities sufficient to violate the provisions of §
53.20(A) of this chapter.
   (C)   No waste, wastewater, or other substance may be discharged into public
sewers which has a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.5, or any other corrosive
property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and/or
personnel at the wastewater facilities.
   (D)   All waste, wastewater, or other substance containing phenols, hydrogen
sulfide, or other taste and odor-producing substances shall conform to
concentration limits established by the approving authority. After treatment of
the composite waste-water, concentration limits may not exceed the requirements
established by state, federal, or other agencies with jurisdiction over
discharges to receiving waters.
(Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-25-11) 
Penalty, see § 53.99
§ 53.22  HAZARDOUS METALS AND TOXIC MATERIALS.
   (A)   No discharges may contain concentrations of hazardous metals any
amounts other than as specified in division (B) of this section.
   (B)   The allowable concentrations of hazardous metals, in terms of mg/l,
for discharge to inland waters, and determined on the basis of individual
sampling in accordance with standard methods are:
 
                  Not to Exceed
Metal     Average Daily Composite Grab Sample
Arsenic   0.1     0.2             0.3
Barium    1.0     2.0             4.0
Cadmium   0.05    0.1             0.2
Chromium  0.5     1.0             5.0
Copper    0.5     1.0             2.0
Lead      0.5     1.0             1.5
Manganese 1.0     2.0             3.0
Mercury   0.005   0.005           0.01
Nickel    1.0     2.0             3.0
Selenium  0,05    0.1             0.2
Silver    0.05    0.1             0.2
Zinc      1.0     2.0             6.0
 
(Note: These concentration parameters and rules governing same are promulgated
under authority of Tex. Water Code, §§ 5.103 and 5.105, and in accordance with
30 Texas Administrative Code §§ 319.21-319.29.)
   (C)   No other hazardous metals or toxic materials may be discharged into
public sewers without a permit from the approving authority specifying
conditions of pretreatment, concentrations, volumes, and other applicable
provisions.
   (D)   Prohibited hazardous materials include but arc not limited to:
      (1)   Antimony;
      (2)   Beryllium;
      (3)   Bismuth;
      (4)   Cobalt;
      (5)   Molybdenum;
      (6)   Uranylion;
      (7)   Rhenium;
      (8)   Strontium;
      (9)   Tellurium;
      (10)   Herbicides;
      (11)   Fungicides; and
      (12)   Pesticides.
(Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-25-11)  Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.23  PARTICULATE SIZE.
   (A)   No person may discharge garbage or other solids into public sewers
unless it is shredded to a degree that all particles can be carried freely
under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers.
   (B)   The approving authority is entitled to review and approve the
installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of 3/
4 horse-power (0.76 hp metric) or greater. A garbage grinder shall be designed
and installed to ensure that ground particles shall not exceed 1/2-inch in any
dimension.
(Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-25-11) 
Penalty, see § 53.99
§ 53.24  STORMWATER AND OTHER UNPOLLUTED DRAINAGE.
   (A)   No person may make any new connections from inflow sources, or
discharge to public sanitary sewers:
      (1)   Unpolluted stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, or
subsurface drainage;
      (2)   Unpolluted cooling water;
      (3)   Unpolluted industrial process waters; or
      (4)   Other unpolluted drainage.
   (B)   In compliance with applicable law, the approving authority may
designate storm sewers and other watercourses into which unpolluted drainage
described in division (A) of this section may be discharged.
(Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-25-11)  Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.25  TEMPERATURE.
   No person may discharge liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than
150°F (65°C), or any substance which causes the temperature of the total
wastewater treatment plant influent to increase at a rate of 10°F or more per
hour, or a combined total increase of plant influent to 110°F.
(Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-25-11)  Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.26  RADIOACTIVE WASTES.
   (A)   No person may discharge radioactive wastes or isotopes into public
sewers without the written permission of the approving authority.
   (B)   The approving authority may establish, in compliance with applicable
state and federal regulations, regulations for discharge of radioactive wastes
into public sewers.
(Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-25-11)  Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.27  IMPAIRMENT OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   No person may discharge into public sewers any substance that can be
reasonably expected to cause:
      (1)   Obstruction to the flow in sewers;
      (2)   Interference with the operation of treatment processes of
facilities; or
      (3)   Excessive loading of treatment facilities.
   (B)   Discharges prohibited by division (A) of this section include, but are
not limited to, materials which exert or cause concentrations of:
      (1)   Inert suspended solids greater than 250 mg/l including but not
limited to:
         (a)   Fuller’s earth;
         (b)   Lime slurries; and
         (c)   Lime residues;
      (2)   Dissolved solids greater than 1,000 mg/l including but not limited
to:
         (a)   Sodium chloride; and
         (b)   Sodium sulfate;
      (3)   Excessive discoloration including but not limited to:
         (a)   Dye wastes;
         (b)   Vegetable tanning solutions; or
      (4)   BOD, COD, or chlorine demand in excess of normal plant capacity.
   (C)   No person may discharge into public sewers any substance that may be
reasonably expected to:
      (1)   Deposit grease or oil in the sewer lines in such a manner as to
clog the sewers;
      (2)   Overload skimming and grease handling equipment;
      (3)   Pass to the receiving waters without being effectively treated by
normal wastewater treatment processes due to the non-amenability of the
substance to bacterial action; or
      (4)   Deleteriously affect the treatment processes due to excessive
quantities.
   (D)   No person may discharge any substance into public sewers which:
      (1)   Is not amenable to treatment or reduction by the processes and
facilities employed; or
      (2)   Is amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the treatment
plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having
jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
   (E)   The approving authority shall regulate the flow and concentration of
slugs when they may:
      (1)   Impair the treatment process;
      (2)   Cause damage to collection facilities;
      (3)   Incur treatment costs exceeding those tor normal wastewater; or
      (4)   Render the effluent unfit for stream disposal or industrial use.
   (F)   No person may discharge into public sewers solid or viscous substances
which may violate division (A) of this section if present in sufficient
quantity or size, including, but not limited to:
      (1)   Ashes;
      (2)   Cinders;
      (3)   Sand;
      (4)   Mud;
      (5)   Straw;
      (6)   Shavings;
      (7)   Metal;
      (8)   Glass;
      (9)   Rags;
      (10)   Feathers;
      (11)   Tar;
      (12)   Plastics;
      (13)   Wood;
      (14)   Unground garbage;
      (15)   Whole blood;
      (16)   Paunch manure;
      (17)   Hair and fleshings;
      (18)   Entrails;
      (19)   Paper products, either whole or ground by garbage grinders;
      (20)   Slops;
      (21)   Chemical residues;
      (22)   Paint residues; or
      (23)   Bulk solids.
(Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-25-11)  Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.28  FATS, OILS AND GREASES; CONTROL AND PREVENTION.
   (A)   Applicability and prohibitions.
      (1)   This section shall apply to all non-residential users of the
wastewater system and transporters of grease or grit trap waste.
      (2)   Grease or grit traps or interceptors shall not be required for
residential users.
      (3)   Food service establishments shall install, use, and maintain
appropriate grease traps or interceptors as required in §
53.28(B).
      (4)   Car washes, auto repair, fueling stations, and other facilities
generating automotive oil, grease, sand, wash water and other wastes or
substances harmful or hazardous to the wastewater system as a result of
providing commercial service or manufacturing shall install, use, and maintain
appropriate grit traps or interceptors as required in §
53.28(B).
      (5)   No user may intentionally or unintentionally allow the direct or
indirect discharge of any petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, mineral
oil, or any fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin into the POTW
system in such amounts as to cause interference with the collection and
treatment system, or as to cause pollutants to pass through the treatment works
into the environment.
   (B)   Installation and maintenance requirements.
      (1)   Installations.
         (a)   New and modified facilities.
            1.   Food service establishments which are newly proposed or
constructed, or existing facilities which will be expanded or renovated, or
existing facilities changing ownership to include a food service establishment,
or to expand an existing food service establishment, shall be required to
design, install, operate and maintain a grease trap in accordance with the
adopted plumbing codes under Chapter 150 and other applicable ordinances. The
grease trap shall have adequate capacity to capture all FOG in excess of that
found in normal domestic wastewater. The food service establishment shall also
be required to install and maintain a control point in accordance with this
chapter. Grease traps and control points shall be installed and inspected prior
to issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
            2.   Commercial service or manufacturing facilities which are newly
proposed or constructed, or existing facilities which will be expanded or
renovated, or existing facilities changing ownership that generate automotive
oil, grease, sand, wash water or other substances that will interfere with the
wastewater system shall be required to design, install, operate and maintain a
grease or grit trap or interceptor in accordance with the adopted plumbing
codes under
Chapter 150 and other applicable ordinances. The facility shall also be
required to install and maintain a control point in accordance with this
chapter. Grit traps or interceptors and control points shall be installed and
inspected prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
         (b)   Existing facilities. Existing grease or grit traps or
interceptors must be operated and maintained in accordance with the
manufacturer’s recommendations and in accordance with this section. Grease or
grit traps or interceptors that either do not have adequate capacity to capture
all FOG, TSS, BOD or COD in excess of that found in normal domestic wastewater,
or sand or other deleterious substances as designed, or that are non-
functional, shall be replaced at the user’s expense upon notification by the
Director. The Director may require an existing facility to install a control
point, in accordance with §
53.29 at the user’s sole expense, to enable the Director to monitor discharges.
      (2)   Cleaning and maintenance generally.
         (a)   Grease or grit traps or interceptors shall be maintained in an
efficient operating condition at all times.
         (b)   Each grease or grit trap or interceptor pumped shall be fully
evacuated unless the trap volume is greater than the tank capacity on the
vacuum truck in which case the transporter shall arrange for additional
transportation capacity so that the trap is fully evacuated within a 24-hour
period, in accordance with 30 Texas Administrative Code § 312.143.
         (c)   All grease or grit trap or interceptor waste shall be properly
disposed of at a permitted facility in accordance with federal, state, and
local regulation.
      (3)   Self-cleaning.
         (a)   Grease trap self-cleaning operators must receive approval from
the POTW annually prior to removing grease from their own grease trap(s)
located inside a building, provided:
            1.   The grease trap is no more than 50 gallons in liquid/operating
capacity;
            2.   Proper on-site material disposal methods are implemented (e.g.
absorb liquids into solid form and dispose into trash);
            3.   The local solid waste authority allows such practices;
            4.   Grease trap waste is placed in a leak proof; sealable
container(s) located on the premises and in an area for the transporter to
pump-out; and
            5.   Detailed records on these activities are maintained and made
available to the Director upon request.
         (b)   Grease trap self-cleaning operators must submit a completed
self-cleaning request to the Director for approval. The written request shall
include the following information:
            1.   Business name and street address;
            2.   Grease trap/interceptor operator name, title, and phone
number;
            3.   Description of maintenance frequency, method of disposal,
method of cleaning and size (in gallons) of the grease trap/interceptor; and
            4.    Signed statement that the operator will maintain records of
waste disposal and produce them for compliance inspections.
         (c)   Self-cleaners must adhere to all the requirements, procedures
and detailed record keeping outlined in their approved application, to ensure
compliance with this chapter. A maintenance log shall be kept by self-cleaning
operators that shall be made available for inspection and copying upon request
by the Director. The log must indicate, at a minimum, the following information
for each maintenance event:
            1.   Date the grease trap/ interceptor was serviced;
            2.   Name of the person or company servicing the grease trap/
interceptor;
            3.   Waste disposal method used;
            4.   Gallons of grease removed and disposed of;
            5.   Waste oil added to grease trap/interceptor waste; and
            6.   Signature of the operator after each cleaning that certifies
that all grease was removed, disposed of properly, grease trap/interceptor was
thoroughly cleaned, and that all parts were replaced and in operable condition.
         (d)   Violations incurred by grease trap self-cleaners will be subject
to enforcement action including fines and/or removal from the self-cleaner
program.
      (4)   Cleaning schedules.
         (a)   Grease or grit traps or interceptors shall be cleaned as often
as necessary to ensure that sediment and floating materials do not accumulate
to impair the efficiency of the grease trap/interceptor; to ensure the
discharge is in compliance with local discharge limits, and to ensure no
visible grease is observed in discharge.
         (b)   Grease traps and grease interceptors subject to these standards
shall be completely evacuated a minimum of every 90 days, or more frequently
when:
            1.   Twenty-five percent or more of the wetted height of the grease
trap or grease interceptor, as measured from the bottom of the device to the
invert of the outlet pipe, contains floating materials, sediment, oils or
greases;
            2.   The discharge exceeds BOD, COD, TSS, FOG, pH, or other
pollutant levels established by the Director; or
            3.   The Director determines the owner or operator thereof has,
within the preceding 24-month period, committed two or more separate acts that
resulted in a notice of continuing violution, a civil penalty, or a criminal
conviction under this chapter.
         (c)   Any person who owns or operates a grease trap/interceptor may
submit to the Director a request in writing for an exception to the 90-day
pumping frequency of their grease trap/interceptor. The Director may grant an
extension for required cleaning frequency on a case-by-case basis when:
            1.   The grease trap/interceptor owner/operator has demonstrated
the specific trap/interceptor will produce an effluent, based on defensible
analytical results, in consistent compliance with established local discharge
limits such as BOD, TSS, FOG, or other parameters as determined by the
Director; or
            2.   Less than 25% of the wetted height of the grease trap or
grease interceptor, as measured from the bottom of the device to the invert of
the outlet pipe, contains floating materials, sediment, oils or greases.
         (d)   In any event, a grease trap and grease interceptor shall be
fully evacuated, cleaned, and inspected at least once every 180 days.
         (e)   Grit traps or interceptors shall be completely evacuated and
inspected at least once every 180 days or more frequently, if required by the
Director of Public Works.
      (5)   Manifest requirements.
         (a)   Each pump-out of a grease or grit trap or interceptor must be
accompanied by a manifest to be used tor record keeping purposes.
         (b)   Persons who generate, collect and transport grease or grit trap
or interceptor waste shall maintain a record of each individual collection and
deposit. Such records shall be in the form of a manifest. The manifest shall
include:
            1.   Name, address, telephone, and commission registration number
of transporter;
            2.   Name, signature, address, and phone number of the person who
generated the waste and the date collected;
            3.   Type and amount of waste collected or transported;
            4.   Name and signature of each person responsible for collecting,
transporting or depositing the waste;
            5.   Date and place where the waste was deposited;
            6.   Identification (permit or site registration number, location,
and operator) of the facility where the waste was deposited;
            7.   Name and signature of facility on-site representative
acknowledging receipt of the waste and the amount of waste received;
            8.   The volume of the grease waste received; and
            9.   A consecutive numerical tracking number to assist
transporters, waste generators, and regulating authorities in tracking the
volume of grease transported.
         (c)   Manifests shall be divided into five parts and records shall be
maintained as follows:
            1.   One part of the manifest shall have the generator and
transporter information completed and shall be given to the generator at the
time of waste pickup.
            2.   The remaining four parts of the manifest shall have all
required information completely tilled out and signed by the appropriate party
before distribution of the manifest.
            3.   One part of the manifest shall go to the receiving facility.
            4.   One part shall go to the transporter, who shall retain a copy
of all manifests showing the collection and disposition of waste.
            5.   One copy of the manifest shall be returned by the transporter
to the person who generated the wastes within 15 days after the waste is
received at the disposal or processing facility.
            6.   One part of the manifest shall go to the Director.
         (d)   Copies of manifests returned to the waste generator shall be
retained for rive years and be readily available for review by the Director
upon request.
      (6)   Alternative treatment.
         (a)   A person commits an offense if the person introduces, or causes,
permits, or suffers the introduction of any surfactant, solvent or emulsifier
into a grease trap. Surfactants, solvents, and emulsifiers are materials which
allow the grease to pass from the trap into the collection system, and include
but are not limited to enzymes, soap, diesel, kerosene, terpene, and other
solvents.
         (b)   It is an affirmative defense to an enforcement of §
53.28(B)(6)(a) that the use of surfactants or soaps is incidental to normal
kitchen hygiene operations.
         (c)   Bioremediation media may be used with the Director’s written
approval if the person has proved to the satisfaction of the Director that
laboratory testing which is appropriate for the type of grease trap to be used
has verified that:
            1.   The media is a pure live bacterial product which is not
inactivated by the use of domestic or commercial disinfectants and detergents,
strong alkalis, acids, and/or water temperatures of 160°F (71°C);
            2.   The use of the media does not reduce the buoyancy of the
grease layer in the grease trap and does not increase the potential for oil and
grease to be discharged to the sanitary sewer;
            3.   The use of the bioremediation media does not cause foaming in
the sanitary sewer; and
            4.   The BOD, COD, and TSS discharged to the sanitary sewer after
use of the media does not exceed the BOD, COD, and TSS which would be
discharged if the product were not being used and the grease trap was being
properly maintained. pH levels must be between 5 and 11.
         (d)   All testing designed to satisfy the criteria set forth in §
53.28(B)(6)(c) shall be scientifically sound and statistically valid. All tests
to determine oil and grease, TSS, BOD, COD, pH, and other pollutant levels
shall use appropriate tests which have been approved by the Environmental
Protection Agency and the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality and which
are defined in 40 C.F.R. Part 136 or 30 Texas Administrative Code § 319.11.
Testing shall be open to inspection by the Director, and shall meet the
Director’s approval.
(Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-25-11)  Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.29  BUILDING SEWER REQUIREMENTS.
   Any person responsible for discharges through a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes, FOG or sand (grit) shall, at his or her own expense and as
required by the approving authority:
   (A)   Install an accessible control manhole;
   (B)   Install meters and other appurtenances to facilitate observation,
sampling, and measurement of the waste;
   (C)   Install safety equipment and facilities (ventilation, steps and the
like) where needed; and
   (D)   Maintain the equipment and facilities.
(Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-25-11)
§ 53.30  SAMPLING AND TESTING.
   (A)   Sampling shall be conducted according to customarily accepted methods,
reflecting the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and determining the
existence of hazards to health, life, limb, and property. (Note: The particular
analysis involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite sample from all
outfalls of a premise is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should
be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are
obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls. Where applicable, 16-hour,
eight-hour or some other period may be required. Periodic grab samples are used
to determine pH and oil and grease.)
   (B)   Examination and analysis of the characteristics of waters and wastes
required by this chapter shall be:
      (1)   Conducted in accordance with the latest edition of standard
methods; and
      (2)   Determined from suitable samples taken at the control manhole
provided or other control point authorized by the approving authority.
   (C)   BOD and suspended solids shall be determined from composite sampling,
except to detect unauthorized discharges.
   (D)   The approving authority shall determine which users or classes of
users may contribute wastewater which is of greater strength than normal
domestic wastewater. All users or classes of users so identified shall be
sampled for flow, BOD, TSS and pH at least annually.
   (E)   The city may select an independent firm or laboratory to determine
flow, BOD, and suspended solids, if necessary. Flow may alternately be
determined by water meter measurements if no other flow device is available and
no other source of raw water is used.
(Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-25-11)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 53.40  APPROVING AUTHORITY REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The approving authority shall require pretreatment to an acceptable
condition for discharge to the public sewers; control over the quantities and
rates of discharge; and payment to cover the cost of handling and treating the
wastes, if discharges or proposed discharges to public sewers may:
      (1)   Deleteriously affect wastewater facilities, processes, equipment,
or receiving waters;
      (2)   Create a hazard to life or health; or
      (3)   Create a public nuisance.
   (B)   The approving authority is entitled to determine whether a discharge
or proposed discharge is included under division (A) of this section.
   (C)   The approving authority shall reject wastes when it determines that a
discharge or proposed discharge does not meet the requirements of division (A)
of this section.
(Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-25-11)
§ 53.41  REVIEW AND APPROVAL.
   (A)   If pretreatment or control is required, the approving authority shall
review and approve design and installation of equipment and processes.
   (B)   The design and installation of equipment and processes must conform to
all applicable statutes, codes, ordinances and other laws.
   (C)   Any person responsible for discharges requiring pretreatment, flow
equalizing, or other facilities shall provide and maintain the facilities in
effective operating condition at his or her own expense.
(Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-25-11)
§ 53.42  POWER TO ENTER PROPERTY.
   (A)   The Director and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing
proper credentials and identification are entitled to enter any public or
private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of enforcing this
chapter.
   (B)   Anyone acting under this authority shall observe the establishment’s
reasonable rules and regulations concerning safety, internal security, and fire
protection.
   (C)   The Director and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing
proper credentials and identification are entitled to enter all private
properties through which the city holds a negotiated easement for the purpose
of:
      (1)   Inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, or repair;
      (2)   Maintenance of any portion of the sewerage system lying within the
easements; or
      (3)   Conducting any other authorized activity.
   (D)   All activities shall be conducted in full accordance with the terms of
the negotiated casement pertaining to the private property involved.
   (E)   No person acting under authority of this provision may inquire into
any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper,
or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and
source of discharge to the public sewers.
(Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-25-11)
§ 53.43  AUTHORITY TO DISCONNECT SERVICE.
   (A)   The city may terminate water and wastewater disposal service and
disconnect a person from the system when:
      (1)   Acids or chemicals which may damage the sewer lines or treatment
process are released to the sewer potentially causing accelerated deterioration
of these structures or interfering with proper conveyance and treatment of
wastewater;
      (2)   A governmental agency informs the city that the effluent from the
wastewater treatment plant is no longer of a quality permitted for discharge to
a watercourse, and it is found that the person is delivering wastewater to the
city’s system that cannot be sufficiently treated or requires treatment that is
not provided by the city as normal domestic treatment; or
      (3)   The customer;
         (a)   Discharges waste or wastewater that is in violation of the
permit issued by the approving authority;
         (b)   Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable rate in
sufficient quantity to cause an imbalance in the wastewater treatment system;
         (c)   Fails to pay monthly bills for water and sanitary sewer service
in accordance with the procedures set forth in §
52.04;or
         (d)   Repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes to public sewers in
violation of §§
53.20 through
53.27 of this chapter as stated above.
   (B)   If service is discontinued pursuant to division (A)(2) of this
section, the city shall:
      (1)   Disconnect the customer;
      (2)   Supply the customer with the governmental agency’s report and
provide the customer with all pertinent information; and
      (3)   Continue disconnection until such time as the customer provides
pretreatment/additional pretreatment or other facilities designed to remove the
objectionable characteristics from his or her wastes.
(Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-25-11)
§ 53.44  NOTICE; CONTINUING VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   The city shall serve persons discharging in violation of this chapter
with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a
reasonable time limit for satisfactory compliance.
   (B)   No person may continue discharging in violation of this chapter beyond
the time limit provided in the notice.
   (C)   This section shall have no bearing on a prosecution or proceeding to
impose a civil penalty under this chapter.
(Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-25-11)
§ 53.45  FAILURE TO PAY BILLS.
   In addition to sanctions provided for by this chapter, the city is entitled
to exercise sanctions provided for by the other ordinances of the city for
failure to pay the bill for water and sanitary sewer service when due.
(Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-25-11)
§ 53.46  APPEAL.
   (A)   Generally. Any person aggrieved by the denial of a discharge permit, a
removal from the self-cleaner program, a termination of service, or the
imposition of a civil penalty under this chapter shall have the right to appeal
to the City Manager as provided by this section.
   (B)   Notice of appeal. The appellant shall initiate such appeal by filing a
written notice with the Director and the City Secretary within ten days of the
date of the notice of the decision from which the appeal is sought. The notice
must briefly describe the decision being appealed, and shall set forth in clear
and concise terms the basis for the complaint and the requested relief. The
notice shall further set forth the mailing address, email address, fax and
phone numbers at which the appellant wishes to receive communications related
to the appeal.
   (C)   Notice of hearing. The City Manager or his or her designee, acting as
Hearing Officer, will set a time and place for a hearing not to exceed 20 days
from the time the notice of appeal is received. At least ten days prior to the
hearing date the Hearing Officer shall give notice of the hearing to the
appellant by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested
addressed to the address specified in the notice of appeal.
   (D)   Hearing. The Hearing Officer shall receive all relevant evidence at
the hearing. The Hearing Officer shall have the authority to administer oaths
and issue orders compelling the attendance of witnesses and the production of
documents. The appellant may appear in person or by counsel at the hearing, and
may present evidence and argument in support of the appeal. The Director and
the City Attorney shall likewise be entitled to present evidence and argument
at the hearing in opposition to the appeal. If the appellant fails or refuses
to appear, the City Manager may proceed to consider the matter and render a
decision based on the evidence presented during the hearing. If the Hearing
Officer determines that the appeal is well taken, the Hearing Officer shall
have the authority to reverse or modify the determination under appeal.
   (E)   Decision. The Hearing Officer shall render a decision in writing
within five days following the conclusion of the hearing. The Hearing Officer
shall then cause one copy of the decision to be filed with the Director, one
copy to be filed with the City Secretary, and one copy to be forwarded to the
appellant by certified mail.
(Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-25-11)
§ 53.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   A person who knowingly violates any provision of this chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $2,000 for each act of violation and for each day of
violation.
      (2)   In addition to proceeding under authority of division (A)(1) of
this section, the city is entitled to pursue all other criminal and civil
remedies to which it is entitled under authority of statutes or other
ordinances against a person continuing prohibited discharges.
   (B)   All persons violating §
53.07 of this chapter by using septic tanks where sanitary sewer facilities are
reasonably available will be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
thereof shall be fined not to exceed $200. Each day during which such violation
continues shall be considered a separate and distinct offense and shall be
punishable as such.
   (C)   If the Director determines that a generator is responsible for a
blockage of a collection system line the generator shall be liable for a civil
penalty not to exceed $500 for the first violation, $1,000 for a second
violation, $1,500 for a third violation, or $2,000 for four or more violations
within a two-year period.
   (D)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §53.28 shall be subject
to a written warning for the first violation, and shall be liable for a civil
penalty not to exceed $500 for a second violation, $1,000 for a third
violation, $1,500 for a fourth violation, and $2,000 for five or more
violations within a two-year period.
   (E)   A separate penalty may be imposed for each day that a violation
continues. Repeated violations may also result in termination of service.
   (F)   Imposition of a civil penalty does not affect a criminal charge filed
under this chapter.
   (G)   All civil penalties shall be paid to the city’s general fund.
(Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-25-11)
CHAPTER 54:  CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL
General Provisions
   
54.01   Title
   
54.02   Definitions
   
54.03   Applicability; conformance required
   
54.04   Fire protection systems
   
54.05   Cross connection prohibited
   
54.06   Director authority
   
54.07   Exculpation
Installation, Testing, and Certification
   
54.20   Installation provisions
   
54.21   Guide to selection of assemblies for premises isolation
   
54.22   Inspection and testing requirements
   
54.23   Test and maintenance reports
   
54.24   Customer service inspection
   
54.25   Owner responsibilities
   
54.26   Water use survey
 
   
54.98   Enforcement and penalties
   
54.99   Offenses and fines
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 54.01  TITLE.
   These regulations shall hereinafter be known, cited, and referred to as the
Cross Connection Control Ordinance of the City of Harker Heights, Texas, and
shall be included as part of the Code of Harker Heights, Texas.
(Ord. 2019-22, passed 8-13-19)
§ 54.02  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY;BACKFLOW ASSEMBLY; or ASSEMBLY.  An
assembly to counteract backpressure or prevent backsiphonage which appears on
the list of approved assemblies issued by the Director and matches the type of
assembly required for isolation of the subject premises as set forth in §
54.21. Types of assemblies include:
      (1)   AIR GAP.  A physical separation between the free flowing discharge
end of a potable water supply piping and/or appurtenance, and an open or
nonpressure receiving vessel, plumbing fixture, or other device. An "approved
AIR GAP separation" must be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe
measured vertically above the overflow rim of the vessel, plumbing fixture, or
other device, in no case less than one inch. AIR GAPS can be used to protect
against backpressure or backsiphonage of a high health or nonhealth hazard.
      (2)   ATMOSPHERIC VACUUM BREAKER BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE;ATMOSPHERIC
VACUUM BREAKER; or AVB. This device cannot be tested and cannot prevent back
pressure backflow, but is used to prevent backsiphonage in nonhealth hazard
conditions.
      (3)   DOUBLE CHECK DETECTOR BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY;DOUBLE CHECK
DETECTOR; or DCDA.  An assembly composed of line-size approved double check
assembly with bypass containing a specific water meter and an approved double
check valve assembly. The meter must register accurately for very low rates of
flow.
      (4)   DOUBLE CHECK VALVE BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY;DOUBLE CHECK
ASSEMBLY;DOUBLE CHECK; or DC.  An assembly which consists of two independently
operating check valves which are spring loaded or weighted. The assembly comes
complete with a gate valve on each side of the checks, as well as test cocks to
test the checks for tightness.
      (5)   PRESSURE VACUUM BREAKER BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY;PRESSURE
VACUUM BREAKER; or PVB.  An assembly which protects against backsiphonage, but
does not provide adequate protection against backpressure backflow. The
assembly is a combination of a single check valve with an AVB and can be used
with downstream shutoff valves. In addition, the assembly has suction and
discharge gate valves and test cocks which allows the full testing of the
assembly.
      (6)   REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY;REDUCED
PRESSURE PRINCIPLE ASSEMBLY;RP ASSEMBLY; or RP.  An assembly containing two
independently acting approved check valves together with a hydraulically
operated, mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located
between the valves and at the same time below the first check valve. The
assembly must include properly located resiliently seated test cocks and
tightly closing resiliently seated shut-off valves at the end of the assembly.
      (7)   REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE DETECTOR BACKFLOW PREVENTION
ASSEMBLY;REDUCED PRESSURE DETECTOR; or RPDA.  An assembly composed of line-size
approved reduced pressure principle assembly with a bypass containing a
specific water meter and an approved reduced pressure principle backflow
prevention assembly. The meter must register accurately for very low rates of
flow.
      (8)   SPILL-RESISTANT PRESSURE VACUUM BREAKER or SVB.  An assembly
containing an independently operating, internally loaded check valve and
independently operating,  loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side
of the check valve. This assembly is to be equipped with a properly located
test cock and shutoff valves on the suction and discharge ports of the
assembly.
   AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY.  Any water supply on or available to a premises from
a source other than directly through the city water system. AUXILIARY WATER
SUPPLIES include all of the following:
      (1)   Water from another public water system;
      (2)   Water from a natural source, such as a well, spring, pond, river,
or creek;
      (3)   Reclaimed water; and
      (4)   Any water supplied by a public water system, including the city
water system, that has passed through a point of delivery and is no longer
controlled by the city water system.
   AWWA. The American Water Works Association.
   BACKFLOW.  The undesirable reversal of flow of water or mixtures of water
and other liquid, gaseous, or other substances into the distribution pipes of
the potable supply of water from any source or sources.
   BACKPRESSURE.  Any elevation of pressure in the downstream piping system (by
any means) above the supply pressure at the point of consideration which would
cause, or tend to cause, a reversal of the normal direction of flow and the
introduction of fluids, mixtures, or substances from any source other than the
intended source.
   BACKSIPHONAGE.  A form of backflow due to a reduction in system pressure
which causes a subatmospheric pressure to exist at a site in the water system.
   BORESIGHT or BORESIGHT TO DAYLIGHT. Providing adequate drainage for backflow
prevention assemblies installed vaults through the use of an unobstructed drain
pipe.
   COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT.  Any property or location which is primarily used
for the manufacture, production, storage, wholesaling, or rebuilding of any
goods or wares which are or may be placed in the flow of commerce, or any
property or location which is used primarily for the provision of any service.
   COMMISSION.  The Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ).
   CONTAINMENT.  The installation of appropriate type or method of backflow
protection at the service connection.
   CONTAMINANTS.  Any foreign material, solid or liquid, not common to the
potable water supply which makes or may make the water unfit or undesirable for
human consumption.
   CONTAMINATION.  The entry into or presence in a public water supply system
of any substance which may be deleterious to health and/or the quality of the
water.
   CROSS CONNECTION.  Any physical arrangement where a potable water supply is
actually or potentially connected, directly or indirectly, with any other non-
drinkable water system, used water system, or auxiliary water supply, sewer,
drain conduit, swimming pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture, swamp
coolers, air condition units, fire protection system, or any other assembly
which contains, or may contain, contaminated water, sewage, or other liquid of
unknown or unsafe quality which may be capable of importing contamination into
the public water system as a result of backflow. Bypass arrangements, jumper
connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover assemblies, or other
temporary or permanent assemblies through which, or because of which, backflow
may occur are considered to be CROSS CONNECTIONS.
   CUSTOMER.  Any person contracting with the city to receive potable water
service.
   DEGREE OF HAZARD.  The hazard classification attached to all actual or
potential cross connections, specifically:
      (1)   HEALTH HAZARD.  An actual or potential threat of contamination of a
physical or toxic nature to the public potable water system or the consumer's
potable water system that would be a danger to health.
      (2)   HIGH HAZARD.  The classification assigned to an actual or potential
cross connection that potentially can allow a substance to backflow into the
potable water supply that may cause illness or death.
      (3)   LOW HAZARD.  The classification assigned to an actual or potential
cross connection that potentially could allow a substance that may be
objectionable but not hazardous to a human's health to backflow into the
potable water supply.
      (4)   PLUMBING HAZARD.  An internal or plumbing-type cross connection in
a consumer's potable water system that may be either a pollution or a
contamination hazard.
      (5)   POLLUTION HAZARD.  An actual or potential threat to the physical
properties of the water system or the potability of the public or consumer's
potable water system but which would not constitute a health or system hazard,
as defined. The maximum degree of intensity of the pollution to which the
potable water system could be degraded under this definition would cause a
nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable or could cause minor damage to the
system or its appurtenances.
      (6)   SYSTEM HAZARD.  An actual or potential threat of severe danger to
the physical properties of the public or consumer's potable water supply or of
a pollution or contamination that would have a detrimental effect on the
quality of the potable water in the system.
   DIRECTOR.  The city's Director of Public Works.
   NON-POTABLE WATER.  Water that does not comply with the Commission's rules
and regulations governing drinking water.
   NON-RESIDENTIAL USES.  All uses not specifically included in the definition
of residential use.
   POINT-OF-USE ISOLATION.  The appropriate backflow prevention within the
consumer's water system at the point at which the actual or potential cross
connection exists.
   POLLUTION.  An impairment of the quality of the public water supply to a
degree which does not create a hazard to the public health but does adversely
and unreasonably affect the aesthetic qualities of such potable water for
domestic use.
   POTABLE WATER SUPPLY.  Any water supply intended or used for human
consumption or other domestic use.
   PREMISES.  Any lot, parcel, or tract of land to which water is provided,
including all improvements, mobile structures, and structures located on it.
   PREMISES ISOLATION.  The appropriate backflow prevention at the service
connection between the public water system and the water user.
   PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM or SYSTEM.  Any public or privately owned water system,
which supplies water for public domestic use. The system must meet all the
health requirements set forth by the Commission. The system will include all
services, reservoirs, facilities, and any equipment used in the process of
producing, treating, storing, or conveying water for public consumption.
   RECOGNIZED TESTER.  A person that is a state certified backflow prevention
assembly tester. Recognized testers may consist of:
      (1)   FIRELINE TESTER.  Qualified to test backflow prevention assemblies
on firelines only. The State Fire Marshal's office requires that a person
performing maintenance on firelines must he employed by an approved fireline
contractor.
      (2)   GENERAL TESTER.  Qualified to test backflow prevention assemblies
on any domestic, commercial, industrial, or irrigation service except
firelines.
   REPRESENTATIVE OF THE WATER SYSTEM.  The Director.
   RESIDENTIAL USE.  Single-family dwellings, duplexes, multiplexes, housing
and apartments where the individual units are each on a separate meter or the
units are full-time dwellings in cases where two or more units are served by
one meter.
   SERVICE CONNECTION.  The terminal end of a service line from the public
potable water system, for example, where the water purveyor loses jurisdiction
and sanitary control over the water at its point of delivery to the consumer's
potable water system. If a meter is installed at the end of the service
connection, then the SERVICE CONNECTION means the downstream end of the meter.
   THERMAL EXPANSION.  Heated water that does not have the space to expand.
   USED WATER.  Water supplied by a public water system to a water user's
system after it has passed through the service connection.
   UTILITY.  The city's Public Works Department.
   WATER SUPPLY PROTECTION SPECIALIST.  Any person who holds a license
endorsement issued by the Texas State Board of Plumbing Examiners to engage in
the inspection, in connection with health and safety laws and ordinances, of
the plumbing work or installation of a public water system distribution
facility or of privately owned plumbing connected to that system's water
distribution lines.
(Ord. 2019-22, passed 8-13-19)
§ 54.03  APPLICABILITY; CONFORMANCE REQUIRED.
   (A)   This chapter applies to the utility water service area and all cross
connections and installations of backflow prevention assemblies within the
territorial limits of the city, those areas where water is purchased from the
city for the purpose of resale, and any plumbing outside the city requiring
plumbing inspection pursuant to an interlocal agreement, water sales contract,
or applicable ordinance approved by the city.
   (B)   These regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements
concerning cross connections and backflow prevention. In addition to these
requirements, each premises owner must be in conformance with all applicable
county, state, and federal laws concerning such matters.
   (C)   Except where indicated, these regulations are not intended to
interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other public ordinance, rule, or
regulation statute, or other provision of law, or abrogate any easement, deed
restriction, covenant, or any other private agreement or deed restriction.
(Ord. 2019-22, passed 8-13-19)
§ 54.04  FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS.
   Backflow prevention assemblies installed in water based fire protection
systems shall be installed and tested in accordance with the currently adopted
local codes and the current editions of an applicable National Fire Protection
Association (NFPA) standard. In the event of a conflict between those codes and
standards and this chapter, the more stringent requirement will apply.
(Ord. 2019-22, passed 8-13-19)
§ 54.05  CROSS CONNECTION PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No installation of potable water supply piping or part thereof may be
made in such a manner that allows used, polluted, or contaminated water,
mixtures, gases, or other substances to enter any portion of such piping by
reason of backsiphonage, backpressure, or any other cause.
   (B)   If it is found that any equipment, mechanism, chemical, or substance
may cause pollution or contamination of the public potable water supply system,
such equipment or mechanism may be permitted only when equipped with an
approved backflow prevention assembly.
   (C)   No person may connect to the public potable water supply or system any
mechanism or system which returns used water to the public potable water supply
or system through any measures.
   (D)   No person may connect any auxiliary water system to the public potable
water supply or system except as allowed by this chapter and by the currently
adopted plumbing code, as amended.
(Ord. 2019-22, passed 8-13-19)
§ 54.06  DIRECTOR AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The Director is vested with the authority and responsibility for the
implementation of an effective cross connection control program for the city
and for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. The Director is
further authorized to perform cross connection control duties that include, but
are not limited to, cross connection inspections and water use surveys.
   (B)   The Director is hereby authorized to promulgate reasonable regulations
to achieve the purposes of this chapter that are not in conflict with this code
(including, but not limited to, any standard plumbing codes adopted by the
city), the city Charter, the Commission, the laws of the State of Texas
(including, but not limited to, Tex. Health and Safety Code §§ 341.031 et
seq.), and the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act, 42 U.S.C. § 300f et seq.
(Ord. 2019-22, passed 8-13-19)
§ 54.07  EXCULPATION.
   (A)   Any reduction in water pressure caused by a backflow assembly is not
the responsibility of the city, and the city is not liable for damage to a
backflow prevention assembly which may occur during testing, fluctuation in the
distribution system pressure, or interruption to the water supply.
   (B)   The representative of the water system and agents of the city charged
with enforcement of this chapter shall be deemed to be performing a
governmental function for the benefit of the general public, and neither the
city, the Director, nor representative of the water system or agent of the city
engaged in inspection or endorsement activities under this chapter when acting
in good faith and without malice shall ever be held liable for any loss or
damage, whether real or asserted, caused, or alleged to have been caused, as a
result of the performance of such governmental function.
(Ord. 2019-22, passed 8-13-19)
INSTALLATION, TESTING, AND CERTIFICATION
§ 54.20  INSTALLATION PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   No water connection from a public drinking water supply system may
be made to any establishment where an actual or potential contamination or
system hazard exists without an air gap separation between the drinking water
supply and the source of potential contamination. The containment air gap is
sometimes impractical and instead reliance must be placed on individual air
gaps or mechanical backflow prevention devices. Under these conditions,
additional protection is required at the meter in the form of a backflow
prevention device (in accordance with AWWA Standard C510 and C511, and AWWA
Manual M14) on those establishments handling substances deleterious or
hazardous to the public health. The Director need not require backflow
protection at the water service entrance (meter) if an adequate cross
connection control program is in effect that includes annual inspection and
testing by a certified backflow prevention device tester.
      (2)   No water connection from any public drinking water supply system
may be made to any condensing, cooling, or industrial process, or any other
system of non-potable usage over which the Director does not have sanitary
control, unless the said connection is made in accordance with the requirements
of §
54.20(A)(1). Water from such systems cannot be returned to the potable water
supply.
      (3)   Overhead bulk water dispensing stations must be provided with an
air gap between the filling outlet hose and the receiving tank to protect
against backsiphonage and cross contamination.
      (4)   The use of a backflow prevention device at the service connection
will be considered as additional backflow protection and must not negate the
use of backflow protection or internal hazards as outlined and enforced by the
current adopted plumbing code.
   (B)   New Installation.
      (1)   New, replacement, or reconditioned approved backflow prevention
assemblies must be installed in accordance with the currently adopted plumbing
code.
      (2)   Installation may not be performed until the city issues a plumbing
permit for such work.
      (3)   Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, a completed test
and maintenance report must be submitted to the Director for any connection
requiring a testable backflow prevention assembly. Documentation of an approved
air gap can be substituted where applicable and is subject to inspection as
provided in §
54.22.
   (C)   High Health Hazard Installation.
      (1)   Only approved backflow prevention assemblies installed at the meter
can be used at high health hazard applications unless a variance is obtained
from the Director. Variances will be based on conditions such as type of
hazard, complexity of facility plumbing, potential for future plumbing
connections, and others as deemed appropriate.
      (2)   The Director may require a secondary assembly if deemed necessary
to protect the public water supply from the failure of the primary backflow
prevention assembly or to allow maintenance of the primary backflow prevention
assembly.
   (D)   Other Installations.
      (1)   An approved backflow prevention assembly must be installed to
protect the potable water system from contamination or pollution when such
system is connected to any automatic fire protection system, standpipe systems,
or privately owned fire hydrants.
      (2)   Installation of a reduced pressure backflow prevention assembly is
required on any meter connected to the potable water system for water
appropriation from fire hydrants unless an approved air gap is authorized. Only
meters and backflow prevention assemblies approved by the Director of Utilities
can be used to obtain water from a fire hydrant.
   (E)   Wholesale Customers. Any customer purchasing water for the purpose of
resale or distribution must either:
      (1)   Install an air gap separation or a reduced pressure backflow
prevention assembly at the service connection; or
      (2)   Implement a plumbing inspection and cross connection control
program that is approved by the Director which is not less restrictive than
that of the city, and provide annual program records to the Director for review
and audit.
   (F)   Government Customers. Any premises owned, operated, or occupied by a
state, federal, county, city, or foreign government or agency refusing to
comply with the provisions of this chapter must install a reduced pressure
backflow prevention assembly at each service connection.
   (G)   Water Hauling Vehicles. Water hauling vehicles obtaining water from a
connection to the city's potable water supply system must have an approved air
gap separation or a reduced pressure backflow prevention assembly installed
permanently on the vehicle, or installed on the fire hydrant meter if such
vehicle is connected by a fire hydrant meter. The assembly must be registered
with the city and certified for operation annually.
   (H)   Compliance for Existing Customers.
      (1)   The owner of any premises which is determined to have an
unprotected or improperly installed high health hazard connection must comply
with this section within 10 days upon written notification by the Director
unless the Director determines that circumstances exist which require
installation within a different time frame. Documentation of the installation
and testing must be submitted as outlined in §
54.23.
      (2)   The owner of any premises which is determined to have an
unprotected nonhealth hazard connection must install an approved assembly
immediately downstream of the city's meter on a schedule determined by the
Director. Documentation of the installation and testing must be submitted as
outlined in §
54.23.
(Ord. 2019-22, passed 8-13-19)
§ 54.21  GUIDE TO SELECTION OF ASSEMBLIES FOR PREMISES ISOLATION.
   Appendix F: Assessment of Hazards and Selection of Assemblies, set forth in
30 Tex. Admin. Code § 290.47(f), as same may be amended from time to time, is
hereby adopted by reference as though set forth at length herein, subject to
the following deletions, alterations, and additions:
 
Premises Isolation: Description of     Assessment of Hazard Required Assembly
Premises
Irrigation systems without chemical    Nonhealth *          RPBA/A VB/PVB
additives
Irrigation systems with on site sewage Health               RPBA
facilities (OSSF)
 
§ 54.22  INSPECTION AND TESTING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Required. All backflow prevention assemblies must be inspected and
tested in each of the following circumstances:
      (1)   Immediately after installation;
      (2)   Whenever the assembly is moved;
      (3)   A minimum of once every 3 years for residential irrigation
connections without chemical additives, and annually for all other connections;
      (4)   Prior to re-occupancy of any premises that has been unoccupied for
at least 1 year;
      (5)   Immediately after repair of the assembly; and
      (6)   When required by the Director.
   (B)   Tester Certification and Registration. All assembly testing must be
performed by a state certified backflow prevention assembly tester approved by
the Director and registered with the city. Test results or certification of the
performance of other services shall not be accepted if the tester is not
currently validly registered with the Director. The Director shall maintain a
current list of registered certified testers, and will make this list available
to city water system customers upon request. Registrations will be valid until
December 31 of the year in which issued, and must be renewed annually.
   (C)   Access. Duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper
credentials and identification are authorized to enter any public or private
property at any reasonable time for the purpose of enforcing this chapter.
Persons and occupants of premises who receive water service from the city,
either directly or indirectly, must allow the city or its representatives ready
access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of
inspection, testing, records examination, or in the performance of any of their
duties under this chapter. Where persons or occupants of premises have security
measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance
before entry into the premises, such persons and occupants must make necessary
arrangements so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel
from the city will be permitted to enter without delay, for the purposes of
performing such specific responsibilities.
   (D)   Accuracy.
      (1)   The certified tester is responsible for the competency and accuracy
of all tests and reports certifying assemblies to be operating within
specifications performed or submitted by the certified tester, and for all work
done by any persons under the direction or control of the certified tester. All
work performed by a certified tester's assistants must be performed in the
presence and under the immediate supervision of the certified tester.
      (2)   The certified tester shall furnish the city with the serial number
of the tester's test kit, and the tester's test gauge must be tested when
purchased and annually thereafter, or more frequently as required by the
Director, to be in compliance with the University of Southern California's
Manual of Cross Connection Control (latest edition) or the American Water Works
Association Manual of Cross Connection Control requirements (Manual M14, latest
edition). The certified tester must maintain the test gauge within a 2%
accuracy deviation and retain test results for 3years from the date of any such
test. All test results shall be made available to the Director upon written
request or as provided for by this chapter (30 Tex. Admin. Code § 290.44(h)(4)
(A) and (B)).
   (E)   Reporting Failure or Malfunction. If a backflow prevention assembly
test fails or an assembly malfunctions, and the actual or potential hazard of
contamination is not immediately curable through repair or replacement, the
certified tester shall notify the Director and the customer immediately in
person or by telephone. This notification shall also be submitted in writing
within 5 calendar days. If the failure or malfunction of a backflow prevention
assembly is not immediately curable through repair or replacement, the Director
may take all necessary steps, including the immediate cessation of water
service through the assembly, to prevent the possible contamination of the city
water system.
   (F)   Assembly Alteration Prohibited. It is a violation of this chapter for
a certified tester to alter the design, material, or operational
characteristics of a backflow prevention assembly during testing, repairing, or
maintaining the assembly without the prior written approval of the Director.
(Ord. 2019-22, passed 8-13-19)
§ 54.23  TEST AND MAINTENANCE REPORTS.
   (A)   A backflow prevention assembly test and maintenance report on a form
promulgated by the Director must be completed by the recognized tester for each
assembly tested. The signed and dated original must be submitted to the
Director within 10 working days after the testing is performed. The Director
may authorize the use of a report format which differs from that found in this
section if it minimally contains all information required by the promulgated
form.
   (B)   The Director must retain test and maintenance reports for a minimum of
3 years, and must provide those records to Commission staff for inspection upon
request.
(Ord. 2019-22, passed 8-13-19)
§ 54.24  CUSTOMER SERVICE INSPECTION.
   (A)   Inspection Requirements. A customer service inspection certification
shall be completed on the current form promulgated by the Director or otherwise
meeting the requirements of this section. The inspection must consist of a
detailed inspection of a location and disposition of the water lines,
including, without limitation, establishing water lines on the premises, the
existence of cross connections, the availability of auxiliary or used water
supplies, the use or availability of pollutants, contaminants, and other
liquid, solid, or gaseous substances which may be used for stabilization of
water supplies, and such other processes necessary to determine degree of
hazard. Such inspection is required:
      (1)   Prior to providing continuous water service to new construction;
      (2)   Whenever the Director has reason to believe that cross connections
or other unacceptable plumbing practices exist on any existing service; and
      (3)   After any material improvement, correction, or addition to the
private plumbing facilities.
   (B)   Inspector Qualifications. Individuals with the following credentials
shall be recognized as capable of conducting a customer service inspection
certification under this section:
      (1)   Plumbing inspectors and water supply protection specialists
licensed by the Texas State Board of Plumbing Examiners;
      (2)   Customer service inspectors certified by the TCEQ.
   (C)   Inspection Certification Report. Copies of properly completed water
service inspection certifications will be kept on file by the Director and made
available upon request for Commission review. The certifications shall be
retained for a minimum of 10 years. If the certification form promulgated by
the Director is not used, the inspection certifications mustminimally include
the name and registration number of the inspector, the type of registration
(plumbing inspectors, water supply protection specialists, certified operator,
and the like), and be dated and signed. It must also certify that:
      (1)   No direct connection between the public drinking water supply and a
potential source of contamination exists. Potential sources of contamination
are isolated from the public water system by an air gap or an appropriate
backflow prevention assembly in accordance with this chapter and state plumbing
regulation. Additionally, all pressure relief valves and the thermal expansion
devices are in compliance with state plumbing codes.
      (2)   No cross connection between the public drinking water supply and a
private water source exists. Where an actual air gap is not maintained between
the public water supply and private water supply, an approved reduced pressure-
zone backflow prevention assembly is properly installed and tested by a
recognized backflow prevention assembly tester as required by this chapter.
      (3)   No connection exists which would allow the return of water used for
condensing, cooling, or industrial processes back to the public water supply.
      (4)   No pipe or pipe fitting which contains more than 8.0% lead exists
in private plumbing facilities installed on or after July 1, 1988.
      (5)   No solder or flux which contains more than 0.02% lead exists in
private plumbing facilities installed on or after July 1, 1988.
      (6)   No plumbing fixture is installed which is not in compliance with
the current plumbing code adopted by the city.
   (D)   Inspection Fees. Inspection fees shall be charged according to the
current city fee schedule.
   (E)   Other Programs Unaffected. The customer service inspections required
by this section are in addition to and not in lieu of any other inspections
required by this code, or by any other law or regulation.
(Ord. 2019-22, passed 8-13-19)
§ 54.25  OWNER RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   It is the responsibility of the premises owner to have all assemblies
tested in accordance with this chapter. Assemblies may be required to be tested
more frequently if the Director deems necessary.
   (B)   The premises owner is responsible for all costs associated with the
installation, general maintenance, testing, upkeep, record keeping, and
replacement of the approved backflow prevention assembly. If inspection or
testing indicates a need for repair, such repair must be completed and the
documentation submitted to the Director within 60 days, or on a schedule
approved by the Director.
   (C)   It is the responsibility of the premises owner to eliminate the
possibility of thermal expansion if a closed system has been created by the
installation of a backflow assembly.
   (D)   It is the responsibility of all premises owners to abide by the
conditions of this chapter. In the event of any changes to the plumbing system,
it is the responsibility of the premises owner to notify the city. All costs
associated with this chapter and the purchase, installation, testing, and
repair of devices are the responsibility of the premises owner.
(Ord. 2019-22, passed 8-13-19)
§ 54.26  WATER USE SURVEY.
   A water use survey may be conducted at any establishment located in the city
which is served by a public water supply or which provides water to the public.
Upon determination that the establishment falls under the provisions of this
chapter and requires a backflow prevention assembly, a notice to abate the
condition or to install the proper backflow prevention assembly may be issued.
(Ord. 2019-22, passed 8-13-19)
§ 54.98  ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   The Director and the City Attorney are each hereby authorized to
enforce the provisions of this chapter by any one or more of the enforcement
mechanisms set forth herein.
   (B)   Failure on the part of any owner or customer to discontinue the use of
all cross connections and to physically separate cross connections is
sufficient cause for the immediate discontinuance of public water service to
the premises.
   (C)   When the Director believes that an emergency affecting public health
or safety exists, the Director may immediately discontinue water service. It
shall be an emergency affecting public health and safety if an approved
backflow prevention assembly is not installed as required by this chapter, or
if an actual cross connection between the public and private water system
exists. The temporary disconnection will continue until the cross connection is
eliminated as required by this chapter. Reasonable advance notice and an
opportunity to be heard shall be provided if it is not an emergency. If it is
an emergency, notice and an opportunity to be heard must be provided as soon as
possible after the disconnection of such water service.
   (D)   Failure to obtain and comply with the appropriate plumbing or building
permits shall result in placement of a hold on the issuance of certificate of
occupancy and termination of water service provided during construction.
   (E)   Any persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
become civilly liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by
the city by reason of such violation.
   (F)   In addition to the penalties provided herein, the city may recover
reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, court reporter fees, and other
expenses of litigation by appropriate suit against the person found to have
violated this chapter or the orders, rules, regulations, and permits issued
hereunder.
(Ord. 2019-22, passed 8-13-19)
§ 54.99  OFFENSES AND FINES.
   (A)   A person commits a misdemeanor criminal offense if the person:
      (1)   Fails to install, repair, or maintain a backflow prevention
assembly in compliance with this chapter;
      (2)   Fails to comply with a repair order issued by the Director;
      (3)   Owns, operates, or manages a premises from which any backflow
enters the public water supply system;
      (4)   Fails to pay any fees required by this chapter;
      (5)   Violates any section of this chapter;
      (6)   Reinstates water service to premises discontinued or disconnected
under this chapter, except as permitted by the Director;
      (7)   Knowingly allows an unregistered tester to perform testing work on
an assembly subject to his ownership; or
      (8)   Tests a backflow prevention assembly without being registered to do
so with the Commission and the city.
   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects, or refuses to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of any of
the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. A first
conviction for a violation of §
54.22(A) shall be punishable by a fine in an amount not to exceed $25. Upon a
second conviction for such offense, or upon a conviction for any other offense
under this chapter, such person, firm, or corporation shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $2,000 for each offense. Each day that a violation is
permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 2019-22, passed 8-13-19)
TITLE VII:  TRANSPORTATION CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC RULES
      
72.   STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING
      
73.   RESERVED
      
74.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      
75.   PARKING SCHEDULES
      
76.   HEAVY VEHICLES AND HAZARDOUS MATERIAL ROUTE
CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Short title
   
70.02   Definitions
   
70.03   Required obedience
   
70.04   Application of traffic regulations to certain vehicles
   
70.05   Public employees to obey traffic regulations
   
70.06   Authorized emergency vehicles
   
70.07   Written report of accident
   
70.08   Effect of headings
   
70.09   Provisions not retroactive
Traffic-Control Devices
   
70.20   Authority to install
   
70.21   Manual and specifications
   
70.22   Obedience to traffic-control devices
   
70.23   When devices required for enforcement purposes
   
70.24   Presumption of legality
   
70.25   Designated official to designate crosswalks
   
70.26   Traffic lanes
   
70.27   Traffic-control sign inventory
   
70.28   Unauthorized signs unlawful
   
70.29   Defacing signs unlawful
Administration and Enforcement
   
70.40   Authority of Police and Fire Department officials
   
70.41   Traffic Division
   
70.42   Emergency and experimental regulations
 
   
70.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01  SHORT TITLE.
   This title may be known and cited as the “Transportation Code.”
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80)
§ 70.02  DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Specific definitions. For the purpose of this transportation code, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
      COMMERCIAL VEHICLE.  Every vehicle that is primarily engaged in the
transportation of cargo, passengers, or equipment for consideration.
      DESIGNATED OFFICIAL.  The Chief of Police, or in the absence of the Chief
of Police, the Operation Manager or designated representative.
      FREIGHT CURB LOADING ZONE. A space adjacent to a curb which is reserved
exclusively or primarily for the use of vehicles during the loading or
unloading of materials, freight, equip-ment, or other non-passenger cargo.
      PASSENGER CURB LOADING ZONE.  A space adjacent to a curb which is
reserved exclusively or primarily for the use of vehicles during the loading or
unloading of passengers.
      POLICE OFFICER.  Every peace officer employed by the City Police
Department or any other person authorized by law to direct or regulate traffic,
or to issue citations or make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
      TRAFFIC DIVISION.  The Traffic Division of the City Police Department,
provided that in the event that no traffic division has been established by the
Department, then the term shall mean the City Police Department.
   (B)   Time. All references to a specified hour shall be deemed to refer to
Central/Standard time, or daylight savings time, whichever may at that time be
in general use throughout the city.
   (C)   Whenever any words or phrases used in this transportation code are not
defined in this section, but are defined in current statutes promulgated by the
Texas Legislature regulating traffic or the operation of vehicles, such
definitions shall apply to the words and phrases used herein, except when the
context requires otherwise.
   (D)   Whenever any words or phrases used in this transportation code are not
defined in this section or by other legislation as described in division (C)
above, such words or phrases shall have the meanings commonly ascribed to them.
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80; Am. Ord. 94-48, passed 10-11-94)
§ 70.03  REQUIRED OBEDIENCE.
   (A)   Obedience to transportation code. It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for
any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this
transportation code.
   (B)   Obedience to Police Department officials. No person shall willfully
fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police
officer.
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80)  Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.04  APPLICATION OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS TO CERTAIN VEHICLES.
   (A)   Every person propelling any push cart upon a roadway shall be granted
all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the
driver of  a vehicle  by this  transportation code  and by the “Rules of the
Road” portion of the State Vehicle Code, except those provisions which by their
very nature have no application.
   (B)   Every person riding an animal or driving any animal-drawn vehicle upon
a roadway shall be granted all the rights and shall be subject to all the
duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this transportation code,
except those provisions of this transportation code which by their very nature
can have no application.
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80)
§ 70.05  PUBLIC EMPLOYEES TO OBEY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   The provisions of this title shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles
owned or operated by the United States, this state, or any county, town,
district, or any other political subdivision of the state, subject to such
specific exceptions as are set forth in this title or in the State Vehicle
Code.
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80)
§ 70.06  AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (A)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an
emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the
law or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may park or
stand, irrespective of the provisions of this transportation code.
   (B)   The foregoing provision shall not relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty of park or stand with due regard for the safety
of all persons, nor shall such provision protect the driver from the
consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others.
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80)  Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.07  WRITTEN REPORT OF ACCIDENT.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle which is in any manner involved in an accident
resulting in bodily injury to or death of any person or total damage to all
property to an apparent extent of $250, or more, shall within 10 days after
such accident forward to the Police Department a written report of such
accident or a copy of any report filed with the Texas Department of Public
Safety. The provisions of this section shall not be applicable when the
accident has been investigated at the scene by a police officer while such
driver was present thereat.
   (B)   Whenever the driver is physically incapable of making a written report
of an accident as required in division (A) of this section, and such driver is
not the owner of the vehicle, then the owner of the vehicle involved in such
accident shall within 10 days after the accident make such report not made by
the driver.
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80)  Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.08  EFFECT OF HEADINGS.
   Chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern,
limit, modify, or in any manner affect the scope, meaning, or extent of the
provisions of any chapter or section of the transportation code.
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80)
§ 70.09  PROVISIONS NOT RETROACTIVE.
   This transportation code shall not have a retroactive effect and shall not
apply to any traffic accident, to any cause of action arising out of a traffic
accident, or judgement arising therefrom, or to any violation of the motor
vehicle ordinance of this city, occurring prior to the effective date of this
transportation code.
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80)
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
§ 70.20  AUTHORITY TO INSTALL.
   The designated official shall place and maintain official traffic-control
devices when and as required under the traffic ordinances of this city to make
effec- tive the provisions of the ordinances, and may place and maintain such
additional official traffic-control devices as he may deem necessary to
regulate, warn, or guide traffic ordinances of this city or the State Vehicle
Code.
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80)
§ 70.21  MANUAL AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   All traffic-control signs, signals, and devices shall conform to the Texas
Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices, volumes 1 and 2, and specifications
approved by the Council. All signs and signals required hereunder for a
particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and
location throughout the city. All traffic-control devices so erected and not
inconsistent with the pro-visions of state law or this transportation code
shall be official traffic-control devices.
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80)
§ 70.22  OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any traffic-control
device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the provisions of this
transportation code, unless otherwise directed by a traffic or police officer,
subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency
vehicle.
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80)  Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.23  WHEN DEVICES REQUIRED FOR ENFORCEMENT PURPOSES.
   No provision of this transportation code for which official traffic-control
devices are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the
time and place of the alleged violation an official device is not in proper
position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person.
Whenever a particular section does not state that official traffic-control
devices are required, such section shall be effective even through no devices
are erected or in place.
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80)
§ 70.24  PRESUMPTION OF LEGALITY.
   (A)   Whenever official traffic-control devices are placed in position
approximately conforming to the requirements of this title, such devices shall
be presumed to have been so placed by the official act or direction of lawful
authority, unless the contrary shall be established by competent evidence.
   (B)   Any official traffic-control device placed pursuant to the provisions
of this title and purporting to conform to the lawful requirements pertaining
to such devices shall be presumed to comply with the requirements of this
transportation code, unless the contrary shall be established by competent
evidence.
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80)
§ 70.25  DESIGNATED OFFICIAL TO DESIGNATE CROSSWALKS.
   The designated official is hereby authorized to designate and maintain, by
appropriate devices, marks, or lines upon the surface of the roadway,
crosswalks at intersections where in his opinion there is particular danger to
pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as he may deem
necessary.
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80)
§ 70.26  TRAFFIC LANES.
   The designated official is hereby authorized to mark traffic lanes upon the
roadway of any street or highway where a regular alignment of traffic is
necessary.
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80)
§ 70.27  TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGN INVENTORY.
   An inventory of all traffic-control signs installed shall be maintained by
the city. The inventory shall show the location of each sign, date of
installation, and other pertinent information applicable to each sign. Future
installations, removals, or maintenance of the traffic-control devices shall be
entered in the inventory as they occur.
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80)
§ 70.28  UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS UNLAWFUL.
   (A)   No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of any
highway, street, or alley any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device
which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic-
control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the
movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the
effectiveness of any official control device or any railroad sign or signal.
   (B)   No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority
permit upon any highway, street, or alley any traffic sign or signal bearing
thereon any commercial advertising.
   (C)   This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private
property adjacent to highways, streets, or alleys of signs giving useful
directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official
signs.
   (D)   Every such prohibited sign, signal, or marking is hereby declared to
be a public nuisance, and the Chief of Police is hereby empowered to remove the
same or cause it to be moved without notice.
(Ord. 78-15, passed 5-23-78)  Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.29  DEFACING SIGNS UNLAWFUL.
   No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter,
deface, injure, knock down, or remove any official traffic-control device,
sign, or signal or any railroad sign or signal, or any inscription, shield, or
insignia thereon, or any part thereof.
(Ord. 78-15, passed 5-23-78)  Penalty, see §
70.99
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 70.40  AUTHORITY OF POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the officers of the Police Department or such
officers as are assigned by the Chief of Police to enforce all street traffic
laws of this city and all of the state vehicle laws.
   (B)   Officers of the Police Department or such officers as are assigned by
the Chief of Police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand,
or signal in conformance with traffic laws, provided that, in the event of a
fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians,
officers of the Police Department may direct traffic as condi- tions may
require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.
   (C)   Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire, may
direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate
vicinity.
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80)
§ 70.41  TRAFFIC DIVISION.
   (A)   Duties. It shall be the duty of the Traffic Division with such aid as
may be rendered by other members of the Police Department to enforce the street
traffic regulation of this city and all the state vehicle laws, to make arrest
for traffic violations, to investigate accidents and to cooperate with the
designated official and other officers of the city in the administration of the
traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions,
and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon the Division by this
transportation code and the traffic ordinances of this city.
   (B)   Investigation of accident. In the investigation of accidents, the
Traffic Division shall arrest and assist in the prosecution of those persons
charged with violations of law causing or contributing to such accidents.
   (C)   Traffic accident studies. Whenever the accidents at any particular
location become numerous, the Traffic Division shall cooperate with the
designated official in conducting studies of such accidents and determining
remedial measures.
   (D)   Traffic accident reports. The Traffic Division shall maintain a
suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. Accident reports or cards
referring to them shall be filed alphabetically by location. Such reports shall
be available for the use and information of the designated official.
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80)
§ 70.42  EMERGENCY AND EXPERIMENTAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The Chief of Police by and with the approval of the designated
official is hereby empowered to make regulations necessary to make effective
the provisions of the traffic ordinances of the city and to make and enforce
temporary or experi-mental regulations to cover emergencies or special
conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulation shall remain in effect
for more than 90 days.
   (B)   The designated official may test traffic- control devices under actual
conditions of traffic.
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80)
§ 70.99  PENALTY.
   Whenever, in any provisions of this transportation code, an act or condition
is prohibited, or is made or declared to be unlawful, or an offense, or a
misdemeanor, or whenever in the code the doing of any act is required, or the
failure to do an act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is
provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this code shall be
punished by a fine as set out in §
10.99. However, no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided
for the same or similar offense under the laws of the state. Each violation of
this Transportation code shall constitute a separate offense.
CHAPTER 71:  TRAFFIC RULES
Section
   
71.01   Speed regulations
   
71.02   Turning movements
   
71.03   One-way streets and alleys
   
71.04   Stop and yield intersections
   
71.05   Stopping when traffic obstructed
   
71.06   Overtaking and passing school bus
   
71.07   Drivers in procession
   
71.08   Unlawful riding
   
71.09   Railroad trains not to block streets
   
71.10   Pedestrian crossing at right angles
 
   
71.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Vehicle striking certain animals, see §
90.03
   Riding animals; operation of animal-drawn vehicles, see §
90.06
§ 71.01  SPEED REGULATIONS.
   (A)   It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to drive or operate a
motor vehicle upon any street, roadway, or highway in the city limits, at a
speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then
existing, having regard to the actual and potential hazards when approaching
and crossing an intersection or railway grade or crossing, when approaching and
going around a curve, when approaching a hill crest, when traveling upon any
narrow or winding roadway, or when special hazard exists with respect to
pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or highway conditions; and
in every event, speed shall be so controlled as may be necessary to avoid
colliding with any person, vehicle, or other conveyance on or entering the
highway in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons to
use due care.
   (B)   The state traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be
applicable on all streets within this city, except as this chapter, as
authorized by state law, hereby declares and determines upon the basis of an
engineering and traffic investigation that certain speed regulations be
applicable upon specified streets or in certain areas, in which event it shall
be unlawful for any person to proceed in excess of any speed so declared in
this transportation code when signs are in place giving notice thereof.
   (C)   The city hereby designates school zones on certain streets as shown in
Chapter 74, Schedule II of this transportation code, and such zones are
declared to be school zones for purposes of this section.  During the hours and
on the days shown in
Chapter 74, Schedule II of this transportation code, the maximum speed limit
within school zones shall be as set forth in the said
Chapter 74, Schedule II of this transportation code.
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80; Am. Ord. 2004-03, passed 1-27-04)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.02  TURNING MOVEMENTS.
   (A)   The designated official is authorized to place official traffic-
control devices within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be
traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and such course to be
traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law.
   (B)   The designated official is hereby authorized to determine those
intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left, or U-
turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such
turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other
hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs.
   (C)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left
or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of
any such sign.
   (D)   The driver of any vehicle proceeding along a street in one direction
shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon the
street in a business district and shall not upon any other street so turn a
vehicle unless such movement can be made in safety and without interfering with
other traffic.
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.03  ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.
   Whenever any ordinance of this city designates any one-way street or alley
the designated official shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof,
and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs
indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every
intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited.
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.04  STOP AND YIELD INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance of the city designates and describes a through
street it shall be the duty of the designated official to place and maintain a
stop sign, or on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation at any
intersection a yield sign, on each and every street intersecting such through
street unless traffic at any such intersection is controlled at all times by
traffic-control signals; provided however, that at the intersection of two such
through streets or at the intersection of a through street and a heavy traffic
street not so designated, stop signs shall be erected at the approached of
either of the streets as may be determined by the designated official upon the
basis of an engineering and traffic study.
   (B)   The city hereby designates certain non-scheduled intersections where a
particular hazard exists as determined by a traffic investigation to be
controlled by stop or yield signs for so long as such hazard is in existence.
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.05  STOPPING WHEN TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTED.
   No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of
other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal
indication to proceed.
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.06  OVERTAKING AND PASSING SCHOOL BUS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle upon a roadway within the limits of the city
upon meeting or over- taking from either direction any school bus which has
stopped on the highway for the purpose of receiving or discharging any school
children shall stop the vehicle before reaching such school bus when there is
in operation on the school bus a visual signal as specified in the Texas
Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways, § 547.701 (Texas Transportation
Code) and the driver shall not proceed until such school bus resumes motion or
is signaled by the school bus driver to proceed or the visual signals are no
longer actuated.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle upon a highway with separated roadways need
not stop upon meeting or passing a school bus which is on a different roadway
or when upon a controlled access highway and the school bus is stopped on a
loading zone which is a part of or adjacent to such highway and where pedes-
trians are not permitted to cross the roadway.
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.07  DRIVERS IN PROCESSION.
   Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near the right-
hand edge of the roadway as practicable and shall follow the vehicle ahead as
close as is practicable and safe.
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.08  UNLAWFUL RIDING.
   No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed or
intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to an
employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to persons riding
within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise.
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.09  RAILROAD TRAINS NOT TO BLOCK STREETS.
   It shall be unlawful for the directing officer or the operator of any
railroad train to direct the operation of or to operate the same in such a
manner as to prevent the use of any street for purposes of travel for a period
of time longer than five minutes, except that this provision shall not apply to
trains or cars in motion other than those engaged in switching.
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.10  PEDESTRIAN CROSSING AT RIGHT ANGLES.
   Except where otherwise indicated by a crosswalk or other official traffic-
control devices, a pedestrian shall cross a roadway at right angles to the curb
or by the shortest route to the opposite curb.
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.99  PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, for which no penalty
is otherwise provided, shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
70.99 of this title.
CHAPTER 72:  STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING
Section
General Provisions
   
72.01   Definitions
   
72.02   Signs or marking indicating angle parking
   
72.03   Designated official to designate curb loading zone
   
72.04   Standing in passenger curb loading zone
   
72.05   Standing in freight curb loading zone
   
72.06   Parking not to obstruct traffic
   
72.07   Parking in alleys
   
72.08   Parking for certain purposes prohibited
   
72.09   Parking adjacent to schools
   
72.10   No stopping, standing, or parking near hazardous or congested areas
   
72.11   Where no signs required
   
72.12   Stopping, standing, and parking prohibited on certain streets
   
72.13   Parking time limited on certain streets
   
72.14   Standards for designation of parking spaces or areas on private
property for use by persons with physical disabilities
   
72.15   Parking boats and trailers
Heavy Vehicle Parking Regulations
   
72.20   Generally
   
72.21   Parking certain heavy vehicles
   
72.22   Accessory equipment
   
72.23   Residential parking permit
   
72.24   Removal of violations
Presumption in Prosecution
   
72.30   Presumption created
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 72.01 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   TRUCK LOT. A truck lot is an area which:
      (1)   fronts on, abuts, or is located adjacent to a truck route specified
in §
76.04;
      (2)   is used for the parking, temporary storage, or holding of a motor
vehicle or trailer which is 18 feet or more in length, seven feet or more in
width, nine feet or more in height, or has a gross vehicle weight of 10,000
pounds or more;
      (3)   is surfaced and maintained with an all-weather surface such as
asphalt, concrete or similar permanent hard surface material sufficient to
prevent mud, dust, loose material, and other nuisances;
      (4)   connects all required spaces and berths by an all-weather hard
surfaced driveway to a public street or alley;
      (5)   complies with all applicable regulations set forth in
Chapter 155 for off-street parking and loading; and
      (6)   is certified as a truck lot in writing by the Director of Planning
and Development.
(Ord. 99-36, passed 10-26-99)
§ 72.02  SIGNS OR MARKINGS INDICATING ANGLE PARKING.
   (A)   (1)   The designated official shall determine upon what streets angle
parking shall be permitted and shall mark or sign such streets but such angle
parking shall not be indicated upon any federal aid or state highway within
this city unless the State Highway Commission has determined by resolution or
other entered in its minutes that the roadway is of sufficient width to permit
angle parking without interfering with the free movement of traffic.
      (2)   Angle parking shall not be indicated or permitted at any place
where passing traffic would thereby be caused or required to drive upon the
left side of the street.
   (B)   On those streets which have been signed or marked by the city for
angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle
to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings.
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80)  Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.03  DESIGNATED OFFICIAL TO DESIGNATE CURB LOADING ZONE.
   The designated official is hereby authorized to determine the location of
passenger and freight curb loading zones and shall place and maintain approp-
riate signs indicating the same and stating the hours during which the
provisions of this section are applicable.
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80)
§ 72.04  STANDING IN PASSENGER CURB LOADING ZONE.
   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of
time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any
place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the regulations
applicable to such curb loading zone are effective, and then only for a period
not to exceed three minutes.
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80)  Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.05  STANDING IN FREIGHT CURB LOADING ZONE.
   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of
time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pick-up and 
loading of materials in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone during
hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case
shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes.
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80)  Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.06  PARKING NOT TO OBSTRUCT TRAFFIC.
   No person shall park any vehicle upon a street or right-of-way or under such
conditions that would unduly interfere with the free movement of traffic
thereon.
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80; Am. Ord. 85-20, passed 10-22-85)  Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.07  PARKING IN ALLEYS.
   No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under
such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the
roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop,
stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block the
driveway entrance to any abutting property.
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80)  Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.08  PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway or right-of-way for the
principal purpose of:
   (A)   Displaying such vehicle for sale.
   (B)   Washing, greasing, or repairing such vehicle except repairs
necessitated by an emergency.
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80; Am. Ord. 85-20, passed 10-22-85)
§ 72.09  PARKING ADJACENT TO SCHOOLS.
   The designated official is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating
parking upon either or both sides of any street adjacent to any school property
when such parking would interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation.
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80)
§ 72.10  NO STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING NEAR HAZARDOUS OR CONGESTED AREAS.
   (A)   The designated official is hereby authorized to determine and
designate by proper signs, places not exceeding 100 feet in length in which the
stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous
condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic.
   (B)   When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as
authorized herein no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any such
desig- nated place.
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80)  Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.11  WHERE NO SIGNS REQUIRED.
   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions
of a police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the following places:
   (A)   On a sidewalk.
   (B)   In front of a public or private driveway.
   (C)   Within an intersection.
   (D)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
   (E)   On a crosswalk.
   (F)   Within ten feet of a crosswalk at an intersection.
   (G)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic.
   (H)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a street.
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80)
§ 72.12  STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS.
   (A)   The provisions of this section, and
Chapter 75, Schedule I, prohibiting the standing or parking of a vehicle shall
apply at all times or at those times herein specified or as indicated on
official signs except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or
official traffic-control device.
   (B)   The provisions of this section imposing a time limit on parking shall
not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive
provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing, or parking of
vehicles in specified places or at specified times.
   (C)   Whenever by this chapter,
Chapter 75, Schedule I, or any ordinance of the city, any parking time limit is
imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets, it shall be the duty of
the designated  official to  erect appropriate  signs  giving notice thereof
and no such regulations shall be effective unless the signs are erected and in
place at the time of alleged offense.
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80)
§ 72.13  PARKING TIME LIMITED ON CERTAIN STREETS.
   In accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and when signs are
erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for a period of
time longer than two hours between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. of any
day except Sundays and public holidays within the district or upon any of the
streets or parts of streets so marked.
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80)
§ 72.14  STANDARDS FOR DESIGNATION OF PARKING SPACES OR AREAS ON PRIVATE
PROPERTY FOR USE BY PERSONS WITH PHYSICAL DISABILITIES.
   (A)   A person who owns or controls private property used for parking may
designate one or more parking spaces or a parking area for the exclusive use of
vehicles transporting persons with disabilities.
   (B)   When designating a parking space or area for persons with
disabilities, the person who owns or controls the property must conform to the
standards and specifications adopted by the commissioner of licensing and
regulation pursuant to § 5(c), (Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 9102) as amended,
relating to the identification and dimensions of parking spaces for persons
with disabilities.
   (C)   The provisions of § 681.011 (Texas Transportation Code) and its
successor legislation shall apply to a parking space or area on private
property that is designated for persons with disabilities in compliance with
the identification requirements set forth herein.
(Ord. 96-34, passed 7-9-96)
§ 72.15 PARKING BOATS AND TRAILERS
   (A)   Except as provided in subsections (B), (C) and (D) of this section, it
be unlawful for any person who owns or controls a boat or trailer to park or
leave same standing so as to encroach upon any public street:
      (1)   For more than seventy-two hours in any seven-day period; or
      (2)   For any length of time more than twice in any thirty-day period.
   (B)   It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section
that at the time of the alleged offense:
      (1)   The owner or operator of the boat or trailer was in the actual
course and scope of loading, unloading, or providing goods or services to, or
acquiring goods or services from, the occupant of property adjacent to the
public street;
      (2)   There were no other locations in the immediate vicinity where the
boat or trailer could be lawfully parked off the public street;
      (3)   The boat or trailer was otherwise lawfully parked as close to the
curb or shoulder of the public street as was practicable in order to minimize
obstruction of traffic on the street; and
      (4)   The boat or trailer was removed from the public street as soon as
reasonably possible following completion of the loading, unloading, or
provision or acquisition of goods or services.
   (C)   It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section
that at the time of the alleged offense there was conspicuously displayed on
the boat or trailer a valid permit approved by the City Manager in accordance
with the following provisions.
      (1)   The application for a permit shall be made upon a form approved by
the City Manager and filed with the City Secretary. No fee shall be charged or
collected for the permit.
      (2)   The City Manager shall approve or disapprove the issuance of the
permit or the renewal within two business days following the date on which the
application is filed. Failure of the City Manager to approve an application
within this time shall result in the administrative disapproval of such
application.
      (3)   The permit, if issued, shall be valid for the period specified
therein, not exceeding seven days. Subsequent applications for one or more
additional permits may be filed if the applicant seeks permission to park or
leave standing the boat or trailer for a longer period of time.
      (4)   The permit may not be transferred or assigned.
      (5)   The City Manager shall deny or revoke the permit if the applicant
has any outstanding parking or moving-traffic citations issued by the City; or
if application contains false or misleading information; or if the boat or
trailer poses a hazard to traffic or pedestrians, constitutes a nuisance, or
unreasonably impedes vehicular or pedestrian traffic on the public street; or
otherwise unreasonably limits access to any property.
   (D)   It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section
that at the time of the alleged offense the boat or trailer was otherwise
lawfully parked or left standing due to a mechanical defect which made it
unsafe to move, provided that as soon as reasonably possible the person having
ownership or control completed emergency repairs, or summoned tow removal
equipment, as appropriate.
   (E)   Nothing herein shall be construed to permit parking in a manner, time,
or location otherwise prohibited by law.
   (F)   A boat or trailer parked or left standing upon a public street in
violation of this section is subject to immediate towing and impoundment.
(Ord. 99-36, passed 10-26-99) Penalty, see §
70.99
HEAVY VEHICLE PARKING REGULATIONS
§ 72.20  GENERALLY.
   (A)   As used in this subchapter, the term “heavy vehicle” shall mean and
refer to:
      (1)   Any motor vehicle which is 18 feet or more in length; or
      (2)   Any motor vehicle which is seven feet or more in width; or
      (3)   Any motor vehicle which is nine feet or more in height; or
      (4)   Any motor vehicle which exceeds a gross vehicle weight of 10,000
pounds (generally excludes one-ton vehicles with manufacturer's rated carrying
capacity not to exceed 2,000 pounds); or
      (5)   Trucks, truck tractors, or the implement thereof which exceed a
gross weight of 10,000 pounds (trailer plus its load).
   (B)   Nothing herein shall be construed to permit parking in a manner, time,
or location otherwise prohibited by law.
(Ord. 99-36, passed 10-26-99)
§ 72.21 PARKING CERTAIN HEAVY VEHICLES.
   (A)   This section does not apply to:
      (1)   Heavy vehicles owned or leased by the City while being used by
employees or agents of the City in the performance of their City duties; or
      (2)   Heavy vehicles otherwise lawfully parked or left standing:
         (a)   At a construction site while construction is in progress; or
         (b)   By public utility companies at a location where public service
utilities are being repaired, installed, maintained, relocated, or extended.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a person who owns or operates a heavy vehicle
to park or leave same standing so as to encroach upon any alley, public street
or right of way.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for a person who owns or operates a heavy
vehicle, except a recreational vehicle, to park or leave same standing so as to
encroach upon any residential property zoned R-1, R1-M, R-2, R-3, R-MH, or RT-
1, unless at the time of the alleged offense there is conspicuously displayed
upon the heavy vehicle a valid permit as provided in §
72.23.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for a person who owns or operates a heavy vehicle
to park or leave same standing so as to encroach upon any commercial property
which is not owned or leased by the owner or operator of the heavy vehicle,
unless the vehicle is parked on a truck lot.
   (E)   It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under paragraph (D)
of this section that at the time of the alleged offense:
      (1)   The vehicle was otherwise lawfully parked;
      (2)   The owner or operator of the vehicle was in the actual course and
scope of loading, unloading, or providing goods or services to, or acquiring
goods or services from, the occupant of property upon which the vehicle was
parked;
      (3)   There were no other locations in the immediate vicinity where the
vehicle could be lawfully parked; and
      (4)   The vehicle was removed from the property as soon as reasonably
possible following completion of the loading, unloading, or provision or
acquisition of goods or services.
   (F)   It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under paragraphs
(B), (C) and (D) of this section that at the time of the alleged offense the
heavy vehicle was otherwise lawfully parked or stopped due to a mechanical
defect which made it unsafe to operate the vehicle, provided that as soon as
reasonably possible the driver or operator completed emergency repairs,
effected a load transfer to another vehicle, or summoned tow removal equipment,
as appropriate.
(Ord. 99-36, passed 10-26-99) Penalty, see §§
70.99 and
72.24
§ 72.22  ACCESSORY EQUIPMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having control of a heavy
vehicle to park or leave standing said heavy vehicle with the motor or
accessory equipment (such as a refrigeration unit generator) running, unless
such heavy vehicle is parked upon commercial property which is owned or leased
by the owner or operator of the heavy vehicle.
(Ord. 99-36, passed 10-26-99) Penalty, see §§
70.99 and
72.24
§ 72.23  RESIDENTIAL PARKING PERMIT.
   (A)   Notwithstanding §
72.21, a heavy vehicle may be parked on residential property zoned R-1, R1-M,
R-2, R-3, R-MH or RT-1 if there is conspicuously displayed on the vehicle a
valid permit approved by the City Manager in accordance with this section.
   (B)   The application for a permit shall be filed with the Planning and
Development Department, and the permit, if issued, shall be renewable annually
upon application and the subsequent inspection of the property. A fee shall be
charged for each permit application and renewal in the amount established and
published annually in the City Fee Schedule.
   (C)   The City Manager shall approve or disapprove an application for the
issuance or renewal of a permit within 45 days following the date on which the
properly-completed application is filed. Failure of the City Manager to approve
an application within such 45-day period shall result in the administrative
disapproval of such application.
   (D)   The City Manager shall deny or revoke the permit if the application
contains false or misleading information, or if the applicant at any time fails
to meet the following requirements. No permit shall be issued until the
following minimum requirements have been satisfied:
      (1)   The applicant is the owner of the heavy vehicle for which the
permit is to be issued.
      (2)   All neighbors within 200 feet of the property where the heavy
vehicle is to be parked have been notified of the filing of the permit
application.
      (3)   The Property upon which the heavy vehicle is to be parked is
occupied by the applicant as his residence.
      (4)   Improvements necessary for the issuance of the permit, if any, must
be completed before the permit is granted.
      (5)    The parking area shall meet the standards for off-street parking
established in §
155.062, and must be improved with a hard surface with an adequate size of
apron to allow for the maneuvering of the heavy vehicle onto and off the public
street.
      (6)   The parking area is located no closer than ten feet from the front
property line and seven feet from any side property line.
      (7)   The applicant must not have any outstanding parking or moving
traffic violations issued by the City.
   (E)   A permit issued under this section shall specify the vehicle to which
it applies, the location where the vehicle is to be parked and, if the vehicle
is subject to the restrictions established by §
76.04, an approved route of travel between the parking location and the nearest
approved truck route.
   (F)   The permit may not be transferred or assigned, and if the permit-
holder ceases to occupy the property for which the permit is issued the permit
shall become null and void.
   (G)   If the City Manager denies the issuance of a permit, or revokes a
permit, he shall send to the applicant at the address shown on the most recent
application, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of
such action and the right to appeal. The applicant may appeal the decision in
writing to the City Council within 15 days of the receipt of the notice. The
City Council shall act on the appeal within 60 days after an appeal is filed
with the City Secretary. The filing of an appeal stays the action of the City
Manager until the City Council makes a final decision.
(Ord. 99-36, passed 10-26-99) Penalty, see §§
70.99 and
72.24
§ 72.24 REMOVAL OF VIOLATIONS.
   A heavy vehicle parked or left standing in violation of any provision of
this subchapter is subject to immediate towing and impoundment.
(Ord. 99-36, passed 10-26-99) Penalty, see §
70.99
PRESUMPTION IN PROSECUTION
§ 72.30  PRESUMPTION CREATED.
   In a prosecution for an offense involving the stopping, standing, or parking
of an unattended motor vehicle under this chapter or under Texas Transportation
Code Ch. 545, Subchapter G, it is presumed that the registered owner of the
vehicle is the person who stopped, stood, or parked the vehicle at the time and
place the offense occurred.
(Ord. 2001-35, passed 11-13-01)
CHAPTER 73:  RESERVED
CHAPTER 74:  TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Speed limits
   
II.   School zones
   
III.   One-way streets
   
IV.   Through streets
   
V.   Stop signs
   
VI.   Yield signs
   
VII.   Traffic-control signals
SCHEDULE I.  SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   In accordance with §
71.01 of this transportation code, and when signs are erected giving notice
thereof, the maximum speed limit shall be set forth in this traffic schedule
upon those streets or portions thereof as follows:
 
Location Speed Limit, mph Ord. No. Date Passed
Access road westbound and eastbound adjacent to New        45 80-04   6-10-80
Highway 190 from east city limits to west city limits
Atoka Trace from Broken Arrow west to dead end             25 88-27   12-27-88
Birch Drive from Lakeview Drive north to dead end          25 88-27   12-27-88
Broken Arrow from Fuller Lane to south dead end            25 88-27   12-27-88
Cedar Drive from Lakeview Drive north to dead end          25 88-27   12-27-88
Cedar Knob Road from FM 2410 south to city limits          50 88-27   12-27-88
Chinaberry Circle from Lakeview Drive east to dead end     25 88-27   12-27-88
Clore Road east of Amy Lane to its termination             15 80-04   6-10-80
Comanche Gap Road from the north city limits to the south  35 2012-03 3-13-12
city limits
Creek Drive from Pawnee Trail west to dead end             25 88-27   12-27-88
Edwards Drive from Highway 190 east to city limits         45 80-04   6-10-80
Elmwood Circle from Elmwood Drive south to dead end        25 88-27   12-27-88
Elmwood Drive from Valley Oaks Drive to Fuller Lane        25 88-27   12-27-88
Fuller Lane from Oakridge Blvd. east to dead end           25 88-27   12-27-88
FM 2410 from Killeen east city limit to the west edge of   45 2012-08 5-22-12
the intersection with Redwood Drive
FM 2410 from the west edge of the intersection with
Redwood Drive to the east edge of the US Highway 190 East  35 2012-08 5-22-12
Frontage Road
FM 2410 from the east edge of the US Highway 190 East      45 2012-08 5-22-12
Frontage Road proceeding east for a distance of 1.61 miles
FM 2410 from the easternmost boundary of the speed zone
described immediately above to the west edge of Warriors   50 2012-08 5-22-12
Path
FM 2410 from the west edge of Warriors Path proceeding     55 2012-08 5-22-12
east for a distance of 0.2 miles
FM 2410 from the easternmost boundary of the speed zone    60 2012-08 5-22-12
described immediately above to the east city limits
FM 3219 from Business Highway 190  north to city limits   50 80-04;  6-10-80;
                                                              96-20   5-14-96
FM 3423 from U.S. Highway 190 Westbound Frontage Road to   30 85-06;  4-23-85;
Loop 518                                                      96-20   5-14-96
                    Starting at the south edge of the FM
                    2410 intersection, proceeding south    45 2015-06 3-31-15
                    for a distance of 0.700 miles
                    From the southernmost boundary of the
FM 3481 (Stillhouse speed zone described immediately above 50 2015-06 3-31-15
Lake Drive)         for a distance of 0.700 miles
                    From the southernmost boundary of the
                    speed zone described immediately above 60 2015-06 3-31-15
                    to the Harker Heights south city
                    limits
Fuller Lane from Cedar Knob Road east to Oakridge Blvd.    40 88-27   12-27-88
Hannahawk Circle from Broken Arrow east to dead end        25 88-27   12-27-88
Highway 190 (Business) from east city limits to west city  45 80-04   6-10-80
limits
Highway 190 (New) from east city limits to west city       55 80-04   6-10-80
limits
Indian Trail from Business Highway 190 south to New        40 80-04   6-10-80
Highway 190
Indian Trail from New Highway 190 south to the city limits 30 80-04   6-10-80
Interstate Highway 14, east and west bound, within Harker  65 2017-07 5-23-17
Heights city limits
Iroquois Drive from Pawnee Trail to Osage Trail            25 88-27   12-27-88
Kiamichi Trail from Broken Arrow east to dead end          25 88-27   12-27-88
Lakeview Drive from Oakridge Blvd. to Tye Valley Road      25 88-27   12-27-88
Mesa Oaks Circle from Oakridge Blvd. to Oakridge Blvd.     25 88-27   12-27-88
Moon Valley Road from Tye Valley Road to Tye Valley Road   25 88-27   12-27-88
Mountain Lion Road  from the Killeen City Limits to FM    35 2014-01 1-14-14
2410
North Mary Jo between Valley and Nolan Trail               20 98-11   5-12-98
Oakridge Blvd. from Fuller Lane to Elmwood Drive           25 88-27   12-27-88
Oakridge Blvd. from Elmwood Drive south to dead end        25 88-27   12-27-88
Oakridge Circle from Oakridge Blvd. east to dead end       25 88-27   12-27-88
Oakwood Drive from Valley Oaks Drive to Oakridge Blvd.     25 88-27   12-27-88
Pawnee Drive from Tejas Drive to Tahuaya Drive             25 88-27   12-27-88
Quenah from Broken Arrow east to dead end                  25 88-27   12-27-88
North Roy Reynolds Drive from intersection with Veteran's  45 94-06   1-25-94
Memorial Blvd. north to city limits
North Roy Reynolds Drive from its intersection with State  30 87-13   4-28-87
Highway 190 Loop 518 north to the city limits
Fuller Lane from Oakridge Blvd east to dead end            25 88-27   12-27-88
Tahuaya Drive from Broken Arrow to Pawnee Trail            25 88-27   12-27-88
Kiamichi Trail from Broken Arrow east to dead end          25 88-27   12-27-88
Stillhouse Lake Drive from the intersection with F.M. 2410 50 98-30   7-14-98
and proceeding to the south for a distance of 0.280 miles
Stillhouse Lake Drive from a point 0.280 miles south of
the intersection with F.M. 2410 proceeding south for a     60 98-30   7-14-98
distance of 2.231 miles to the south city limit
Tye Valley Road from Fuller Lane to Fuller Lane            25 88-27   12-27-88
U.S. Highway 190 east and west bound to the Harker
Heights-Killeen city limits from the eastern right-of-way
of FM 3423 (Indian Trail)
   Construction zone 65 mph speed limit signs present,  65 2013-23 8-27-13
speed limit, mph
   Construction zone 65 mph speed limit signs absent,   75 2013-23 8-27-13
speed limit, mph
Valley Oaks Circle from Valley Oaks Drive east to dead end 25 88-27   12-27-88
Valley Oaks Drive from Oakridge Blvd. to Oakridge          25 88-27   12-27-88
Boulevard
Verna Lee Blvd. north bound and south bound lanes from the
intersection of FM-2410 to the intersection of Indian      30 2008-09 4-8-08
Trail
Veteran's Memorial Blvd. (BU 190L) from west city limit to 40 94-10   2-22-94
east city limit (1.850 mi.)
Warriors Path Road, starting from the north edge of FM
2410 intersection to 620 feet north of the Pontotoc Trace  40 2020-27 7-28-20
intersection
Willowood Circle from Willowood Drive east to dead end     25 88-27   12-27-88
Willowood Drive from Oakridge Blvd. to Valley Oaks Drive   25 88-27   12-27-88
The speed limit for all roadways not specifically listed in this schedule is
hereby 30 miles per hour zone.
 
Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE II.  SCHOOL ZONES.
   (A)   In accordance with §
71.01 of this transportation code, and when signs are erected giving notice
thereof, the maximum speed limit shall be 20 miles per hour during the hours
stated on the sign on school days only, upon those streets or portions of
streets as follows:
 
Location Ord. No. Date Passed
Bobwhite from South Ann Blvd. west to Harley Drive      80-04          6-10-80
Chickasaw Drive eastbound and westbound from Moccasin
Drive and Chickasaw Drive intersection to 125 feet east 88-18          8-23-88
of Moccasin Drive intersection
Dove Lane from South Ann Blvd. west to Harley Drive     80-04          6-10-80
Harley Drive northbound from 150 feet south of Bobwhite 80-04          6-10-80;
to 150 feet north of Dove                               Am. Ord. 83-08 8-23-83
Harley Drive southbound from 150 feet north of Harley   80-04;         6-10-80;
and Dove to 150 feet south of Harley and Bobwhite       Am. Ord. 83-08 8-23-83
Iowa Drive eastbound and westbound from Mountain Lion   88-18;         8-23-88;
Road and Iowa Drive to 50 feet east of Iowa Drive and   Am. Ord.       1-27-04
Moccasin Drive intersection                             2004-03
Moccasin Drive northbound and southbound from Moccasin  88-18          8-23-88
Drive and Wampum to Moccasin Drive and Iowa Drive
Pawnee Drive northbound and southbound from Pawnee
Drive and Iowa Drive to 85 feet north of Pawnee Drive   88-18          8-23-88
and Iowa Drive
Sioux Circle northbound and southbound from Sioux
Circle and Iowa Drive to 120 feet north of Sioux Circle 88-18          8-23-88
and Iowa Drive
Mountain Lion Road northbound and southbound from 87    88-18;         8-23-88;
feet north of Iowa Drive and Mountain Lion Road         Am. Ord.       1-27-04
intersection to 100 feet south of Wampum Drive          2004-03
Wampum Drive eastbound and westbound from Wampum Drive  88-18;         8-23-88;
and Mountain Lion Road intersection to 91 feet east of  Am. Ord.       1-27-04
Wampum and Moccasin Drive intersection                  2004-03
Crazy Horse Circle northbound and southbound from
Wampum Drive and Crazy Horse Circle intersection to     2004-34        8-24-04
circle.
Chinook Circle northbound and southbound from Wampum    2004-34        8-24-04
Drive and Chinook Circle intersection to circle.
Wilderness Drive northbound and southbound from
Mountain Lion Road and Wilderness Drive intersection to 2004-34        8-24-04
77 feet north of Mountain Lion Road.
E. Iowa Drive eastbound and westbound 97 feet from
Modoc Drive and E. Iowa Drive intersection to E. Iowa   2004-34        8-24-04
Drive and Mountain Lion Road intersection.
Modoc Drive northbound and southbound from E. Iowa
Drive and Modoc Dr. intersection to 153 feet north of
E. Iowa Drive to Modoc Drive northbound and southbound  2004-34        8-24-04
from Great Plains Trail and Modoc Dr. intersection to
128 feet south of Great Plains Trail.
Village Drive eastbound and westbound from Modoc Drive
and Village Drive intersection to 94 feet west of Modoc 2004-34        8-24-04
Drive.
Mission Drive eastbound and westbound from Modoc Drive
and Mission Drive intersection to 107 feet west of      2004-34        8-24-04
Modoc Drive.
W. Great Plains Trail eastbound and westbound 95 feet
from Modoc Drive and W. Great Plains Trail intersection 2004-34        8-24-04
to E. Great Plains Trail and Mountain Lion Road.
Buckskin Trail northbound and southbound from E. Great
Plains Trail and Buckskin Trail intersection to 103     2004-34        8-24-04
feet south of E. Great Plains Trail.
Prospector Trail eastbound and westbound from
Prospector Trail and Mustang Trail intersection to 85   2006-24        7-25-06
feet west of Prospector Trial and Mustang Trail
intersection.
Mustang Trail northbound and southbound from Prospector
Trail and Mustang Trail intersection to 80 feet south   2006-24        7-25-06
of Prospector Trial and Mustang Trail intersection.
Tundra Drive northbound and southbound from Prospector
Trail and Tundra Drive intersection to 80 feet south of 2006-24        7-25-06
Prospector Trail and Tundra Drive intersection.
Prospector Trail eastbound and westbound from
Reservation Drive and Prospector Trail intersection to  2006-24        7-25-06
88 feet east of Reservation Drive and Prospector Trail
intersection.
Wagon Wheel Drive northbound and southbound from
Cowhand Drive and Wagon Wheel Drive intersection to 100 2006-24        7-25-06
feet north of Cowhand Drive and Wagon Wheel Drive
intersection.
Cowhand Drive eastbound and westbound from Bullwhip
Circle and Cowhand Drive intersection to 142 feet east  2006-24        7-25-06
of Bullwhip Circle and Cowhand Drive intersection.
Black Hills Trail eastbound and westbound from Bullwhip
Drive and Black Hills Trail intersection to 80 feet     2006-24        7-25-06
east of Bullwhip Drive and Black Hills Trail
intersection.
White Hawk Trail eastbound and westbound from Bullwhip
Drive and White Hawk Trail intersection to 140 feet     2006-24        7-25-06
east of Bullwhip Drive and White Hawk Trail
intersection.
Canoe Drive northbound and southbound from E. Great
Plains Trail and Canoe Drive intersection to 146 feet   2013-15        5-28-13
south of Canoe Drive and E. Running Wolf Trail
intersection
E. Deer Horn Pass eastbound and westbound from Canoe
Drive and E. Deer Horn Pass intersection to 130 feet    2013-08        3-12-13
west of Canoe Drive and E. Deer Horn Pass intersection
E. Running Wolf Trail eastbound and westbound from
Canoe Drive and E. Running Wolf Trail intersection to   2013-08        3-12-13
110 feet west of Canoe Drive and E. Running Wolf Trail
intersection
Skipcha Drive, beginning north of the centerline of E.
Iowa Drive and proceeding generally north along Skipcha 2014-01        1-14-14
Drive for a distance of 337 feet.
Ann Blvd. northbound and southbound from 278 feet south 2018-25        10-23-18
of Bobwhite Lane to 350 feet north of Dove Lane
Pueblo Trace northbound and southbound from 100 feet
north of the Pueblo Trace and Yuma Trail intersection   2020-27        7-28-20
to 150 feet south of the Pueblo Trace and Inca Drive
intersection.
Inca Drive eastbound and westbound from Inca Drive and
Pueblo Trace intersection to 100 feet west of Inca      2020-27        7-28-20
Drive and Pueblo Trace intersection.
Pima Trail eastbound and westbound from Pima Trail and
Pueblo Trace intersection to 100 feet west of Yuma      2020-27        7-28-20
Trail and Pueblo Trace intersection.
Yuma Trail eastbound and westbound from Yuma Trail and
Pueblo Trace intersection to 100 feet west of Yuma      2020-27        7-28-20
Trail and Pueblo Trace intersection.
 
 
   (B)   In accordance with §
71.01 of this transportation code, and when signs are erected giving notice
thereof, the maximum speed shall be 25 miles per hour during the hours stated
on the sign on school days only, upon those streets or portions of streets as
follows:
 
Location Ord. No. Date Passed
Verna Lee Blvd. from its intersection with FM 2410 to 260 feet  2004-03 1-27-04
north of the intersection of FM 2410 and Verna Lee Blvd.
Verna Lee Blvd. from its intersection with Ramblewood 260 feet  2004-03 1-27-04
north of the intersection of Ramblewood and Verna Lee Blvd.
Pinewood from its intersection with Verna Lee Blvd. to 224 feet 2004-03 1-27-04
west of the intersection
Ashwood from its intersection with Verna Lee Blvd. to 214 feet  2004-03 1-27-04
west of the intersection
Maplewood from its intersection with Verna Lee Blvd. to 197     2004-03 1-27-04
feet west of the intersection
Rosewood from its intersection with Verna Lee Blvd. to 207 feet 2004-03 1-27-04
west of the intersection
Lemonwood from its intersection with Verna Lee Blvd. to 218     2004-03 1-27-04
feet west of the intersection
Ramblewood from its intersection with Verna Lee Blvd. to 223    2004-03 1-27-04
feet west of the intersection
Warriors Path Road northbound and southbound from 70 feet north
of the Warriors Path Road and Pontotoc Trace intersection to    2020-27 7-28-20
1,445 feet north of the Warriors Path Road and Pontotoc Trace
intersection.
 
   (C)   In accordance with §
71.01 of this transportation code, and when signs are erected giving notice
thereof, the maximum speed shall be 35 miles per hour during the hours stated
on the sign on school days only, upon those streets or portions of streets as
follows:
 
Location                                                                    Ord.  Date
                                                                            No.   Passed
FM 2410, beginning 270’ west of the centerline of Verna Lee Boulevard and 2009- 6-9-09
proceeding generally east along FM 2410 for a distance of 0.335 miles       13
 
   (D)   When signs are erected giving notice thereof, during the hours stated
on the sign on school days only, the speed limits set forth in this section
supersede any conflicting speed limit established in Schedule I of this
chapter.
(Ord. 2006-24, passed 7-25-06; Am. Ord. 2009-13, passed 6-9-09)
Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE III.  ONE-WAY STREETS.
   (A)   Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys described
in the following traffic schedule, vehicular traffic shall move only in the
indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected
and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction
is prohibited.
   (B)   In accordance with division (A) of this schedule, and when properly
posted, traffic shall move only in the direction indicated upon the following
streets:
 
Street                      Location                       Ord. No. Date Passed
Access road adjacent to New From west city limits to east  80-04    6-10-80
Highway 190, east           city limits
Access road adjacent to New From east city limits to west  80-04    6-10-80
Highway 190, west           city limits
Bobwhite Lane               From South Ann Blvd. to Harley 88-25    12-27-88
                            Drive
Dove Lane                   From South Ann Blvd. to Harley 88-25    12-27-88
                            Drive
Edwards Drive, east         From Business Highway 190 to   80-04    6-10-80
                            Buffalo Drive
 
Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE IV.  THROUGH STREETS.
   (A)   Those streets and parts of streets described in this traffic schedule
are hereby declared to be through streets for the purpose of this
transportation code.
   (B)   In accordance with division (A) of this schedule and when signs are
erected giving notice thereof, drivers of vehicles shall stop or yield at every
intersection before entering any of the following streets or parts of streets:
 
Street             Ord. No. Date Passed
South Amy Lane     80-04    6-10-80
South Ann Blvd.    80-04    6-10-80
South Harley Drive 80-04    6-10-80
 
Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE V.  STOP SIGNS.
   The following intersections are to be controlled with stop signs oriented as
indicated in this Schedule.
 
Street Intersection Direction of      TravOrd. No. Date Passed
            Pioneer                                         South 2003-
Addax Trail Eland Trail                                     South 10    9-9-03
            Wildewood                                       South
Alberta     Verna Lee Blvd.                                 West  2003- 9-9-03
Circle                                                            10
Alberta     Verna Lee Blvd.                                 East  2003- 9-9-03
Lane                                                              10
                                                            North
            Veterans Memorial Blvd.                         and   2003-
Amy Lane                                                    South 10    9-9-03
            Indian Oaks                                     South

Ann Blvd.   West Central Texas Expressway                   South 2003- 9-9-03
                                                                  10
            Indian Trail                                    North
Antelope                                                    North 2003- 9-9-03
Trail       Frontier                                        and   10
                                                            South
Apache      Comanche Gap Road                               North 2003- 9-9-03
Drive                                                             10
            Tomahawk                                        North
                                                            North
            Chickasaw                                       and
Arapaho                                                     South 2003- 9-9-03
Drive                                                       North 10
            Wampum                                          and
                                                            South
            Creek                                           North
                                                            East
            Harley Drive                                    and
                                                            West  2003-
Arlo Road                                                   East  10    9-9-03
            Ann Blvd.                                       and
                                                            West
            Amy Lane                                        East
            Ann Blvd.                                       West
Arrowhead                                                   East  2003- 9-9-03
Drive       Comanche                                        and   10
                                                            West
Ashwood     Verna Lee Blvd.                                 South 2003- 9-9-03
Drive                                                             10
Atoka Trace Broken Arrow                                    East  2003- 9-9-03
                                                                  10
Aztec Trace Osage                                           North 2003- 9-9-03
                                                                  10
Badger      Antelope                                        South 2003- 9-9-03
Circle                                                            10
            Ann Blvd.                                       West  2003-
Ball Road                                                         10    9-9-03
            Amy Lane                                        East  2003-
                                                                  10
Bear Trail  Antelope                                        West  2003- 9-9-03
                                                                  10
                                                            East
            Antelope                                        and   2003-
Beaver                                                      West  10    9-9-03
Trail       Frontier                                        North
            Frontier                                        South
            Frontier Trail                                  South 2012- 5-22-12
                                                                  09
            Roy Reynolds                                    West
                                                            East
            Harley Drive                                    and
                                                            West
Beeline                                                     East  2003-
Lane        Ann Blvd.                                       and   10    9-9-03
                                                            West
                                                            East
            Amy Lane                                        and
                                                            West
            Indian Trail                                    East
Blackhawk   Heights Drive                                   West  2003- 9-9-03
Trail                                                             10
Bluebird    Beeline                                         North 2003- 9-9-03
Lane                                                              10
                                                            North 2003-
           Cherokee                                        and   10    9-9-03
                                                            South
Bobcat      Antelope                                        South 2003- 9-9-03
Circle                                                            10
                                                            East
Bobwhite    Harley Drive                                    and   2003-
Lane                                                        West  10    9-9-03
            Ann Blvd.                                       West

                                                            North
            Cedar Oaks                                      and   2003-
Boulder Run                                                 South 10    9-9-03
            Indian Trail                                    South

            Roy Reynolds                                    West
Briarwood                                                   East  2003- 9-9-03
            Pin Oak Drive                                   and   10
                                                            West
Broken      Fuller Lane                                     North 2003- 9-9-03
Arrow Drive                                                       10
Broken      Pawnee Drive                                    South 2012- 5-22-12
Arrow Drive                                                       09
Buckskin    E. Great Plains Trail                           North 2013- 3-12-13
Trail                                                             08
Buffalo     East Central Texas Expressway                   North 2003-
Trail       Indian Trail                                    South 10    9-9-03

Bybee Court Lark                                            East  2003- 9-9-03
                                                                  10
                                                            East
            Redwood Drive                                   and   2003-
Cagle                                                       West  10    9-9-03
            Harley Drive                                    East

Canoe Drive E. Great Plains Trail                           North 2013- 3-12-13
                                                                  08
                                                            East
            Harley Drive                                    and
                                                            West
Cardinal                                                    East  2003- 9-9-03
Lane        Ann Blvd.                                       and   10
                                                            West
            Bluebird                                        East
            Amy Lane                                        West
Caribou     Pioneer                                         South 2003- 9-9-03
Trail                                                             10
Catawba     Wilderness                                      West  2003- 9-9-03
Loop                                                              10
Cayuga      River Rock Trail                                East  2009- 7-28-09
Drive                                                             20
Cayuga      River Rock Trail                                West  2009- 7-28-09
Drive                                                             20
Cedar Knob  FM 2410                                         North 2003-
Road        Stillhouse Lake Rd.                             West  10    9-9-03

                                                            East
            Nola Ruth Blvd.                                 and
Cedar Oaks                                                  West  2003-
Lane                                                        East  10    9-9-03
            Boulder Run                                     and
                                                            West
            End-O-Trail                                     East
            Cedar Oaks                                      North
            Chardonnay                                      South
Chablis     Zinfandel                                       South 2003- 9-9-03
Drive                                                       North 10
            Port                                            and
                                                            South
Chapparral  Stillhouse Lake Rd.                             East  2003- 9-9-03
Road                                                              10
Chardonnay  Chablis                                         East  2003- 9-9-03
                                                                  10
                                                            North
Cheetah     Wolverine                                       and   2003-
Trail                                                       South 10    9-9-03
            Elk Trail                                       South

Cheetah                                                     East  2004-
Trail       Wolverine Trail                                 and   19    5-25-04
                                                            West
                                                            East
            Harley Drive                                    and
                                                            West
Cherokee                                                    East  2003-
Drive       Ann Blvd.                                       and   10    9-9-03
                                                            West
                                                            East
            Amy Lane                                        and
                                                            West
Cheyenne    Tomahawk                                        North 2003-
Trail       Arapaho                                         East  10    9-9-03

Chickasaw   Moccassin                                       West  2003-
Drive       Wampum                                          South 10    9-9-03

Chinook     Wampum                                          North 2003- 9-9-03
Drive                                                             10
Chippewa    Thunderbird                                     North 2003- 9-9-03
Drive                                                             10
Chiricahua  Shoshoni                                        South 2003-
Trace       Maya                                            North 10    9-9-03

            Pioneer                                         North 2003-
Civet Trail Addax                                           South 10    9-9-03

            Amy Lane                                        West
                                                            East  2003-
Clore Road  Indian Trail                                    and   10    9-9-03
                                                            West
            Lookout Ridge Blvd.                             East
Comache     Indian Oaks                                     North 2003-
Drive       FM 2410                                         South 10    9-9-03

Comanche    FM 2410                                         North 2003- 9-9-03
Gap Road                                                          10
Commercial  Triangle                                        East  2003- 9-9-03
Drive                                                             10
Concho      Modoc                                           West  2003- 9-9-03
Court                                                             10
Concho      Modoc                                           East  2003-
Trail       Raindance Loop                                  West  10    9-9-03

Cottonmouth Indian Trail                                    South 2003- 9-9-03
Drive                                                             10
Cottonwood  Cagle                                           South 2003- 9-9-03
Drive                                                             10
Cowhand     Bullwhip Circle/Bullwhip Drive                  East  2006- 7-25-06
Drive                                                             25
Cowhand     Bullwhip Circle/Bullwhip Drive                  West  2006- 7-25-06
Drive                                                             25
                                                            East  2003-
Cox Drive   Amy Lane                                        and   10    9-9-03
                                                            West
Coyote      Antelope                                        South 2003- 9-9-03
Circle                                                            10
Crazy Horse Wampum                                          North 2003- 9-9-03
Circle                                                            10
            FM 2410                                         East
Creek Drive                                                 East  2003- 9-9-03
            Ottawa                                          and   10
                                                            West
                                                            North
            Prospector Trail                                and
Crowfoot                                                    South 2010- 6-8-10
Drive                                                       North 15
            Ponderosa Drive                                 and
                                                            South
            Beeline                                         North 2003-
Crymes Lane Robin                                           South 10    9-9-03

            Beeline                                         North 2003-
Daisy Drive Robin                                           South 10    9-9-03

Dakota      Shasta                                          South 2003- 9-9-03
Trace                                                             10
Davis       Elk Trail                                       South 2003- 9-9-03
Circle                                                            10
            End-O-Trail                                     West
                                                            East
            Jason                                           and   2003-
Diana Lane                                                  West  10    9-9-03
                                                            East
            Silver Creek                                    and
                                                            West
Dingo       Wolverine                                       West  2003- 9-9-03
Circle                                                            10
Dingo Trail Wolverine                                       East  2003- 9-9-03
                                                                  10
                                                            East
Dorothy     Verna Lee Blvd.                                 and   2003-
Lane                                                        West  10    9-9-03
            Nola Ruth Blvd.                                 East

            Harley Drive                                    East  2003-
Dove Lane   Ann Blvd.                                       East  10    9-9-03

Drawbridge  FM 2410                                         South 2003- 9-9-03
Drive                                                             10
Drawbridge                                                  North 2004-
Drive       Lancelot Lane                                   and   19    5-25-04
                                                            South
East
Central     Nola Ruth Blvd.                                 East  2003- 9-9-03
Texas                                                             10
Expressway
Eastern     Clore                                           South 2003-
Hills Drive Indian Trail                                    East  10    9-9-03

Elbert Lane Amy Lane                                        West  2003- 9-9-03
                                                                  10
                                                            East  2008-
Elbert Lane Pan American Drive                              and   15    5-27-08
                                                            West
Eland Trail Grizzly                                         South 2003- 9-9-03
                                                                  10
            Frontier                                        South 2003-
            Pioneer                                         South 10    9-9-03
Elk Trail   Llama                                           South
                                                            North 2005-
            Gazelle Trail                                   and   06    4-12-05
                                                            South
Elmwood     Oakridge                                        North 2003-
Drive       Valley Oaks                                     South 10    9-9-03

            Old Nolanville Rd.                              North
End-O-Trail                                                 North 2003- 9-9-03
            Sutton Place                                    and   10
                                                            South
Evergreen   Roy Reynolds                                    West  2003-
Drive       FM 2410                                         South 10    9-9-03

            Elk Trail                                       West  2003-
Fawn Trail  Antelope                                        East  10    9-9-03

Flat Rock   Rummel Road                                     East  2009- 7-28-09
Cove                                                              20
Flint Oak   Highview Drive                                  South 2009- 7-28-09
Drive                                                             20
                                                            North
            Veterans Memorial Blvd.                         and
FM 3219                                                     South 2003- 9-9-03
                                                            North 10
            Edwards Drive                                   and
                                                            South
Forest      Roy Reynolds                                    West  2003- 9-9-03
Circle                                                            10
Forest      Indian Oaks                                     North 2003- 9-9-03
Hills Drive                                                       10
            Frontier                                        North 2003- 9-9-03
Fox Trail                                                         10
            Frontier Trail                                  South 2012- 5-22-12
                                                                  09
            West Central Texas Expressway                   West
Frontier                                                    East  2003-
Trail       Antelope                                        and   10    9-9-03
                                                            West
            Verna Lee Blvd.                                 East
            Stillhouse Lake Rd.                             West  2003-
Fuller Lane Oakridge                                        West  10    9-9-03

Fullview    Dorothy Lane                                    North 2003- 9-9-03
Court                                                             10
Gasisco     Verna Lee Blvd.                                 East  2012- 5-22-12
Drive                                                             09
            Caribou                                         West
                                                            East
            Wolverine                                       and
Gazelle                                                     West  2003- 9-9-03
Trail                                                       East  10
            Elk Trail                                       and
                                                            West
            Antelope                                        East
            Old Nolanville Rd.                              North 2003-
Gina Drive  Diana                                           West  10    9-9-03

Granite     FM 2410                                         North 2003- 9-9-03
Trail                                                             10
            Mountain Lion Rd.                               North
Great                                                       North 2003-
Plains      Modoc                                           and   10    9-9-03
                                                            South
            Iowa                                            West
Grizzly     Miller's Crossing                               West  2003- 9-9-03
Trail                                                             10
Grizzly     Pioneer Trail                                   South 2004- 5-25-04
Trail                                                             19
Halona      Stillhouse Lake Road                            East  2010- 12-14-
                                                                  36    10
Hannhawk    Broken Arrow                                    West  2003- 9-9-03
Circle                                                            10
Harley      FM 2410                                         South 2003- 9-9-03
Drive                                                             10
Harvest     Modoc                                           West  2003-
Drive       Omaha                                           East  10    9-9-03

Harvest     Modoc                                           East  2003- 9-9-03
Loop                                                              10
Heights     East Central Texas Expressway                   North 2003- 9-9-03
Drive                                                             10
            Miller's Crossing                               South 2003-
Helms Way   East Central Texas Expressway                   North 10    9-9-03

Highland    Roy Reynolds                                    North 2003-
Oaks Drive  FM 2410                                         South 10    9-9-03

            Fuller Lane                                     North 2003-
Hilltop     Cliffview                                       South 10    9-9-03

            Chickasaw                                       North
                                                            North 2003-
Hogan Drive Wampum                                          and   10    9-9-03
                                                            South
            Creek                                           South
            Indian Trail                                    East  2003- 9-9-03
Hopi Trail                                                        10
            Pueblo Trace                                    East  2020- 7-28-20
                                                                  27
Illinois    Cheyenne                                        East  2003-
Drive       Tomahawk                                        North 10    9-9-03

Inca Drive  Pueblo Trace                                    East  2020- 7-28-20
                                                                  27
            Ann Blvd.                                       West
Indian Oaks                                                 East  2003-
Drive       Amy Lane                                        and   10    9-9-03
                                                            West
            West Central Texas Expressway                   South
            Veterans Memorial Blvd.                         North
                                                            East
            Antelope                                        and
Indian                                                      West  2003- 9-9-03
Trail                                                       East  10
            Verna Lee Blvd.                                 and
                                                            West
            FM 2410                                         South
                                                            East
            Mountain Lion Rd.                               and
                                                            West  2003-
Iowa Drive  Cheyenne                                        North 10    9-9-03
                                                            East
            Modoc                                           and
                                                            West
                                                            East  2003-
Jamie Road  Mary Jo                                         and   10    9-9-03
                                                            West
Jan Circle  Mary Jo                                         East  2003- 9-9-03
                                                                  10
            Arlo                                            North 2003-
Janie Drive Stacie                                          South 10    9-9-03

Jason Drive Old Nolanville Rd.                              North 2003- 9-9-03
                                                                  10
Juanita     Nolan Trail                                     North 2003-
Drive       Jamie                                           South 10    9-9-03

Juniper     Oakridge                                        South 2003- 9-9-03
Drive                                                             10
                                                            North
Kangaroo    Pioneer                                         and   2003-
Trail                                                       South 10    9-9-03
            Addax                                           South
            Llama                                           South
            Harley Drive                                    West
                                                            East
            Ann Blvd.                                       and   2003-
Kathey Road                                                 West  10    9-9-03
                                                            East
            Amy Lane                                        and
                                                            West
Kiamichi    Broken Arrow                                    South 2003-
Trail       Tahuaya                                         North 10    9-9-03

Kodiak      Grizzly                                         South 2003- 9-9-03
                                                                  10
Lakecliffe  Lakecliffe Drive                                South 2003- 9-9-03
Circle                                                            10
Lakecliffe  Fuller Lane                                     North 2003-
Drive       Lakecliffe Drive                                West  10    9-9-03

Lakeview    Oakridge                                        West  2003-
Drive       Tye Valley                                      South 10    9-9-03

            Port Drive                                      North 2012- 5-22-12
Lambrusco                                                         09
Drive       Port Drive                                      South 2012- 5-22-12
                                                                  09
Lancelot    Drawbridge Drive                                North 2004- 5-25-04
Lane                                                              19
Lark Circle Indian Oaks                                     North 2003- 9-9-03
                                                                  10
Lark Drive  Beeline                                         South 2003- 9-9-03
                                                                  10
Lemonwood   Verna Lee Blvd.                                 East  2003- 9-9-03
                                                                  10
Limestone   FM 2410                                         North 2003-
Trail       Quarry                                          South 10    9-9-03

Live Oak    Roy Reynolds                                    West  2003- 9-9-03
Drive                                                             10
            Caribou                                         West  2003-
Llama Trail Elk Trail                                       East  10    9-9-03

            Caribou                                         West  2003-
Lobo Trail  Wolverine                                       East  10    9-9-03

Lookout     Edwards Drive                                   North 2003-
Ridge Blvd. West Central Texas Expressway                   South 10    9-9-03

Man O War   Old Nolanville Rd.                              North 2003- 9-9-03
                                                                  10
Maplewood   Verna Lee Blvd.                                 East  2003- 9-9-03
                                                                  10
Marble      Limestone                                       West  2003-
Trail       Granite                                         East  10    9-9-03

            Harley Drive                                    West
Mark Road   Janie                                           East  2003- 9-9-03
            Ann Blvd.                                       West  10
            Amy Lane                                        East
Mary Jo     Veterans Memorial Blvd.                         South 2003- 9-9-03
Drive                                                             10
Maya Trail  Indian Trail                                    East  2003- 9-9-03
                                                                  10
McClure     Beeline                                         North 2003-
Lane        Robin                                           South 10    9-9-03

Meadow      High Oak Drive                                  West  2009- 7-28-09
Circle                                                            20
Mesa Oaks   Oakridge                                        North 2003- 9-9-03
Circle                                                            10
            Rattlesnake                                     West
                                                            East
Mildred Lee Verna Lee Blvd.                                 and   2003-
Lane                                                        West  10    9-9-03
                                                            East
            Nola Ruth Blvd.                                 and
                                                            West
Miller's    FM 2410                                         West  2003- 9-9-03
Crossing                                                          10
Miller’s  1024 feet west of the Helm’s Way Intersection West  2010- 8-24-10
Drive       centerline                                            21
Mission     Modoc                                           North 2003- 9-9-03
                                                                  10
Missouri    Modoc                                           West  2003- 9-9-03
Drive                                                             10
            Iowa                                            North
Moccasin                                                    North 2003-
Drive       Wampum                                          and   10    9-9-03
                                                            South
            Creek                                           South
                                                            East
            Harley Drive                                    and
Mockingbird                                                 West  2003-
Lane                                                        East  10    9-9-03
            Ann Blvd.                                       and
                                                            West
            Bluebird                                        East
Modie Drive Northside Drive                                 West  2003- 9-9-03
                                                                  10
            East Central Texas Expressway                   North
                                                            North
            Concho                                          and
                                                            South
                                                            North 2003- 9-9-03
            Mountain Lion Rd.                               and   10
                                                            South
                                                            North
            Great Plains                                    and
                                                            South
Modoc Drive                                                 North
            Harvest Loop                                    and
                                                            South
                                                            North 2004-
            Quapaw Drive                                    and   26    7-27-04
                                                            South
                                                            North
            Wickiup Trail                                   and
                                                            South
                                                            North 2004-
            E. Iowa Dr.                                     and   35    8-24-04
                                                            South
            Harley Drive                                    West
                                                            East
Mohawk      Ann Blvd.                                       and   2003-
Drive                                                       West  10    9-9-03
                                                            East
            Comanche                                        and
                                                            West
Mohican     Indian Trail                                    East  2003-
Trail       Aztec                                           West  10    9-9-03

Moody       Roy Reynolds                                    West  2003- 9-9-03
Circle                                                            10
Mountain    FM 2410                                         East  2003- 9-9-03
Lion Rd.                                                          10
Mountain    Iowa Dr.                                        North 2004- 8-10-04
Lion Rd.                                                          32
Mountain    Iowa Dr.                                        South 2004- 8-10-04
Lion Rd.                                                          32
Mountain    Sutton Place                                    North 2003- 9-9-03
View Drive                                                        10
Mustang     Prospector Trail                                North 2006- 10-3-06
Trail                                                             39
Mustang     Prospector Trail                                South 2006- 10-3-06
Trail                                                             39
                                                            North
            Cedar Oaks                                      and
Nola Ruth                                                   South 2003-
Blvd.       Indian Trail                                    South 10    9-9-03
                                                            North
            Mildred Lee Blvd.                               and
                                                            South
Nola Ruth   Old Nolanville Road                             North 2010- 5-11-10
Blvd.                                                             11
                                                            East  2003-
Nolan Trail Ann Blvd.                                       and   10    9-9-03
                                                            West
Oakmont     Highland Oaks Drive                             West  2009- 7-28-09
Circle                                                            20
Oakridge    Fuller Lane                                     South 2003- 9-9-03
Blvd.                                                             10
Oak Trail   Indian Trail                                    South 2003-
Drive       Boulder Run                                     East  10    9-9-03

Oakwood     Oakridge                                        North 2003-
Drive       Valley Ridge                                    North 10    9-9-03

Ocelot      Pioneer                                         North 2003- 9-9-03
Circle                                                            10
Ocelot      Grizzly                                         North 2003-
Trail       Pioneer                                         South 10    9-9-03

Old                                                               2003-
Nolanville  Nola Ruth Blvd.                                 West  10    9-9-03
Road
Old Oak     Verna Lee Blvd.                                 West  2003- 9-9-03
Road                                                              10
Onyx Trail  Quarry                                          North 2003- 9-9-03
                                                                  10
Orlan Drive Lakeside Drive                                  North 2009- 7-28-09
                                                                  20
Orlan Drive Lakeside Drive                                  South 2009- 7-28-09
                                                                  20
Osage Trace Indian Trail                                    South 2003- 9-9-03
                                                                  10
Ottawa      Mountain Lion Rd.                               South 2003- 9-9-03
Drive                                                             10
Paintbrush  Yaupon                                          West  2003- 9-9-03
Drive                                                             10
Pan         Indian Trail                                    North 2003-
American    West Central Texas Expressway                   South 10    9-9-03
Drive
Panda       Grizzly                                         East  2003- 9-9-03
Circle                                                            10
Pawnee                                                      East  2003-
Drive       Broken Arrow                                    and   10    9-9-03
                                                            West
Pecan Drive Veterans Memorial Blvd.                         South 2003- 9-9-03
                                                                  10
                                                            East
            Indian Trail                                    and   2003-
                                                            West  10    9-9-03
Pima Trail  Aztec                                           East

            Pueblo Trace                                    West  2020- 6-9-20
                                                                  21
Pin Oak     Roy Reynolds                                    West  2003-
Drive       FM 2410                                         South 10    9-9-03

Pinewood    Verna Lee Blvd.                                 East  2003- 9-9-03
Drive                                                             10
Pioneer     FM 2410                                         South 2003- 9-9-03
Trail                                                             10
Pomegranite Mountain Laurel                                 South 2003- 9-9-03
Circle                                                            10
Ponca Trace Pontotoc                                        North 2003- 9-9-03
                                                                  10
Pontiac     Wilderness                                      East  2003- 9-9-03
Drive                                                             10
Pontotoc    Warriors Path                                   East  2003- 9-9-03
Trace                                                             10
Port Drive  Chablis                                         East  2003- 9-9-03
                                                                  10
Possum                                                      North 2003-
Trail       Frontier                                        and   10    9-9-03
                                                            South
Preswick    Nola Ruth Blvd.                                 West  2003- 9-9-03
Circle                                                            10
            Verna Lee Blvd.                                 West  2003- 9-9-03
Preswick                                                          10
Drive       Nola Ruth Blvd.                                 East  2012- 5-22-12
                                                                  09
Prospector  Bullwhip Drive                                  East  2006- 7-25-06
Trail                                                             25
Prospector  Bullwhip Drive                                  West  2006- 7-25-06
Trail                                                             25
Prospector  Rain Cloud Trail                                East  2006- 7-25-06
Trail                                                             25
Prospector  Rain Cloud Trail                                West  2006- 7-25-06
Trail                                                             25
            Pima Trail                                      North 2020- 6-9-20
                                                                  21
Pueblo      Pima Trail                                      South 2020- 6-9-20
Trace                                                             21
            Pontotoc                                        South 2003- 9-9-03
                                                                  10
Puma Circle Gazelle                                         South 2003- 9-9-03
                                                                  10
Quail                                                       North 2003-
Hollow Road Fuller Lane                                     and   10    9-9-03
                                                            South
Quapaw      Modoc                                           West  2003-
Drive       Wickiup                                         East  10    9-9-03

Quarry      Granite                                         East  2003- 9-9-03
Trail                                                             10
            End-O-Trail                                     West  2003-
Rally Lane  Jason                                           East  10    9-9-03

Ramblewood  Verna Lee Blvd.                                 East  2003- 9-9-03
Drive                                                             10
            Nolan Trail                                     North 2003-
Randy Blvd. Valley Road                                     South 10    9-9-03

                                                            North
Rattlesnake Mildred Lee                                     and   2003-
Road                                                        South 10    9-9-03
            Indian Trail                                    South

Rebecca     Beeline                                         North 2003-
Lane        Robin                                           South 10    9-9-03

Red Cloud   Wampum                                          North 2003-
Drive       Creek                                           South 10    9-9-03

Red Fern                                                    North 2010- 12-14-
Drive       Halona Drive                                    and   36    10
                                                            South
Redwood     FM 2410                                         South 2003- 9-9-03
Circle                                                            10
Redwood     Woodlawn                                        North 2003-
Drive       FM 2410                                         South 10    9-9-03

Reynard     Verna Lee Blvd.                                 East  2003- 9-9-03
Circle                                                            10
Robison     Old Nolanville Rd.                              North 2003- 9-9-03
Drive                                                             10
            Roy Reynolds                                    West
                                                            East
            Harley Drive                                    and
                                                            West  2003-
Robin Lane                                                  East  10    9-9-03
            Ann Blvd.                                       and
                                                            West
            Bluebird                                        East
            Amy Lane                                        West
            Fuller Lane                                     North 2003-
Rocky Hill  Cliffview                                       South 10    9-9-03

Rosewood    Verna Lee Blvd.                                 East  2003- 9-9-03
Drive                                                             10
Roy         FM 2410                                         South 2003- 9-9-03
Reynolds                                                          10
Roy                                                               2003-
Reynolds    Roy Reynolds                                    West  10    9-9-03
Circle
                                                            East
            Harley Drive                                    and
                                                            West  2003-
Ruby Road                                                   East  10    9-9-03
            Ann Blvd.                                       and
                                                            West
            Amy Lane                                        East
Rummel Road High Oak Drive                                  East  2009- 7-28-09
                                                                  20
Shasta      Shoshoni                                        West  2003-
Trail       Indian Trail                                    East  10    9-9-03

            Modoc                                           West
Shawnee                                                     East  2003-
Trail       Heights Drive                                   and   10    9-9-03
                                                            West
            Tomahawk                                        South
            Verna Lee Blvd.                                 West  2003-
Shine Lane  Nola Ruth Blvd.                                 East  10    9-9-03

Shoshoni    Indian Trail                                    East  2003- 9-9-03
Trail                                                             10
Silver      Diana Lane                                      North 2009- 7-28-09
Creek Drive                                                       20
Silver      Diana Lane                                      South 2009- 7-28-09
Creek Drive                                                       20
Silver      Old Nolanville Rd.                              North 2003- 9-9-03
Creek Drive                                                       10
Skipcha     Illinois                                        North 2003-
Drive       Iowa                                            South 10    9-9-03

            Modoc                                           West  2003-
Snakedance  Wickiup                                         East  10    9-9-03

Spanish     Roy Reynolds                                    West  2003-
Oaks Drive  Briarwood                                       South 10    9-9-03

Spruce      Cottonwood                                      West  2003- 9-9-03
Drive                                                             10
            Harley Drive                                    West
                                                            East  2003-
Stacie Road Ann Blvd.                                       and   10    9-9-03
                                                            West
            Amy Lane                                        East
Stone                                                             2003-
Canyon      Oak Trails                                      South 10    9-9-03
Court
Stonehenge  Lancelot                                        South 2003- 9-9-03
Drive                                                             10
Summer Glen Stillhouse Lake Rd.                             West  2003- 9-9-03
Drive                                                             10
Sun Dance   Mountain Lion Rd.                               South 2003-
Drive       Raindance Loop                                  North 10    9-9-03

Sun Meadows Old Nolanville Rd.                              North 2003- 9-9-03
Drive                                                             10
Sutton      End-O-Trail                                     West  2003- 9-9-03
Place                                                             10
Suzanne     Indian Trail                                    West  2003-
Lane        Nola Ruth Blvd.                                 East  10    9-9-03

Tahuaya     Broken Arrow                                    West  2003- 9-9-03
Drive                                                             10
                                                            East
Tanglewood  End-O-Trail                                     and   2003-
Drive                                                       West  10    9-9-03
            Jason                                           East

                                                            East  2003-
Tepee Drive Raindance Loop                                  and   10    9-9-03
                                                            West
Tejas Trail Dakota                                          East  2003- 9-9-03
                                                                  10
Thomas      Jason                                           East  2003- 9-9-03
Court                                                             10
Thunderbird Wilderness                                      East  2003- 9-9-03
Drive                                                             10
Timberline  Verna Lee Blvd.                                 West  2003- 9-9-03
Road                                                              10
Tomahawk    Heights Drive                                   West  2003-
Drive       Chickasaw                                       South 10    9-9-03

Totem Trail Creek                                           South 2003- 9-9-03
                                                                  10
                                                            East
            Boulder Run                                     and   2003-
Trail Crest                                                 West  10    9-9-03
            Cedar Oaks                                      North

            Beeline                                         North 2003-
Travis Lane Robin                                           South 10    9-9-03

Triangle    Commercial Drive                                North 2005- 3-29-05
Road                                                              05
Triangle    FM 2410                                         North 2003- 9-9-03
Road                                                              10
            Ann Blvd.                                       West  2003-
Turnbo Road Amy Lane                                        East  10    9-9-03

Tye Valley  Fuller Lane                                     South 2003- 9-9-03
Road                                                              10
                                                            East
            Indian Trail                                    and   2003-
Ute Trail                                                   West  10    9-9-03
            Warriors Path                                   East

V.F.W.      Veterans Memorial Blvd.                         South 2003- 9-9-03
Drive                                                             10
Valley Oaks                                                 East  2003-
Drive       Oakridge                                        and   10    9-9-03
                                                            West
                                                            East
            Ann Blvd.                                       and
                                                            West  2003-
Valley Road                                                 East  10    9-9-03
            Amy Lane                                        and
                                                            West
            Pecan                                           East
            East Central Texas Expressway                   North
                                                            North
Verna Lee   Shine                                           and   2003-
Blvd.                                                       South 10    9-9-03
                                                            North
            Indian Trail                                    and
                                                            South
Village     Modoc                                           East  2003-
Drive       Iowa                                            West  10    9-9-03

Vinson      Antelope                                        East  2003- 9-9-03
Circle                                                            10
            End-O-Trail                                     West  2003-
Volley Lane Jason                                           East  10    9-9-03

Waco Trace  Chablis                                         West  2003- 9-9-03
                                                                  10
Wagonwheel  Mountain Lion Rd.                               North 2003- 9-9-03
Drive                                                             10
            Mountain Lion Rd.                               West
                                                            East  2003-
            Moccasin                                        and   10    9-9-03
                                                            West
Wampum      FM 2410                                         East
Drive                                                       East
            Arapaho Drive                                   and
                                                            West  2004- 7-27-04
                                                            East  26
            Hogan Drive                                     and
                                                            West
Warriors    Old Nolanville Rd.                              North 2003-
Path        FM 2410                                         South 10    9-9-03

            Beeline                                         North 2003-
Watson Lane Robin                                           South 10    9-9-03

Wedgewood   Summer Glen                                     North 2003-
Drive       Fuller Lane                                     South 10    9-9-03

Welch Cove  Lakeside Drive                                  West  2009- 7-28-09
                                                                  20
                                                            East
            Pin Oak                                         and
White Oak                                                   West  2003- 9-9-03
Lane                                                        East  10
            Evergreen                                       and
                                                            West
Wichita     Ann Blvd.                                       West  2003- 9-9-03
Drive                                                             10
Wickiup     Shawnee                                         North 2003-
Trail       Modoc                                           West  10    9-9-03

Wilderness  Mountain Lion Rd.                               South 2003- 9-9-03
Drive                                                             10
Wildewood   Pioneer                                         North 2003-
Drive       FM 2410                                         South 10    9-9-03

Wildridge   Trailcrest                                      West  2003- 9-9-03
Drive                                                             10
Willowood   Oakridge                                        North 2003-
Drive       Valley Oaks                                     South 10    9-9-03

Wind Ridge  Indian Trail                                    South 2003-
Drive       Boulder Run                                     East  10    9-9-03

Windy Hill  Verna Lee Blvd.                                 West  2003- 9-9-03
Road                                                              10
Wolf Trail  Antelope                                        West  2003- 9-9-03
                                                                  10
Wolverine                                                   North 2004-
Trail       Cheetah Trail                                   and   19    5-25-04
                                                            South
                                                            East
            Evergreen                                       and
Woodlawn                                                    West  2003-
Drive                                                       East  10    9-9-03
            Cottonwood                                      and
                                                            West
            Harley Drive                                    East
Wood        End-O-Trail                                     East  2003- 9-9-03
Shadows                                                           10
            Harley Drive                                    West  2003-
Wren        Ann Blvd.                                       East  10    9-9-03

            Llama                                           North
                                                            North 2003-
Yak Trail   Pioneer                                         and   10    9-9-03
                                                            South
            Addax                                           South
Yaupon      Old Nolanville Rd.                              North 2003- 9-9-03
Drive                                                             10
Yuron Trace Ute Trail                                       North 2011- 8-23-11
                                                                  23
Yuron Trace Ute Trail                                       South 2011- 8-23-11
                                                                  23
Yucca       Yaupon                                          East  2003- 9-9-03
Circle                                                            10
Zinfandel   Osage                                           East  2003- 9-9-03
Drive                                                             10
 
(Am. Ord. 2006-25, passed 7-25-06)  Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE VI.  YIELD SIGNS.
   The following intersections are to be controlled with yield signs oriented
as indicated in this Schedule.
 
Street Intersection Direction of       TravOrd. No. Date Passed
Add Court            Rally                 South           2003-10 9-9--03
Alberta Lane         Gasisco               North           2003-10 9-9-03
                     Plaza                 North and South
Ashwood Drive        Wildewood             West            2003-10 9-9-03
Atoka Trace          Pawnee                West            2003-10 9-9-03
Aztec Trace          Ute Trail             South           2003-10 9-9-03
Beaver Trail         Fox                   South           2003-10 9-9-03
Birchwood Drive      Lakeview              West            2003-10 9-9-03
Blackhawk Trail      Shawnee               East            2003-10 9-9-03
Bluebird Lane        Indian Oaks           South           2003-10 9-9-03
Bluebonnet Circle    Mountain Laurel       North           2003-10 9-9-03
Bonnie Drive         Ruby                  South           2003-10 9-9-03
Briarwood Lane       Evergreen             East            2003-10 9-9-03
                     Highland Oaks         East and West
Burk Circle          Tanglewood            North           2003-10 9-9-03
Cagle                Pin Oak               West            2003-10 9-9-03
                     Evergreen             East and West
Calumet Drive        Wickiup               South           2003-10 9-9-03
Cardinal Lane        Cottonwood            West            2003-10 9-9-03
Cedar Ridge          Cedar Oaks            South           2003-10 9-9-03
                     Wild Ridge            North
Commercial Drive     Heights Drive         West            2019-13 5-14-19
                     Heights Drive         East            2019-13 5-14-19
East Central Texas   Off ramp FM 2410      East            2003-10 9-9-03
Expressway           Off ramp Indian Trail East
West Central Texas   Off ramp FM 2410      West            2003-10 9-9-03
Expressway
Cheetah Circle       Elk Trail             West            2003-10 9-9-03
Cherokee Drive       Cottonwood            West            2003-10 9-9-03
Chinaberry Circle    Lakeview              West            2003-10 9-9-03
Choctaw Trail        Indian Oaks           South           2003-10 9-9-03
Christina Circle     Dian                  West            2003-10 9-9-03
Citation Loop        Man O War             West            2003-10 9-9-03
Cliffside Drive      Trailcrest            East and West   2003-10 9-9-03
                     Tanglewood            North
Coral Drive          Buffalo               West            2003-10 9-9-03
                     Cottonmouth           East
Coronado Road        Elbert                North and South 2003-10 9-9-03
                     Indian Oaks           South
Cox Drive            Ann Blvd.             West            2003-10 9-9-03
Cynthia Drive        Northside Drive       West            2003-10 9-9-03
                     Pima                  North and South
Dakota Trace         Hopi                  North and South 2003-10 9-9-03
                     Mohican               South
                     Maya                  North
Danny Circle         Tanglewood            North           2003-10 9-9-03
Delaware Drive       Wickiup               South           2003-10 9-9-03
Diana Loop           Gina Drive            South           2003-10 9-9-03
Dorothy Lane         Gasisco               West            2003-10 9-9-03
                     Plaza Court           East and West
Doubles Court        Tanglewood            North           2003-10 9-9-03
Drawbridge Drive     Lancelot              South           2003-10 9-9-03
Dueces Court         Rally                 South           2003-10 9-9-03
Elmwood Circle       Elmwood Drive         East            2003-10 9-9-03
Forest Circle        Moody Circle          North           2003-10 9-9-03
Forest Hills Drive   Arrowhead             North and South 2003-10 9-9-03
Fox  Trail          Beaver                North           2003-10 9-9-03
Grizzly Trail        Pioneer               North           2003-10 9-9-03
Heights Drive        Commercial Drive      East            2005-05 3-29-05
High Ridge Trail     Mountain View         South           2003-10 9-9-03
Hogan Circle         Chickasaw             South           2003-10 9-9-03
Holly Court          Cedar Oaks            East            2003-10 9-9-03
Honeysuckle Circle   Mountain Laurel       North           2003-10 9-9-03
Inca Drive           Aztec                 West            2003-10 9-9-03
Impala Trail         Caribou               West            2003-10 9-9-03
Iroquois Drive       Atoka                 North           2003-10 9-9-03
                     Pawnee                South
Jaguar Circle        Gazelle               South           2003-10 9-9-03
Joey Circle          Kangaroo              East            2003-10 9-9-03
Heights Drive        Commercial Drive      North           2019-13 5-14-19
                     Commercial Drive      South           2019-13 5-14-19
Kudu Trail           Caribou               West            2003-10 9-9-03
Lambrusco Drive      Chardonnay            North           2003-10 9-9-03
                     Zinfandel             South
Lark Drive           Indian Oaks           South           2003-10 9-9-03
                     Cherokee              North
Lemonwood            Wildewood             West            2003-10 9-9-03
Little Turtle        Moccasin              West            2003-10 9-9-03
                     Hogan                 East
Lobo Circle          Wolverine             West            2003-10 9-9-03
Longmeadow Road      Old Oak               North           2003-10 9-9-03
                     Windy Hill            South
Love Court           Tanglewood            North           2003-10 9-9-03
Lynn Drive           Jamie                 North           2003-10 9-9-03
                    Valley                South           2003-10 9-9-03
Lynx Circle          Frontier              North           2003-10 9-9-03
Mary Jo Drive        Nolan Trail           North           2003-10 9-9-03
Maya Trail           Aztec                 West            2003-10 9-9-03
                     Yuron                 East
McGinnis Court       Mountain View         North and South 2003-10 9-9-03
Meagan Court         Rocky Mountain        South           2003-10 9-9-03
Mildred Lee Lane     Cedar Oaks            East            2003-10 9-9-03
Mission              Iowa                  South           2003-10 9-9-03
Mohawk Drive         Forest Hills          East            2003-10 9-9-03
Moon Valley Road     Tye Valley            East and West   2003-10 9-9-03
Mossy Oaks Circle    Cedar Oaks            West            2003-10 9-9-03
Mountain Laurel      Paintbrush            East            2003-10 9-9-03
Mountain View Court  Mountain View         East            2003-10 9-9-03
Natchez Trail        Dakota                East            2003-10 9-9-03
Northside Drive      Valley                South           2003-10 9-9-03
Oak Timbers Circle   Cedar Oaks            South           2003-10 9-9-03
Oakridge Circle      Oakridge Blvd.        West            2003-10 9-9-03
Persimmon Court      Woodlawn              North           2003-10 9-9-03
Pima Trail           Aztec                 West            2003-10 9-9-03
                     Pueblo                East
Pinewood Drive       Wildewood             West            2003-10 9-9-03
                     East Central Texas    North
Plaza Court          Expressway                            2003-10 9-9-03
                     Gasisco               North
Polar                Grizzly               East            2003-10 9-9-03
Pontotoc Trace       Aztec                 West            2003-10 9-9-03
Possum Trail         Beaver                North           2003-10 9-9-03
Quail Hollow Road    Cliffview             South           2003-10 9-9-03
Quail Run            Quail Hollow          West            2003-10 9-9-03
Quartz Trail         Marble                North           2003-10 9-9-03
                     Quarry                South
Racquet Court        Tanglewood            South           2003-10 9-9-03
Ramblewood Drive     Wildewood             West            2003-10 9-9-03
Rattlesnake Road     Dorothy               North           2003-10 9-9-03
Red Oak Drive        Redwood               East            2003-10 9-9-03
                     Cottonwood            West
Redwood Circle       Redwood Drive         East            2003-10 9-9-03
Renea Circle         Silver Creek          West            2003-10 9-9-03
Rocky Mountain Trail Mountain View         East and West   2003-10 9-9-03
Ronald Drive         Northside Drive       West            2003-10 9-9-03
Rose Circle          Silver Creek          West            2003-10 9-9-03
Rosewood Drive       Wildewood             West            2003-10 9-9-03
Roy Reynolds Drive   Business 190          South           2010-17 7-13-10
Seminole Trace       Pontotoc              North           2003-10 9-9-03
                     Ute Trail             South
Shadow Ridge Road    Old Oak               North           2003-10 9-9-03
                     Windy Hill            South
Shoshoni Trail       Shasta                North           2003-10 9-9-03
Sioux Circle         Iowa                  South           2003-10 9-9-03
Spicewood Circle     Cedar Oaks            South           2003-10 9-9-03
Spruce Drive         Redwood               East            2003-10 9-9-03
Tanglewood Court     Cedar Oaks            East            2003-10 9-9-03
Tanglewood Drive     Cedar Oaks            West            2003-10 9-9-03
Theresa Circle       Silver Creek          West            2003-10 9-9-03
Totem Trail          Wigwam                North           2003-10 9-9-03
Ute Trail            Dakota                West            2003-10 9-9-03
Valley Oaks Circle   Valley Oaks           South           2003-10 9-9-03
Waco Trace           Pueblo                East            2003-10 9-9-03
Wagonwheel Drive     Mustang               North           2003-10 9-9-03
Wallaby Circle       Kangaroo              East            2003-10 9-9-03
Walnut Circle        Lakeview              South           2003-10 9-9-03
Whisper Wood Road    Old Oak               North           2003-10 9-9-03
                     Windy Hill            South
White Oak Lane       Highland Oaks         West            2003-10 9-9-03
Wigwam Trail         Moccasin              West            2003-10 9-9-03
                     Hogan                 East
Willowood Circle     Willowood             West            2003-10 9-9-03
Wolverine Trail      Cheetah               South           2003-10 9-9-03
                     Llama                 South
Woodlawn Drive       Highland Oaks         East and West   2003-10 9-9-03
                     Pin Oak               East and West
Wood Shadows         Cedar Oaks            North           2003-10 9-9-03
Woodside Drive       Tanglewood            North           2003-10 9-9-03
                     Trailcrest            South
Yuma Trail           Aztec                 West            2003-10 9-9-03
Yuron Trace          Pontotoc              North           2003-10 9-9-03
                                                           2011-23 8-23-11
Zuni Trace           Maya                  North           2003-10 9-9-03
                     Shoshoni              South
 
Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE VII.  TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNALS.
   The following intersections are to be controlled with traffic-control
signals.
 
Street Intersection Ord. No. Date Passed
                        Ann Blvd.
FM 2410                 West Central Texas Expressway 2003-10 9-9-03
                        East Central Texas Expressway
                        Verna Lee Blvd.
                        Wampum Drive
FM 2410                 Millers Crossing              2007-21 8-14-07
                        Mountain Lion Road
Indian Trail            West Central Texas Expressway 2003-10 9-9-03
                        East Central Texas Expressway
                        Roy Reynolds
Veterans Memorial Blvd. Harley Drive                  2003-10 9-9-03
                        Ann Blvd.
 
Penalty, see §
70.99
CHAPTER 75:  PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Parking prohibited
SCHEDULE I.  PARKING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a
vehicle at any time upon any of the streets described in the following parking
schedule.
   (B)   In accordance with division (A) above, and when signs are erected
giving notice thereof, no person shall at any time park a vehicle upon any of
the following described streets or parts of streets:
 
Street Location Times Ord. No. Date Passed
FM-2410            114 E. FM-2410        All               2009-20 7-28-09
                   From State Highway
North Amy Lane     190 right-of- way     All               87-11   4-28-87
                   north to south edge
                   of Nolan Creek
                   East side of street   7:00 a.m. to 4:00
South Ann Blvd.    only from Bobwhite    p.m.              88-25   12-27-88
                   Lane to Dove Lane
                   South side of street  7:00 a.m. to 4:00
Bobwhite Lane      only from South Ann   p.m.              88-25   12-27-88
                   Blvd. to Harley Drive
Commercial Drive   From Heights Drive to All               2005-05 3-29-05
                   FM 2410, both sides
                   East side, from
Coronado Road      Elbert Lane to        All               96-54   10-8-96
                   Central Texas
                   Expressway
                   North side of street  7:00 a.m. to 4:00
Dove Lane          only from South Ann   p.m.              88-25   12-27-88
                   Blvd. to Harley Drive
                   North side, from Pan
Elbert Lane        American Drive to     All               96-54   10-8-96
                   Coronado Road
                   West side of street   7:00 a.m. to 4:00
Harley Drive       only from Bobwhite    p.m.              88-25   12-27-88
                   Lane to Dove Lane
                   Across from fire
                   station from a point
South Harley Drive 40 feet south of      All               80-04   6-10-80
                   Kathy Drive north to
                   Kathy Drive
 
Street Location Times Ord. No. Date Passed
South      West side of street from a point 95 feet north of FM 2410 south to            6-10-
Harley     FM 2410                                                             All 80-04 80
Drive
South                                                                                    6-10-
Harley     East side of street from FM 2410 north 106 feet.                    All 80-04 80
Drive
South                                                                                    3-22-
Harley     East side of South Harley Drive 150 feet south from Kathy Drive     All 83-03 83
Drive
Heights    From Shawnee Trail to Centrail Texas Expressway, both sides         All 2005- 3-29-
Drive                                                                              05    05
           Westbound lane, 984 feet west of the Helm’s Way intersection      All 2012- 5-22-
           centerline                                                              09    12
Miller’s Northbound lane adjacent to Carl Levin Park, 75 feet south of the   All 2012- 5-22-
Drive      90 degree bend in the street                                            09    12
           Eastbound lane adjacent to Carl Levin Park, 75 feet east of the 90  All 2012- 5-22-
           degree bend in the street                                               09    12
Modoc      From Shawnee Trail to Central Texas Expressway, both sides          All 2005- 3-29-
Drive                                                                              05    05
Mountain   Both sides of the road between E. Iowa Drive and Wampum Drive. West All 2014- 1-14-
Lion Road  side of the road between Wampum Drive and Great Plains Trail            01    14
Oakridge
Blvd.      381 feet north of the Valley Oaks Drive intersection centerline     All 2019- 8-27-
Landscape                                                                          24    19
Island
Oakridge
Blvd.      283 feet south of the Valley Oaks Drive intersection centerline     All 2019- 2019-
Landscape                                                                          24    24
Island
Pan                                                                                      10-8-
American   West side, from Central Texas Expressway to Elbert Lane             All 96-54 96
Drive
Triangle   From Commercial Drive extended to the end of the city’s right-of- All 2005- 3-29-
Road       way                                                                     05    05
 
Penalty, see §
70.99
CHAPTER 76:  HEAVY VEHICLES AND HAZARDOUS MATERIAL ROUTE
Section
   
76.01   Adoption of applicable laws
   
76.02   Definitions
   
76.03   [Repealed.]
   
76.04   Truck routes
   
76.05   [Repealed.]
   
76.06   Transportation of hazardous materials
 
   
76.99   Penalty
§ 76.01  ADOPTION OF APPLICABLE LAWS.
   The following documents are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of
this chapter as if they were fully set forth herein:
   (A)   Hazardous Materials Transportation Act, 49 U.S.C. 1801 through 1819
inclusive and as amended or added to;
   (B)   49 CFR 171 through 179 inclusive and as amended;
   (C)   49 CFR 390 through 397 inclusive and as amended;
   (D)   10 CFR 71 as amended.
(Ord. 97-19, passed 8-12-97)
§ 76.02  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have
the meanings ascribed to them:
   CARRIER.  The owner or lessee of the vehicle in or on which the hazardous
material is being transported.
   CFR.  Code of Federal Regulations.
   INCIDENT.  Any occurrence whereby a hazardous material as defined herein is
spilled, escapes, or otherwise is rendered uncontained so as to present a
threat to the environment or property of any person.
   IMPLEMENT.  Any trailer or semi-trailer to be drawn by a truck tractor.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.  Any quantity, group, form or class of material
designated as hazardous material in any official publication of the Secretary
of Transportation of the United States under the authority of 49 U.S.C. 1801
through 1819 inclusive and as amended, 49 CFR 171 and 172 as amended, or 10 CFR
71 as amended and including any such publications issued after the effective
date of this chapter.
   MOTOR VEHICLE.  Every vehicle which is self propelled.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.  A vehicle which is built on a single chassis, is
self-propelled or towable and designed primarily as temporary living quarters
for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. It shall be capable of
legal registration for use on public highways; have a body of substantial,
safe, and weatherproof construction, mounted upon a chassis of adequate
carrying capacity; and be completely self-contained as a vehicle having all of
the basic conveniences of a home including cooking, sleeping, and sanitary
facilities. It shall have a minimum interior height of six feet in the living
area with a fixed roof (not a pop-up variety); a gas or electric refrigerator;
built-in heater which, if using a combustible fuel, must be vented to the
outside; and a toilet with connected discharge into a holding tank(s) so
arranged that all liquid waste of any kind flows directly into such holding
tank(s) and none ever flows onto the ground.
   TRAILER/SEMI-TRAILER.  Every vehicle designated or used to carry its load
wholly or partially on its own structure and to be drawn by a motor vehicle,
except devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
   U.S.C.  United State Code.
   VEHICLE/TRUCK TRACTOR.  Any motor vehicle designed to transport or draw
persons or property on a highway. The term does not include a device used
exclusively on stationary rails or tracks, & manufactured housing as that term
is defined by the Texas Manufactured Housing Standards Act.
(Ord. 97-19, passed 8-12-97; Am. Ord. 99-36, passed 10-26-99)
§ 76.03  [REPEALED.]
§ 76.04  TRUCK ROUTES.
   (A)   All motor vehicles which are 18 feet or more in length or seven feet
or more in width or nine feet or more in height, or which have a gross vehicle
weight of 10,000 pounds or more, may only be driven, used or operated on the
following roads while within the city limits:
      (1)   U.S. Highway 190 (Central Texas Expressway) and its frontage roads.
      (2)   Business Highway 190 (Veterans Memorial Blvd.).
      (3)   Edwards Drive.
      (4)   FM 3219.
      (5)   Lookout Ridge Blvd.
      (6)   FM 3423 (Indian Trail north of Central Texas Expressway).
      (7)   FM 2410.
      (8)   FM 3481 (Stillhouse Lake Drive).
      (9)   Mountain Lion Road.
   (B)   Notwithstanding division (A), vehicles transporting hazardous
materials are restricted to the routes identified in §76.06.
   (C)   Provided that the operator promptly returns to an approved truck route
by the most direct route practical, it shall be an affirmative defense to
prosecution for a violation of paragraph (A) of this section that, at the time
of the alleged offense, the operator deviated from an approved truck route
solely:
      (1)   To obtain service, repairs, or fuel in the normal course of
business, and their was no other approved truck route by which such service,
repairs or fuel could be obtained;
      (2)   To pickup or deliver goods, services or freight at a location which
could not be reached by an approved truck route; or
      (3)   To drive on an approved route specified in a valid permit issued
under §
72.23.
(Ord. 97-19, passed 8-12-97; Am. Ord. 99-36, passed 10-26-99; Am. Ord. 2008-12,
passed 4-22-08) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.05  [REPEALED.]
§ 76.06  TRANSPORTATION OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.
   (A)   Vehicle operation.
      (1)   The operator of a vehicle used to transport hazardous materials
shall display the required placards meeting U.S. Department of Transportation
specifications and keep accessible required shipping papers for the hazardous
materials being shipped, which specify:
         (a)   Origin of the shipment;
         (b)   Destination or delivery point of the shipment;
         (c)   Proper shipping name;
         (d)   Hazard class;
         (e)   Proper identification number; and
         (f)   Total quantity of materials being shipped.
      (2)   All vehicles used to transport hazardous materials shall conform to
all provisions of Title 49 CFR, Parts 390 to 397, inclusive, and as amended.
      (3)   A carrier or operator of a vehicle transporting a hazardous
material commits an offense if such vehicle is not attended by a qualified
representative of the carrier or operator at any time such vehicle is on any
public street, alley or right-of- way within the corporate limits of the city.
For the purposes of this section:
         (a)   A motor vehicle is attended when the person in charge of the
vehicle is on the vehicle, awake, and not in a sleeper berth, or is within 100
feet of the vehicle and has it within his unobstructed view.
         (b)   A qualified representative of a carrier is a person who:
            1.   Has been designated by the carrier to attend the vehicle;
            2.   Is aware of the nature of the hazardous material or substance
contained in the vehicle he attends;
            3.   Has been instructed on the procedures he must follow in
emergencies concerning hazardous materials or substances; and
            4.   Is authorized to move the vehicle and has the means and
ability to do so.
      (4)   Except when overtaking or passing in opposite directions of travel,
all vehicles transporting hazardous materials shall maintain a minimum distance
of at least 300 feet from other vehicles carrying hazardous materials. This
requirement shall apply whether or not such vehicles are moving or parked,
except when at a destination or point of origin.
   (B)   Hazardous materials routes.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly transport
hazardous materials or knowingly cause hazardous materials to be transported
upon any public street or highway within the corporate limits of the city,
except upon the following:
         (a)   U.S. Highway 190 (Central Texas Expressway).
         (b)   Business Highway 190 (Veterans Memorial Blvd).
      (2)   Deviation from the routes designated above is permitted only to the
extent reasonably necessary for purposes only of pick up and delivery of
hazardous materials in the city. Such deviation from designated hazardous
materials routes must be limited to designated truck routes specified in §
76.04.
   (C)   The operator of a vehicle used to transport hazardous materials shall
immediately report any incident involving hazardous materials to the City
Police Department.
   (D)   In the event that any truck, trailer or any other vehicle becomes
inoperable while transporting hazardous materials, the operator of the vehicle
shall notify the Police Department. Immediate removal of hazardous cargo from
an inoperable vehicle may be required by the City Fire Department in the
interest of the health, safety and welfare of citizens and the protection of
property. The Police Department will provide the operator with road clearance
to a repair facility, as appropriate.
(Ord. 97-19, passed 8-12-97) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.99  PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, or corporation violating this chapter or any portion
thereof shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined
not more than $2,000, and each day that such violation occurs or continues
shall be considered a separate offense and punishable accordingly.
(Ord. 97-19, passed 8-12-97)
TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   FIRE PREVENTION
      
92.   ABANDONED AND JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES
      
93.   NUISANCES
      
94.   HEALTH AND SANITATION
      
95.   NOISE REGULATIONS
      
96.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
97.   AIRPORT REGULATIONS
      
98.   FAIR HOUSING
      
99.   ALARMS REGULATIONS
      
100.   SPECIAL EVENTS
      
101.   HUNTING
      
102.   TREE CARE
      
103.   DONATION CONTAINERS
      
104.   RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT
      
105.   PARKS AND RECREATION
CHAPTER 90:  ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Animal Services Division
   
90.03   Vehicle striking certain animals
   
90.04   Disposal of diseased or dead animals and fowl
   
90.05   Animal waste
   
90.06   Riding animals; operation of animal-drawn vehicles
   
90.07   Performing animals exhibitions
   
90.08   Animals in food establishments prohibited
   
90.09   Sale or adoption of animals restricted
   
90.10   Microchipping of certain animals
   
90.11   Sterilization required
Keeping Animals
   
90.35   Vaccination required
   
90.36   Running-at-large prohibited
   
90.37   Keeping of swine
   
90.38   Keeping swine or other animals near streams or creeks
   
90.39   Keeping animals, fowl, and bees other than swine or hares
   
90.40   Enclosures to be properly maintained
   
90.41   Keeping hares
   
90.42   Wild animals prohibited
   
90.43   Keeping in unoccupied residence
   
90.44   Animal confinement in vehicle or trailer
   
90.45   [Reserved]
   
90.46   Noisy animals and fowl prohibited
   
90.47   Mistreatment of animals and fowl
   
90.48   Keeping animals; other responsibilities
   
90.49   Animal restraint
Dangerous Animals
   
90.50   Dangerous dog report
   
90.51   Dangerous dog determination
   
90.52   Municipal court hearing
   
90.53   Requirements for owner of a dangerous dog
   
90.54   Registration
   
90.55   Compliance enforcement
   
90.56   Destruction for safety
   
90.57   Nuisance declared
   
90.58   Owner’s knowledge
   
90.59   Notices
Animal Control; Rabies
   
90.60   Impoundment
   
90.61   Impoundment fees; classification
   
90.62   Adoption
   
90.63   Notice of sale; illegal removal of impounded livestock
   
90.64   Suspected rabid animals
   
90.65   Quarantine and testing
   
90.66   Release of quarantined animals
   
90.67   Tampering with traps
   
90.68   Destruction of certain animals
Animal Abuser Registry
   
90.80   Animal Abuser Registry established
   
90.81   Registration required
   
90.82   Contact with animals prohibited
   
90.83   Seizure authorized
 
   
90.96   Interference with official duties
   
90.97   Offenses and violations
   
90.98   Defenses and affirmative defenses
Cross-reference:
   Animal Advisory Committee, see §§
33.45 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADEQUATE SHELTER.  A structurally sound, moisture-proof and wind-proof
shelter large enough to enable the animal or fowl to move freely, having
enclosed walls or sides, a doorway of such size the  animal can enter, a roof,
and a solid level floor to which the animal may seek refuge from moisture, wind
and excessive heat or cold, and maintained in a clean, sanitary and healthy
manner so that the animal or fowl need not stand, sit or lie in excrement.
   ADULT.  The same meaning as set forth in Tex. Family Code § 101.003.
   ANIMAL.  A living being of the biological kingdom Animality, having a
capacity for spontaneous
movement and rapid motor response to stimulation, and not of a species having a
capacity for articulate speech.
   ANIMAL SERVICES OFFICER.   Any person designated by the city as an employee
who is authorized and qualified to perform animal control duties under the laws
of the city.
   ANIMAL SHELTER.  Any facility operated by a humane society or the city or
its authorized agents, or contracting facility for the purpose of impounding or
caring for animals held under the authority of this chapter.
   AT LARGE.  Off the premises of the owner and not under the complete control,
either by leash, cord, chain, or similar method of physical restraint of a
person having charge of the animal or on the premises of the owner and neither
confined to the premises by means of a leash, cord, chain, or enclosure, nor
within the direct, constant, and immediate presence of a person having
effective verbal command of the animal.
   CURRENT VACCINATION. Means that the animal was:
      (1)   Vaccinated by the time the animal is 16 weeks of age, or within 30
days of acquisition if the animal is over 16 weeks of age when acquired; and
      (2)   After the initial vaccination, re-vaccinated against rabies within
the last year if the most recent vaccination was of the 12-month variety, or
within the last three years if the most recent vaccination was of the 36-month
variety.
   DANGEROUS DOG. A dog that:
      (1)   By means of angry, threatening, or aggressive behavior demonstrates
the apparent ability and inclination to attack, injure or kill a human being or
domestic animal without provocation;
      (2)   Attacks a human being or domestic animal without provocation;
      (3)   Has behaved in such a manner that the owner thereof knows or should
reasonable know that the dog is possessed of vicious tendencies;
      (4)   Is certified by a doctor of veterinary medicine, after observation
thereof, as posing a danger to human life or property upon the basis of
reasonable medical probability; or
      (5)   Is described by Tex. Health and Safety Code, § 822.041, as amended
from time to time.
   DOMESTIC ANIMAL. An animal that is domesticated or kept in captivity, such
as for a pet or for farm produce, rather than living in a wild or feral state.
   FOWL.  A bird of any kind.
   HUMANE SOCIETY.  An organization regarded as nonprofit founded for the
prevention of cruelty to animals and education of the public.
   KEEP.  To retain on the premises by any means; to harbor, to control, own,
or have custody or possession of.
   KENNEL.  A place in which five or more dogs or cats at least six months-of-
age are kept, boarded, or trained, by the owners of the dogs or cats or by
persons providing facilities and care, with or without compensation.
   MAINTAIN.  To feed, shelter, protect, provide for, or bear the expense of.
   OWNER.  Any person, firm, association, partnership, or corporation owning,
keeping, in charge of, in control of, or harboring one or more animals.
   PET SHOP.  Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation conducting a
business at a properly-zoned location, whether operated separately or in
connection with another business enterprise other than a kennel, that buys,
sells, or boards any animal.
   PROVOCATION. The act of purposely stimulating, inciting, agitating or
disturbing an animal.
   RESIDENCE.  A house, apartment, room. or duplex inhabited as the principal
dwelling place of a person or persons.
   RESIDENTIAL BUILDING.  A structure or building designed, constructed, or
converted for use as a residence.
   SECURE ENCLOSURE. Has the same meaning as provided in Tex. Health and Safety
Code, § 822.041, as amended from time to time. The enclosure must have secure
sides and a top that will protect the animal from the elements. All sides must
be embedded at least two feet into the ground unless the bottom is adequately
secured to the sides. The enclosure shall not be less than five feet by ten
feet and not less than six feet high. Nothing herein will be construed to
permit a structure or fence otherwise prohibited by law.
   SERIOUS BODILY INJURY. The meaning as provided in Tex. Health and Safety
Code, § 822.001, as amend from time to time.
   SHELTER MANAGER.   Any person designated by the city as the employee who is
responsible for administering the city’s animal shelter.
   STERILIZATION.  The surgical procedure which renders the animal incapable of
reproducing its own kind.
   TRAP.   Any device placed by city animal services personnel, employed or
used in the capture of animals, which is not under the constant supervision of
an employee and which functions in such a manner as to confine any animal
entering the same.
   VACCINATION. Rabies vaccination performed by or under the direct supervision
of a veterinarian licensed to practice in the State of Texas using a vaccine
licensed by the United States Department of Agriculture for use in that species
and administered according to label instructions.
   VETERINARIAN.  A person trained in, and licensed by the state to practice,
the branch of medicine dealing with the investigation, treatment, and
prevention of diseases in animals.
(Ord. 92-08, passed 4-23-92; Am. Ord. 2005-17, passed 6-28-05; Am. Ord. 2008-
10, passed 4-8-08; Am. Ord. 2009-03, passed 1-27-09; Am. Ord. 2011-30, passed
9-13-11; Am. Ord. 2014-30, passed 11-18-14; Am. Ord. 2018-04, passed 1-9-18;
Am. Ord. 2019-10, passed 4-23-19)
§ 90.02  ANIMAL SERVICES DIVISION.
   This chapter establishes the Animal Services Division, and the functions,
duties, and conduct of employees.
   (A)   In order to protect the public health and to effectively control,
regulate and provide for animals within the city, there is hereby created the
Animal Services Division within the City Administration Department. This
Division shall consist of a Shelter Manager, one or more Animal Services
Officers, and such other personnel as shall be assigned by the City Manager or
Assistant City Manager.
   (B)   The Animal Services Division shall enforce all laws and ordinances in
the city pertaining to the licensing, registration, keeping, treatment,
impounding, and regulation of animals within the city. In every case and
instance wherein the keeping or the existence of animals presents a health
hazard, or threat to the public health, the Animal Services Division shall have
concurrent jurisdiction with County Health Department.
   (C)   The Shelter Manager shall manage the city’s animal shelter, or the
city may contract with one or more private entities for the purpose of
operating a shelter. The Shelter Manager shall keep such records and make such
reports concerning the activities of the Animal Services Division as may be
required by ordinance, the City Manager or the Assistant City Manager.
   (D)   It shall be the duty of the members of the Animal Services Division to
enforce the ordinances of the city applicable to domesticated and wild animals,
to conduct themselves in a proper and law-abiding manner, and to avoid the use
of unnecessary force on animals in the possession or control of the Animal
Services Division.
   (E)   For the purpose of discharging the duties imposed by this chapter and
to enforce its provisions, any Animal Services Officer or police officer is
empowered, at all reasonable times and upon presentation of appropriate
credentials, to enter upon any premises upon which the animal is kept or
harbored, and to demand the exhibition of the certificate of vaccination for
the animal. It is further provided that any Animal Services Officer may enter,
at all reasonable times and upon the presentation of proper credentials, the
premises where an animal is kept in an allegedly cruel or inhumane manner, and
demand to examine and impound the animal when, in his or her opinion, humane
treatment is required. No employee, however, may enter a private residence for
purposes of making an inspection under this chapter, without first receiving
permission from a lawful adult occupant of the residence, or being authorized
to inspect the residence by a magistrate or by order of a court of competent
jurisdiction upon showing of a probable violation of law.
   (F)   No person shall interfere with or hinder any Animal Services Division
employee in the performance of his or her duty.
   (G)   The Shelter Manager will maintain a monthly report of the total number
of animals impounded, the total number redeemed, the total number euthanized,
and the number remaining in the pound.
(Ord. 92-08, passed 4-23-92; Am. Ord. 2011-30, passed 9-13-11; Am. Ord. 2014-
30, passed 11-18-14)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.03  VEHICLE STRIKING CERTAIN ANIMALS.
   The driver of any vehicle which collides with or strikes any domesticated
animal shall stop such vehicle immediately at the scene of such accident, or as
close as possible without interfering with traffic, render reasonable
assistance to the animal and, then and there, either locate and notify the
owner of the animal, or report the accident and the injury to the Animal
Services Division or the Police Department. An injured animal may be delivered
to its owner, a veterinarian, animal services personnel, or an animal shelter.
If no owner of the animal can be located, the animal shall be humanely
destroyed by animal services personnel or by a police officer. The provisions
of this section shall not apply to any emergency vehicle or to a driver taking
an ill or injured person to medical care, nor shall it require assistance to an
animal if providing such assistance would place any person in danger from the
animal or traffic.
(Ord. 92-08, passed 4-23-92; Am. Ord. 2014-30, passed 11-18-14)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.04  DISPOSAL OF DISEASED OR DEAD ANIMALS AND FOWL.
   (A)   Disposal of diseased animals and fowl.  It shall be the duty of every
person keeping or maintaining any animal or fowl which becomes infected or
afflicted with a disease which is contagious or a threat to the life and health
of other such animals or fowl, or to humans, to humanely destroy the animals or
fowl and dispose of its remains when directed, and as directed, by an officer
of the County Health Department.
   (B)   Disposal of dead animals and fowl.  Except for animals and fowl kept
by veterinarians or persons engaged in medical or scientific research, and
those mounted by a taxidermist, dead animals and fowl shall be disposed of
within 24 hours of the time of death. The manner in which dead animals and fowl
are disposed of shall, at minimum, comply with the established regulations of
the County Health Department and applicable state laws and regulations.
   (C)   Disposal on public property prohibited.  It shall be unlawful for any
person to dispose of any dead animal or fowl upon public property within the
city. Public property shall include, but not be limited to, streets, alleys,
parks, trash cans, dumpsters, buildings, and grounds owned, operated, or rented
by any level of government, school property, and drain-age channels maintained
by the city.
(Ord. 92-08, passed 4-23-92) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.05  ANIMAL WASTE.
   The owner of every animal shall make sanitary disposal of any excreta
deposited by his animal on public walks, streets, recreation areas, or upon
private property not within the control, possession, or supervision of said
owner.
(Ord. 92-08, passed 4-23-92) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.06  RIDING ANIMALS; OPERATION OF ANIMAL-DRAWN VEHICLES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a horse or any animal on
any of the premises of any park owned and operated by the city unless such
animal is ridden in or on the bridle paths which are so designated for the
riding of animals or any other area plainly marked as an area designated for
the riding of such animals.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any animal-drawn
vehicle on any of the premises of any park owned and operated by the city
including streets and bridle paths unless specifically designed and marked for
such operations.
      (1)   A riding animal or animal for drawing vehicles may be kept at a
private residence for the purpose of immediate recreation for not more than
eight hours in any 24-hour period. If the animal is stabled in the city, it
must have a permanent place for stabling of ten acres or more than the private
residence.
      (2)   The provision of division (B)(1) of this section shall not apply to
city-approved riding stables.
   (C)   Commercial enterprises of the type described herein such as rented
bridle carriages or pony rides must be licensed to operate in the city or
obtain a permit at city hall a minimum of seven days prior to the event.
   (D)   In all activities involving animals covered in this section, the
provisions of § 90.05 of this chapter apply.
(Ord. 92-08, passed 4-23-92) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.07  PERFORMING ANIMALS EXHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No performing animal exhibition or circus shall be permitted in which
animals are induced or encouraged to perform through the use of chemical,
mechanical, electrical, or manual devices in a manner which will cause, or is
likely to cause, physical injury or suffering.
   (B)   All equipment used on a performing animal shall fit properly and be in
good working condition.
(Ord. 92-08, passed 4-23-92) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.08  ANIMALS IN FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED.
   The owner of an animal or the proprietor or manager of an establishment
where food items are sold or offered for sale, for consumption on or off the
premises, commits an offense if he permits an animal to enter or remain in such
food establishment. This section shall not apply to seeing-eye assisting dogs
under the control of a disabled person, or police dogs.
(Ord. 92-08, passed 4-23-92) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.09  SALE OR ADOPTION OF ANIMALS RESTRICTED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, or offer for adoption, a live
animal or fowl directly from public property or along a public right-of-way.
(Ord. 2008-10, passed 4-8-08)
§ 90.10  MICROCHIPPING OF CERTAIN ANIMALS.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, all dogs and cats
reclaimed or adopted from the animal shelter shall be microchipped prior to
leaving the shelter.
   (B)   The Shelter Manager may waive the requirements of division (A) of this
section upon a determination that compliance therewith presents a danger to the
animal or any person. If such waiver is granted, the person taking possession
of the animal shall sign a written  promise to have the animal microchipped by
a licensed veterinarian, and to file a certificate with the Shelter Manager
within seven calendar days following the release of the animal from the
shelter. The certificate required by this division must be issued by the
veterinarian performing the procedure, and shall contain the name, address, and
telephone number of the veterinarian, a description of the animal, the
microchip number, and the date of the procedure. A person who willfully
violates a written promise to provide proof of microchipping under this
division commits an offense.
   (C)   All microchips required by this section will be inserted between the
shoulder blades, and registered with a pet recovery service that participates
in the American Animal Hospital Association Universal Pet Microchip Lookup
Tool.
   (D)   Not later than the thirtieth day after the date on which the change
takes effect, the owner of a microchipped animal shall notify the microchip
registry of any change in the owner’s information recorded in the registry. A
person seeking to reclaim an impounded animal shall correct any errors or
omissions in the animal’s microchip registry prior to taking possession of the
animal.
   (E)   If the Animal Services Division performs the microchip procedure, the
cost of the microchip as noted in the city’s current fee schedule will be added
to the impoundment fees. The microchip fees are not refundable and may be used
only for the dog or cat for which it was issued.
(Ord. 2016-10, passed 5-10-16)
§ 90.11  STERILIZATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   An animal that is at least eight months of age and has been impounded
two or more times by the Animal Services Division or at its direction must be
sterilized. Such animal will not be released from impound unless the owner of
the animal:
      (1)   Signs an agreement on a form prescribed by the Animal Services
Division promising to have the animal sterilized by a licensed veterinarian;
and
      (2)   Deposits the sum of $100 in immediately available good funds with
the Animal Services Division to secure the obligation to timely have the animal
sterilized.
   (B)   The deadline for providing proof of sterilization under this section
is 30 days following the date of the animal's release from impound. The Shelter
Manager shall extend the deadline for sterilization on presentation of a
written report from a licensed veterinarian stating that the life or health of
the animal may be jeopardized by surgery. There is no limit on the number of
extensions which may be granted. If a deadline falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or
legal holiday, the deadline is extended to noon on the next day that is not a
Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday.
   (C)   If the animal is sterilized, the owner shall file a certificate or
letter from a licensed veterinarian with the Shelter Manager that briefly
describes the animal, states that the animal has been sterilized, and provides
the date on which the animal was sterilized.
   (D)   If the animal dies or is lost or stolen before being sterilized, the
owner shall file a sworn statement with the Shelter Manager attesting to such
death, loss or theft, and describing the circumstances thereof with reasonable
detail and specificity.
   (E)   If the owner timely files a letter or certificate under division (C),
or a sworn statement under division (D), the $100 sterilization deposit will be
refunded to the owner. No other fees associated with the impound will be
refunded. If the owner fails to timely file proof of sterilization, loss or
theft under this section, the sterilization deposit will be automatically
forfeited to the city without further notice and the owner will not thereafter
be entitled to a refund of any portion thereof.
   (F)   The owner's obligations under this section do not extend the deadline
for reclaiming the animal from impound, and any animal not timely reclaimed
will be subject to forfeiture, adoption, or destruction as otherwise provided
in this chapter.
   (G)   An owner who fails to timely file proof of sterilization, loss or
theft under this section commits an offense.
(Ord. 2019-36, passed 10-22-19)
KEEPING ANIMALS
§ 90.35  VACCINATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to keep, harbor or maintain a dog, wolf-dog
hybrid, cat, ferret or livestock in the city that does not have current
vaccination.
   (B)   Official rabies vaccination certificates issued by the vaccinating
veterinarian shall contain certain standard information as designated by the
Texas Department of Health:
      (1)   The owner's name, address, and telephone number.
      (2)   Animal identification, species, sex, age (three months to 12
months, or older), size (pounds), predominant breed, and colors.
      (3)   Vaccine used, producer, expiration date, and serial numbers.
      (4)   Date of vaccination.
      (5)   Rabies tag number.
      (6)   Veterinarian's signature and license number.
   (C)   A copy of each official rabies vaccination certificate issued shall be
retained by the issuing veterinarian in a readily retrievable status for a
period of not less than three years from the date of issuance.
   (D)   The failure of an owner to exhibit a current, valid vaccination
certificate upon request by any animal services personnel or a police officer
is prima facie evidence that the animal does not have current vaccination.
(Ord. 92-08, passed 4-23-92; Am. Ord. 2011-30, passed 9-13-11)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.36  RUNNING-AT-LARGE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to suffer or permit any dogs,
cats, guinea fowl, hares, horses, mules, donkeys, cattle, goats, sheep,
chickens, turkeys, geese, ducks, pigeons, animals, or fowl to run, or be, at-
large upon the public streets, avenues, or alleys of the city, or on the
premises of any person other than the owner of the animals or fowl, and the
premises not being in the possession or control of the owner of the animals or
fowl.
   (B)   No female animal in heat shall be allowed or permitted to leave the
property of the owner of the animal unless being transported by the owner and
under the owner's physical control at all times.
   (C)   Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished
by a fine not to exceed $200.
   (D)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to service animals while
performing their qualifying services, or animals performing official police or
rescue activities.
(Ord. 92-08, passed 4-23-92; Am. Ord. 99-04, passed 2- 23-99; Am. Ord. 2011-30,
passed 9-13-11)
§ 90.37  KEEPING OF SWINE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any swine within the limits of
the city except that swine may be kept in a pen or enclosure situated upon a
tract of land containing at least ten acres which is for agricultural use and,
further provided the pen or enclosure is located a distance of not less than
500 feet from the nearest property line or tract upon which the swine are kept
and maintained, or at a distance of not less than 300 feet from any residence.
(Ord. 92-08, passed 4-23-92) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.38  KEEPING SWINE OR OTHER ANIMALS NEAR STREAMS OR CREEKS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any animal or fowl
in a pen, cage, or enclosure near a creek or stream within the city and cause
or contribute to the pollution of the creek or stream by permitting drainage of
fecal matter or urine from the pens, cages, or enclosures, to enter the creek
or stream. No swine shall be permitted or allowed to have access to, or enter
the water of a creek or stream within the city.
(Ord. 92-08, passed 4-23-92) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.39  KEEPING ANIMALS, FOWL, AND BEES OTHER THAN SWINE OR HARES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to introduce, keep, or maintain any
guinea fowl, horses, mules, donkeys, cattle, goats, sheep, chickens, turkeys,
geese, ducks, or pigeons, bees, or the feed or feed area for such, in any pen,
barn, building, or structure, excluding property perimeter fences within the
city limits of the city, within 250 feet of the residence of any person other
than the owner. In the event the property owner can establish that the literal
application of this section to the particular circumstances of his property
presents an unreasonable burden, he may request a permit by letter to the City
Manager.  The City Manager may approve an exception to the 250 feet distance
above; however, the minimum distance shall not be less than 75 feet.  Such
permits shall be revocable at will upon 90 days notice or upon lesser notice if
necessary to protect health, safety or public property.  In the event a request
for a permit is denied, the property owner may appeal this decision to the
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
(Ord. 92-08, passed 4-23-92; Am. Ord. 96-40, passed 7-23-96) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.40  ENCLOSURES TO BE PROPERLY MAINTAINED.
   Every person keeping or maintaining any guinea fowl, hares, horses, mules,
donkeys, cattle, goats, sheep, chickens, turkeys, geese, ducks, pigeons,
animals, or fowl, shall keep the same in a pen, cage, or enclosure which is
maintained in a clean, dry, and sanitary condition so that such animals shall
not create foul or offensive odors or create a health hazard.
(Ord. 92-08, passed 4-23-92) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.41  KEEPING HARES.
   No person shall keep or maintain hares within 150 feet of a residence of any
person other than the owner thereof; provided however, that when kept in a
clean, dry, sanitary and odor-free cage, and the feed is stored in rodent-proof
containers not more than four hares may be kept and maintained, as pets or for
student agricultural projects, not for sale, in a pen or cage which is not
closer than 50 feet to the nearest property line of the lot, tract, or parcel
on which the pen or cage is located. In the event that the property owner can
establish that the literal application of this section and particular
circumstances of his property present an unreasonable burden, he may request a
permit by letter to the City Manager. The City Manager may approve an exception
to the 150 feet distance above and the number of hares. Such permits shall be
revocable at will upon 90 days notice or upon lesser notice if necessary to
protect health, safety or public property. In the event a request for a permit
is denied, the property owner may appeal this decision to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
(Ord. 92-08, passed 4-23-92; Am. Ord. 2005-38, passed 11-8-05) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.42  WILD ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, keep, or possess a
wild animal, as per the 71st Legislature Regular Session 1989, House Bill 1687.
   (B)   The provisions of division (A) of this section shall not apply to the
following:
      (1)   Veterinarians keeping animals at the veterinarian's regular place
of business during periods of time the animals or fowl are being treated for
disease or injury, or observed in the course of such treatment. Nor shall the
provisions of division (A) of this section apply to citizens caring for animals
or fowl under a veterinarian's care and supervision for the purpose of
treatment or care.
      (2)   Animals kept, maintained, and used in the course of scientific
research at an established business location or under condition approved by the
Animal Services Division.
      (3)   Circuses, traveling shows, zoos, and auction barns operating under
permit or sanction of the city.
      (4)   Animals or fowl, such as baby chickens, hares, pigeons, and ducks,
kept at an established place of business dealing in farm and ranch supplies and
which animals or fowl are domesticated and marketable for human consumption;
provided, that the animals or fowl are kept and maintained in an enclosure
which is dry, sanitary, cleaned regularly and free of accumulations of odor-
causing debris and fecal matter.
      (5)   Animals, fowl, and bees kept and maintained on land for
agricultural use, provided the land is in a tract of ten acres or more, and the
animals or fowl are not kept within a distance of 250 feet from the residence
of any person not the owner of such animals or fowl.
(Ord. 92-08, passed 4-23-92; Am. Ord. 2014-30, passed 11-18-14)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.43  KEEPING IN UNOCCUPIED RESIDENCE.
   It shall be unlawful to keep, shelter, or enclose any animal within any
residential building which is not occupied as a residence of a person.
(Ord. 92-08, passed 4-23-92) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.44  ANIMAL CONFINEMENT IN VEHICLE OR TRAILER.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person having the charge or custody of an
animal, as owner or otherwise, to place or confine such animal or allow such
animal to be placed or confined or to remain in a motor vehicle or trailer
under such condition for such period of time as may endanger the health or
well-being of such animal due to heat, lack of food or water, or such
circumstances as may reasonably be expected to cause suffering, disability, or
death.
   (B)   The Animal Services Officer is authorized to instruct any animal
services personnel or police officer finding an animal in a motor vehicle or
trailer in violation of this section to obtain a locksmith, at the owner’s
expense, or to break and enter the vehicle or trailer if necessary, to remove
the animal.
(Ord. 92-08, passed 4-23-92; Am. Ord. 2014-30, passed 11-18-14)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.45  [RESERVED].
§ 90.46  NOISY ANIMALS AND FOWL PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to stable or keep any animal or
fowl in the city limits in such a manner that such animal by stamping, kicking,
braying, bleating, barking, yelping, neighing, crowing, or making any other
utterance or disturbance creates such a noise as shall be a disturbance to
those living in the vicinity.
   (B)   An animal or fowl may be declared a nuisance if it is:
      (1)   Reported by two or more persons living in the area of the nuisance
by either verbal or written complaint;
      (2)   Reported by any animal services personnel; or
      (3)   Reported by any police officer.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the animal services personnel or police
officer to file a complaint to cause the nuisance to be abated.
   (D)   An owner shall exercise proper care and control of his animals to
prevent them from becoming a public nuisance.
(Ord. 92-08, passed 4-23-92; Am. Ord. 2014-30, passed 11-18-14)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.47  MISTREATMENT OF ANIMALS AND FOWL.
   (A)   No person, other than a licensed veterinarian shall crop a dog's ears.
   (B)   Chickens or ducklings younger than eight weeks-of-age may be sold
within the corporate limits of the city, provided however, that no chickens or
ducklings younger than eight weeks may be sold if the natural coloring has been
altered by artificial coloring.
   (C)   No person shall give away any live animal, fish, reptile, or bird as a
prize for or an inducement to enter, any contest, game, or other competition,
or as an inducement to enter a place of amusement; or offer such as listed
above for an incentive to enter any business agreement whereby the offer was
for the purpose of attracting trade.
(Ord. 92-08, passed 4-23-92) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.48  KEEPING ANIMALS; OTHER RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   A person who keeps or maintains an animal or fowl shall provide such
animal or fowl with:
      (1)   Adequate shelter, if animal is a dog;
      (2)   A daily supply of appropriate, wholesome and nutritional food in
sufficient quantities to provide for the dietary needs of the animal or fowl; 
      (3)   Constant access to an adequate supply of fresh, clean, potable
water;
      (4)   Veterinary care as needed to prevent disease and suffering; and
      (5)   Regular grooming, if lack thereof would materially and adversely
affect the health of the animal or fowl.
   (B)   Plastic air shipping containers and pet carriers shall not be used as
outdoor shelters.
(Ord. 2008-10, passed 4-8-08)
§ 90.49  ANIMAL RESTRAINT.
   (A)   As used in this section, the term “restraint” means a chain, rope,
tether, leash, cable, cord, or other device that attaches an animal to a
stationary object or a trolley system.
   (B)   All restraints must terminate at both ends with properly functioning
swivels.
   (C)   No animal may be restrained by means of a restraint that:
      (1)   Enables the animal to gain access to a street or public right-of-
way;
      (2)   Can become tangled around any fixed object;
      (3)   Is in an unsafe condition;
      (4)   Is reasonably likely to cause strangulation or injury to the
animal;
      (5)   Is reasonably likely to subject the animal to harassment, stings or
bites by insects or rodents, or attacks by other animals; or
      (6)   Prevents the animal from having ready access to adequate shade,
food, water and shelter.
   (D)   An owner or other person keeping a dog shall not restrain or allow the
restraint of the dog outside and unattended by means of an unreasonable
restraint. For purposes of this section, a restraint is unreasonable if the
restraint:
      (1)   Is affixed to a collar that is pinch-type, prong-type, or choke
type, or that is not otherwise sized to at least the circumference of the dog's
neck plus one inch;
      (2)   Is shorter than the greater of five times the length of the dog, as
measured from the tip of the dog’s nose to the base of the dog’s tail, or ten
feet in length;
      (3)   Is affixed to an object more than seven feet above ground level;
      (4)   Weighs more than one-eighth of the dog’s weight, or is otherwise of
such weight as to prevent the dog from moving about freely; or
      (5)   Is used during extreme weather conditions, including conditions in
which:
         (a)   The actual or effective outdoor temperature is below 32º F.;
         (b)   A heat advisory has been issued by a local or state authority or
jurisdiction; or
         (c)   A hurricane, tropical storm, or tornado warning has been issued
for the city by the National Weather Service.
(Ord. 92-08, passed 4-23-92; Am. Ord. 2009-3, passed 1-27-09)  Penalty, see §
10.99
DANGEROUS ANIMALS
§ 90.50  DANGEROUS DOG REPORT.
   (A)   An animal services officer may receive a report concerning a dangerous
dog. Such report and supporting witness statements shall be in writing and
sworn to on a form prescribed by the Animal Services Division.
   (B)   An animal services officer shall investigate all reports filed under
this section and may issue sworn reports based on an animal services officer's
investigation or observation.
   (C)   If the report indicates that a dog has caused the death of or serious
bodily injury to a person by attacking, biting, or mauling the person, and the
animal services officer has probable cause to believe that the dog caused the
death of or serious bodily injury to the person as stated in the report, the
animal services officer shall proceed under Tex. Health and Safety Code, Ch.
822, Subch. A, as amended. Otherwise, the officer has discretion to proceed
with a request for a dangerous dog determination in Municipal Court under §
90.51(A), or an administrative determination under §
90.51(B).
(Ord. 2018-04, passed 1-9-18)
§ 90.51  DANGEROUS DOG DETERMINATION.
   (A)   Judicial Determination by Municipal Court.
      (1)   The Municipal Court may determine that a dog is a dangerous dog in
compliance with Tex. Health and Safety Code § 822.0422, and for such purpose
the City Council elects to by governed by that section. An animal services
officer may file a sworn report describing a dangerous dog incident with the
Court. The sworn report shall present probable cause that the dog described in
the report is a dangerous dog.
      (2)   An animal services officer shall famish written notice to the owner
of the dog, as identified in the complaint, to inform the owner that a
dangerous dog report has been filed with the court. The notice to the owner
shall require the owner to deliver the dog immediately to the Animal Services
Division upon receiving the notice, prodded that the Shelter Manager may, in
his or her discretion, accept proof that the dog is impounded with a licensed
veterinarian according to the terms of §
90.55(D). The notice to the owner shall also contain a statement that the owner
will be notified by the court of the date and time for the hearing.
      (3)   If the owner fails to deliver the dog as required by Subsection (A)
(2), the Court shall order the Animal Services Division to seize the dog and
snail issue a warrant authorizing the seizure. An animal services officer shall
seize the dog or order its seizure and shall provide for the impoundment of the
dog in secure and humane conditions at the owner's expense until the Court
orders the disposition of the dog. The Court shall determine, after notice and
hearing as provided in §
90.52, whether the dog is a dangerous dog.
   (B)   Administrative determination by animal services officer.
      (1)   An animal services officer may determine that a dog is a dangerous
dog after investigation of a dangerous dog report. An animal services officer
shall furnish written notice to the owner of the dog as identified in the
report to inform the owner that a dangerous dog report has been received. The
owner will have five calendar days from the date the owner is notified to
provide the animal services officer information regarding the incident
described in the report. An animal services officer may consider additional
information from other sources in the course of the investigation. If a dog has
caused bodily injury to any person, an animal services officer may seize and
impound the dog at the owner's expense pending a determination of whether the
dog is a dangerous dog.
      (2)   If, after investigating a dangerous dog report, an animal services
officer determines that the dog is a dangerous dog, the animal services officer
shall provide notice to the owner of that fact. An owner may appeal an animal
services officer's dangerous dog determination as allowed by law. The notice to
the owner of the dangerous dog determination shall contain a statement that the
owner has a right, not later than the fifteenth day after the date the owner
receives such notice, to appeal such determination to the Harker Heights
Municipal Court or as otherwise provided by law.
      (3)   The failure or decision not to make an administrative determination
pursuant to this section shall have no bearing on any criminal prosecution for
violation of any provision of this chapter, or any application for judicial
determination hereunder.
   (C)   Determination. Upon concluding a hearing in Municipal Court under §
90.51(A), or an administrative investigation under §
90.51(B), the Court or animal services officer, as applicable, shall:
      (1)   Determine that the dog is not dangerous and, if the dog is
impounded, waive any impoundment fees incurred and release the dog to its
owner;
      (2)   Determine that the dog is dangerous and order the owner to comply
with the requirements for ownership of a dangerous dog set forth in this
subchapter, in which case an impounded dog shall be released to its owner after
the owner demonstrates compliance with such requirements; or
      (3)   Determine that the dog is dangerous, order the owner to permanently
remove the dog from the city within a designated period of time, and order the
owner to:
         (a)   Provide a sworn statement to the Shelter Manager stating the
street address, telephone number, and name of the person in control of the
location outside of the city where the dog has been relocated; or
         (b)   Provide other evidence satisfactory to the Shelter Manager that
the dog has been permanently removed from the city,
(Ord. 2018-04, passed 1-9-18)
§ 90.52  MUNICIPAL COURT HEARING.
   (A)   After the court receives a sworn report of an incident involving a
dangerous dog under §
90.51(A)(1) or a report of a dangerous dog owner's failure to comply with the
requirements for ownership of a dangerous dog set forth in this subchapter, the
Court shall set a time for a hearing to determine whether the dog is a
dangerous dog or whether the owner of a dangerous dog has failed to comply with
the requirements of this subchapter. The hearing must be held not later than
ten calendar days after the date on which the dog is seized or delivered,
   (B)   The Court shall give written notice of the time and place of the
hearing to:
      (1)   The owner of the dog or the person from whom the dog was seized;
      (2)   The person who made the report; and
      (3)   The Animal Services Division.
   (C)   Any interested party, including the city attorney, is entitled to
present evidence at the hearing.
   (D)   The judge shall he the finder of fact and shall render a decision
based on a preponderance of the evidence. The judge may compel the attendance
of any party or witness, including but not limited to the complainant, the dog
owner, and any involved animal services officers.
   (E)   An owner or the person who made the report may appeal the decision of
the Municipal Court as allowed by law.
(Ord. 2018-04, passed 1-9-18)
§ 90.53  REQUIREMENTS FOR OWNER OF A DANGEROUS DOG.
   (A)   Generally. Not later than 15 days after a person learns that he or she
is the owner of a dangerous dog, such person must:
      (1)   Register the dangerous dog with the Animal Services Division as
required by this subchapter and maintain current registration at all times. The
owner may request written extension from the Animal Services Division to
complete the registration requirements if necessary. All requests for extension
shall be in writing and, if granted, shall total no more than 30 additional
days.
      (2)   Confine the dog indoors or in a secure enclosure inspected and
approved by the Animal Services Division. The dog must not be outdoors unless
it is within the secure enclosure or muzzled and restrained by a substantial
chain or leash no longer than six feet in length, and a person capable of
controlling the dog is in immediate physical control of the leash. The dog
shall not be leashed to any inanimate object such as a tree, post, building, or
other object. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury
to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration, but prevents the dog
from biting any person or animal.
      (3)   Place and maintain placards in a conspicuous manner at all points
of entry into each building or secure enclosure where the dog is kept. The
placard shall be no smaller than nine inches by six inches and shall read
“WARNING DANGEROUS DOG ON PREMISES” in contrasting colors with block letters at
least one inch in height. The owner will maintain the placards in good repair
and will ensure that the words are clearly visible and legible at all times.
      (4)   Acquire and maintain liability insurance coverage that includes
coverage for dog attacks in an amount of at least $200,000 per occurrence to
cover personal injury, death, and property damage resulting from an attack by
the dangerous dog without regard to the location of the attack, and provide
proof of the required liability insurance coverage to the Animal Services
Division. The owner shall notify the Animal Services Division immediately if a
lapse in insurance coverage occurs or if the coverage ceases or is reduced at
any time for any reason. The owner shall include in the policy provisions
requiring the insurance provider to provide notice to the Animal Services
Division not less than 30 days prior to cancellation or any material reduction
in coverage, and naming the City of Harker Heights as a certificate holder.
      (5)   Present proof to the Animal Services Division that the dog has been
sterilized so as to prevent reproduction.
      (6)   Comply with all applicable regulations, requirements, and
restrictions on dangerous dogs in Tex. Health and Safety Code Ch. 822, Subch.
D, as amended, and any other applicable law.
   (B)   Effect of appeal. An appeal of a dangerous dog determination by the
Court under §
90.51(A) or of a dangerous dog declaration by an animal services officer under
§
90.51 (B) shall not act to stay the requirements of division (A).
   (C)   Microchip; national registry. Microchip and register the dangerous dog
for its life with a national registry, and present proof to the Animal Services
Division, all at the owner's expense. The owner of the dangerous dog shall
microchip the dog by implanting a microchip identification device on the dog
within seven calendar days after being notified by an animal services officer
or the court that such animal is dangerous, or within 48 hours of an
unsuccessful appeal.
   (D)   Notification of attack. Within five days following any attack a
registered dangerous dog makes on a human, domestic animal, or domestic fowl,
the owner thereof shall provide written notice to the Animal Services Division
describing the incident in detail and with specificity.
   (E)   Costs. The owner shall pay any costs and fees incurred or assessed by
the city related to the seizure, acceptance, impoundment, compliance inspection
or re-inspection, and destruction of a dangerous dog under this chapter,
including but not limited to all costs of housing, feeding, routine or
emergency veterinary medical care, and immunizations. Costs must be paid in
cash or certified funds only. All costs must be paid prior to release of the
dog to the owner, or within a maximum of three business days following notice
thereof, whichever occurs first If the costs have not been paid within the
allotted time, the owner will be deemed to have voluntarily relinquished of the
dog and the dog shall immediately become the property of the city,
(Ord. 2018-04, passed 1-9-18)
§ 90.54  REGISTRATION.
   (A)   The Animal Services Division shall annually register a dangerous dog
if the owner is in compliance with the owner's requirements of §
90.53. The owner shall present proof of compliance satisfactory to the Animal
Services Division and shall pay the annual registration established by the city
fee schedule.
   (B)   The Animal Services Division shall provide to the owner of a dangerous
dog with a dangerous dog registration tag. Such tag shall be of a bright
distinguishing color, shall contain the year of registration on its face and
shall be larger than a normal license tag issued to dogs and cats. A dangerous
dog registration shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance.
   (C)   The owner of a registered dangerous dog shall attach the tag to the
dog's collar, or similar device, and shall place such collar or device on the
dog. The owner of a registered dangerous dog shall display current registration
on the dog in this manner at all times.
   (D)   If the owner of a registered dangerous dog sells or gives away the dog
or moves the dog to a new address, the owner, not later than the fourteenth day
after the date of the sale, gift or move, shall notify the Animal Services
Division in writing of the dog's new address and the name and phone number of
the new owner if applicable.
   (E)   If the owner of a registered dangerous dog sells or gives the dog to
another person, the owner shall notify the other person at the time of the sale
or gift that the dog is a registered dangerous dog.
   (F)   If a new owner of a dangerous dog keeps the dog within the city
limits, he shall register the dog with the Animal Services Division within ten
days after receiving it. The Animal Services Division shall re-register a
dangerous dog with a new owner if such owner is in compliance with this
subchapter. Such owner shall present proof of compliance satisfactory to an
animal services officer and shall pay the registration fee established by the
city fee schedule.
   (G)   If a dangerous dog's registration is expired when a new owner attempts
to re-register it, the new owner shall follow the owner's requirements of
division (A).
   (H)   A re-registration shall be valid only for the time remaining on the
prior registration.
   (I)   In the event that a registered dangerous dog dies, the owner must
within ten days thereafter present dispositive proof to the satisfaction of an
animal services officer, or present written verification by a licensed
veterinarian, in order to verify the identity of the dangerous dog by
microchip.
   (J)   In the event that a registered dangerous dog lost or stolen, the owner
must within ten days thereafter notify the Animal Services Division.
   (K)   After the effective date of this ordinance the owner of a dog which
has been deemed dangerous in another jurisdiction may not register the dog
under this subchapter and may not harbor the animal within the territorial
limits of the City of Harker Heights.
(Ord. 2018-04, passed 1-9-18)
§ 90.55  COMPLIANCE ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Compliance Inspections. The owner of a dangerous dog must comply with
all applicable regulations, requirements and restrictions on dangerous dogs and
may be re-inspected four times per year by the Animal Services Division for
compliance. For each inspection, the owner shall pay a compliance inspection
fee established by the city fee schedule, which shall be due the within 30 days
from the date of billing.
   (B)   Owner to deliver. If the dog is not already impounded, the owner shall
deliver the dog to the Animal Services Division immediately upon failure to
comply with any requirement of an owner of a dangerous dog under this
subchapter. No dangerous dog shall be returned to its owner at any time unless
authorized by this chapter and all the owner's requirements are fulfilled.
   (C)   Warrant and seizure. The Municipal Court may issue a warrant to seize
a dangerous dog at any time the Court finds probable cause to believe that the
owner is in violation of or has failed to comply with any of the applicable
owner requirements under this subchapter, including any time otherwise allowed
for voluntary compliance. If, on application of an animal services officer, the
Court finds, after notice and hearing as provided by §
90.52, that the owner of a dangerous dog has failed to comply with or has
fallen out of compliance with the applicable requirements of this subchapter,
the Court shall order an animal services officer to seize the dog and shall
issue a warrant authorizing the seizure.
   (D)   Impoundment. When seizure, delivery or surrender of a dog is
authorized or required by this subchapter, an animal services officer shall
seize the dog according to a warrant or shall order such seizure and shall
accept the dog into custody when delivered by the owner. The Animal Services
Division shall provide for impoundment of the dog in secure and humane
conditions until the Court orders the disposition of the dog. Alternatively,
the Animal Services Division may accept proof of impoundment from a licensed
veterinarian if such proof and impoundment are satisfactory to the Shelter
Manager.
   (E)   Destruction ordered. In addition to any other penalty or remedy
provided under this chapter or other law, the Court shall order the Animal
Services Division to impound and humanely destroy a dangerous dog if no
perfected appeal is pending and:
      (1)   The owner fails to comply with the owner's requirements under this
subchapter;
      (2)   The owner after initial compliance with the owner's requirements
under this subchapter subsequently violates or fails to comply with such
requirements, and thereafter either fails to renew compliance within ten
calendar days after the dog is seized or delivered to the Animal Services
Division or is ineligible to have the dog returned under division (F):
      (3)   The owner of the dog has not been located within ten calendar days
after the seizure and impoundment of the dog, and no other statute or ordinance
has allowed or required the dog's earlier destruction;
      (4)   For any other reason the dog cannot be returned to its owner; or
      (5)   The owner is found guilty of an offense under §
90.97(A);
   (F)   Return of dog. The Court may order the Animal Services Division to
return the dangerous dog to the owner if the owner proves that the owner has
renewed compliance with this subchapter within ten calendar days after the dog
is seized or delivered to the Animal Services Division, provided that no
dangerous dog shall be returned to its owner after renewed compliance more than
one time. A dangerous dog that is otherwise eligible for release from impound
but not reclaimed by its owner within ten days from the date of notice of
impoundment shall be deemed abandoned and, at the discretion of the. Shelter
Manager, euthanized in a humane manner.
(Ord. 2018-04, passed 1-9-18)
§ 90.56  DESTRUCTION FOR SAFETY.
   If impoundment of a dangerous dog is being attempted away from the premises
of the owner and the impoundment cannot he made with safety, the dog may be
destroyed without notice to the owner or harborer thereof. If an attempt is
made to impound a dangerous dog from the premises of the owner or harborer and
the impoundment cannot be made with safety, the owner or harborer will be given
notice that if said animal is not surrendered to the Animal Services Division
within 24 hours, the dog will be destroyed wherever it is found. After this
notice, the dog may be destroyed during an attempt to impound if impoundment
cannot be made with safety, wherever the impoundment is attempted. In lieu of
surrendering the dog to Animal Services, an owner may permanently remove said
animal from the city, if written proof of destination is provided to the Animal
Services Division and transport is made in compliance with this subchapter.
(Ord. 2018-04, passed 1-9-18)
§ 90.57  NUISANCE DECLARED.
   It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance that an owner or other person
harbors, keeps, or maintains in the city a dog declared to be dangerous in
accordance with this subchapter unless the owner complies with the requirements
of this subchapter, and all other laws regulating dangerous dogs.
(Ord. 2018-04, passed 1-9-18)
§ 90.58  OWNER'S KNOWLEDGE.
   For purposes of this subchapter, an owner learns that a dog is a dangerous
dog upon the first to occur of the following events:
   (A)   The owner knows of an attack of the sort described in the definition
of DANGEROUS DOG;
   (B)   The owner is notified that an animal services officer has declared the
dog to be a dangerous dog under this subchapter;
   (C)   The owner is notified by any court of competent jurisdiction that the
dog is a dangerous dog;
   (D)   The owner is notified by any court of competent jurisdiction that,
after appeal, such court has upheld a prior determination that the dog is a
dangerous dog; or
   (E)   The owner knows that the dog has been deemed dangerous by a final
determination made in accordance with the law of any other jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2018-04, passed 1-9-18)
§ 90.59  NOTICES.
   All notices required by this subchapter to be given to the owner shall be
mailed certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner's last known
mailing address, or delivered in person. If the notice is mailed to the owner
and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as “refused” or
“unclaimed” the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is
conclusively deemed delivered. If the notice is given by mail, the date of
notice is the date of delivery. If the date of delivery is not known, then
notice given by mail is deemed to be delivered three  days after the date it is
placed in a mail receptacle of the United States Postal Service. Notice that is
delivered in person is deemed received on the date of in-hand delivery to the
owner or any adult residing at the owner's address, or on the date that the
notice is left firmly affixed on or near the front door of the primary building
at the owner's address.
(Ord. 2018-04, passed 1-9-18)
ANIMAL CONTROL; RABIES
§ 90.60  IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   Animals at-large may be captured by animal services personnel, or
other designated employees of the city if animal services personnel are not
available, impounded in an animal shelter, and there confined in a reasonably
humane manner with necessary food and shelter.
   (B)   Immediately upon intake, animal services personnel are authorized to
provide each appropriately aged impounded animal with core immunizations as
defined by the Association of Shelter Veterinarian guidelines. These
vaccinations may either be administered by a licensed veterinarian employed or
contracted by the city or animal services personnel who is familiar with the
common infectious diseases affecting dogs and cats of Bell County, along with
any other necessary treatment the veterinarian, or animal services personnel
after consultation with a veterinarian, determines is appropriate for the care
and well-being of the animal, or to prevent animals currently housed at the
shelter from becoming exposed to an infectious disease.
   (C)   If an impounded animal bears a tag, microchip or other identification,
the Shelter Manager shall make a reasonable effort to notify the owner. Notice
under this section is complete upon the earlier of:
      (1)   Verbal notification to the owner, if the owner can be reached in
person or by telephone;
      (2)   Written notification affixed to the front door of the owner's last
known address; or
      (3)   Written notification mailed to the owner's last known address,
enclosed in a postpaid, properly addressed wrapper, in a post office or
official depository under the care and custody of the United States Postal
Service.
   (D)   Unless otherwise required by law, an impounded animal shall be
released to its owner during regular hours of operation upon payment of the
appropriate fees and upon proof of ownership.
      (1)   Acceptable proof of ownership may consist of a microchip or tag
indicating ownership of the animal, a receipt for purchase or adoption of the
animal, records from a veterinarian showing vaccinations administered within
the previous 12 months, receipts for payment to a veterinarian or commercial
pet service facility for services rendered to the animal, and photographic or
videographic records showing the animal and individual asserting ownership at
home or in other environments.
      (2)   Impounded dogs and cats for which the owner cannot show proof of
current vaccination will be released only if and when the owner signs an
agreement to show proof of same within 72 hours. Failure to show proof of
vaccination within the 72-hour period will constitute a violation of this
chapter.
   (E)   If the animal is not reclaimed by the owner, then before the animal is
released for adoption, humane destruction, or other disposition, the Shelter
Manager or an entity contracting with the city to operate an animal shelter
shall keep an impounded animal:
      (1)   At least three days after notification to the owner, not counting
the date of notice, if such notice is required under division (C); or
      (2)   At least three days, not counting the day of impoundment, in all
other cases.
   (F)   Any animal surrendered by the owner, or not reclaimed by the owner
within the time provided in division (E), shall be deemed abandoned, and shall
thereafter be the sole property of the city, and the owner divested of all
right, title and interest in and to such animal. The animal shall then be
subject to adoption, placement, transfer, humane destruction, or other
disposition at the discretion of the Shelter Manager.
(Ord. 92-08, passed 4-23-92; Am. Ord. 2011-30, passed 9-13-11; Am. Ord. 2014-
30, passed 11-18-14; Am. Ord. 2018-05, passed 1-9-18; Am. Ord. 2019-36, passed
10-22-19)
§ 90.61  IMPOUNDMENT FEES; CLASSIFICATION.
   (A)   Impoundment fees shall be set in the City Council's budget ordinance.
   (B)   Classification:
      (1)   Class A.  Each dog or cat or juvenile of same.
      (2)   Class B.  Goat, sheep, lamb, pig, sow, shoat, and animals of the
same approximate size and weight.
      (3)   Class C.  Cattle, horses, ponies, mules, foals, calves, and animals
of the same approximate size and weight.
      (4)   Class D.  Exotic or wild animals.
      (5)   Class E.  Birds and fowl.
   (C)   A daily handling fee after the first day shall be charged for every
day or fraction thereof that an animal is at the center. The fee shall be based
upon the class of animal enumerated in division (B) of this section.
(Ord. 92-08, passed 4-23-92)
§ 90.62  ADOPTION.
   (A)   The decision to place an animal for adoption is in the sole discretion
of the Shelter Manager. No person seeking to adopt an animal shall be
discriminated against on the basis of race, sex, religion, or national origin.
No person convicted of the offense of animal cruelty shall be permitted to
adopt an animal from an animal shelter.
   (B)   An impounded domestic animal or fowl may be given without fee to a
nonprofit animal shelter, pound, organization, or society for the protection of
animals, for the purpose of domestic adoption, providing that all other
sections of this chapter, or any other ordinances or applicable laws are met.
   (C)   Dogs or cats may not be released for adoption unless the animal has
been vaccinated against rabies and sterilized or the new owner signs an
agreement to have the animal sterilized, as follows:
      (1)   Animals must be vaccinated against rabies by an licensed
veterinarian within seven days of adoption.
      (2)   Animals must be sterilized by a licensed veterinarian within 30
days of adoption in the case of an adult animal, or within 30 days after the
estimated date the animal will become eight months old in the case of an infant
animal.  The Shelter Manager may extend the deadline for sterilization by 30
days, on presentation of a written report from a licensed veterinarian, stating
that the life or health of the animal may be jeopardized by surgery.  There is
no limit on the number of extensions which may be granted.
      (3)   If a deadline specified in the adoption agreement falls on a
Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the deadline is extended to noon on the
next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday.
      (4)   Except as hereafter provided, each new owner who signs an agreement
must deliver to the Shelter Manager a letter signed by a licensed veterinarian
that briefly describes the animal, states that the animal has been sterilized
or vaccinated, as applicable, and provides the date on which the animal was
sterilized or vaccinated.  The  letter must be delivered to the Shelter Manager
in person or by mail within seven days of the date of the procedure described
in the letter.
         (a)   If the adopted animal dies before being sterilized or
vaccinated, then, in lieu of the confirmation letter described above, the new
owner shall deliver to the Director of Animal Control a signed letter stating
that the animal is dead and, if known, provide the date and circumstances of
its death.  The letter must be delivered in person or by mail within seven days
of the animal’s death.
         (b)   If the adopted animal is lost or stolen before being sterilized
or vaccinated, then, in lieu of the confirmation letter described above, the
new owner shall deliver to the Shelter Manager a signed letter, stating the
animal is lost or stolen and, if known, provide the date and circumstances of
the animal’s disappearance.  The letter must be delivered in person or by mail
within seven days of the animal’s disappearance. 
      (5)   If the Shelter Manager does not receive a letter meeting the
requirements of §
90.62(C)(4) within the seventh day after the due date specified inthe adoption
agreement, he shall cause a complaint to be filed against the new owner, and
there  shall be a rebuttable presumption that the owner’s failure to timely
deliver the required letter is the result of the owner’s refusal to have the
animal vaccinated or sterilized, as applicable.
      (6)   If the Shelter Manager does not receive a letter meeting the
requirements of §
90.62(C)(4) within the seventh day after the due date specified in the adoption
agreement, he may promptly reclaim the animal from the new owner.  A person may
not prevent, obstruct, or interfere with a reclamation under this subsection.
   (D)   A new owner who violates §
90.62(C) commits an offense. 
(Ord. 92-08, passed 4-23-92; Am. Ord. 93-05, passed 4-8-93; Am. Ord. 99-11.
passed 5-25-99; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 4-8-08; Am. Ord. 2011-30, passed 9-13-
11; Am. Ord. 2014-30, passed 11-18-14; Am. Ord. 2019-36, passed 10-22-19)
§ 90.63  NOTICE OF SALE; ILLEGAL REMOVAL OF IMPOUNDED LIVESTOCK.
   (A)   Notice. All notices of public sale of live-stock by the Animal
Services Division shall be posted in the city’s normal public notice location.
   (B)   Contents of notice. All notices for the sale of impounded livestock
shall state the following:
      (1)   When such animals are to be sold;
      (2)   Where such animals are to be sold;
      (3)   Full description of the animals; and
      (4)   Statement of charges and cost.
   (C)   Illegally removing animals from impoundment.  It shall be unlawful for
any person to take or attempt to take any animal out of city impoundment or
release the same therefrom without the permission of the Animal Services
Division.
(Ord. 92-08, passed 4-23-92; Am. Ord. 2014-30, passed 11-18-14)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.64  SUSPECTED RABID ANIMALS.
   (A)   A person having knowledge of an animal bite or scratch to an
individual that a reasonable person could reasonably foresee as capable of
transmitting rabies, or knowledge of an animal that is reasonably suspected to
be rabid, shall report such knowledge immediately to the Shelter Manager or the
Police Department.
   (B)   The owner of an animal that is reported to be rabid, or to have
exposed an individual to a risk of contracting rabies, shall submit the animal
to an Animal Services Officer or a licensed veterinarian to be quarantined
until such time as it can be definitely determined whether such animal is
infected with rabies, but in no case less than ten days from the day of
impound.
   (C)   It is an offense under this chapter for a person to refuse to submit
for quarantine any animal reasonably suspected of being rabid. It is also an
offense to knowingly sell, release or otherwise dispose of an animal before the
expiration of the quarantine period if the animal is reasonably suspected of
being rabid.
   (D)   An animal that is lacking proof of current vaccination for rabies at
the time it bites a person is presumed to be under suspicion of rabies.
(Ord. 92-08, passed 4-23-92; Am. Ord. 2014-30, passed 11-18-14)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.65  QUARANTINE AND TESTING.
   (A)   Animals suspected of being rabid shall be quarantined with a licensed
veterinarian at the expense of the owner, or, at the discretion of the Animal
Services Officer, the animal may be quarantined on the property of the owner.
If it is determined by a veterinarian that a quarantined animal shows the
clinical signs of the disease of rabies, the veterinarian shall humanely
destroy the animal. If an animal dies or is destroyed while in quarantine, the
veterinarian shall remove the head or brain of the animal at the owner’s
expense and submit it to the Texas Department of Health for testing.
   (B)   Any animal that is required to but does not have current vaccination
shall be vaccinated by the attending veterinarian at the conclusion of the
quarantine period.
   (C)   The owner of the quarantined animal shall pay all fees incident to the
quarantine prior to release of the animal from quarantine by the veterinarian,
except that if a vaccinated and licensed animal bites or scratches a person who
is trespassing, and the animal is properly confined and restrained on the
premises of the owner, the trespassing person so bitten or scratched by the
animal shall be liable, in advance, for all fees incident to the veterinary
examination and quarantine, if the person so bitten or scratched demands
quarantine. Otherwise, no quarantine is required unless ordered by an Animal
Services Officer, in which case the animal shall be quarantined at the animal
shelter at no expense to the owner.
   (D)   In the event the owner of a dog or cat suspected to have rabies is
unknown, the dog or cat shall be considered a stray, and it shall be
quarantined at the city shelter. Should a person subsequently appear to claim
the dog or cat, that person shall be considered the owner and shall be liable
for all fees incident to the quarantine. If all fees are not paid within three
days following the quarantine period, the dog or cat may be sold or destroyed
by the Shelter Manager.
   (E)   Any animal suspected of being infected with rabies may be destroyed
immediately upon recommendation of a licensed veterinarian.
   (F)   Whenever any animal bites any other animal, all regulations and
requirements herein described shall apply to both the inflictor of the bite and
the animal bitten. Should any animal be bitten by an animal determined to have
rabies, then the bitten animal shall be handled by one of the following
methods:
      (1)   If the owner does not show proof of current vaccination, the animal
shall be quarantined for a minimum period of 180 days immediately following the
date of exposure, at the owner’s expense, at a veterinary hospital, the city
shelter or a reputable boarding kennel, with the animal being examined and
vaccinated against rabies 30 days before the end of the 180-day quarantine
period by a licensed veterinarian, unless the owner of the animal gives written
consent to destroy it; or
      (2)   If the owner shows proof of current vaccination, the type and
length of quarantine shall be determined by a veterinarian in consultation with
the veterinarian who has been attending the animal, but not to exceed six
months, at the owner’s expense; or
      (3)   An Animal Services Officer may make the final decision to order
that the animal be humanely destroyed.
   (G)   Should any owner refuse to comply with the provisions of this section,
the municipal judge may issue an order to any Animal Services Officer or police
officer directing that the animal be confined in the city animal shelter for a
period of ten days for observation for rabies. The expense of the confinement
shall be paid by the owner, except as set forth in division (C) of this
section. The order may be issued by the municipal judge only on a finding of
probable cause, based on the affidavit of a credible person, showing that the
biting or scratching took place and that the dog or other animal in question
was the dog or other animal responsible.
   (H)   Any dog or other animal kept, maintained, or harbored within the city,
which has bitten, scratched, or otherwise attacked any person is hereby
declared to be a nuisance.
   (I)   Any animal determined to have bitten or scratched someone must be
taken, at the owner’s expense, except as set forth in division (C) of this
section, to a veterinarian to be examined both at the time of the bite and at
the end of the quarantine period. This applies to vaccinated as well as
unvaccinated animals, as per the Texas Department of Health.
(Ord. 92-08, passed 4-23-92; Am. Ord. 2011-30, passed 9-13-11; Am. Ord. 2014-
30, passed 11-18-14)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.66  RELEASE OF QUARANTINED ANIMALS.
   (A)   If a veterinarian determines that a quarantined animal does not show
the clinical signs of rabies, the animal shall be released to its owner
following the quarantine period if:
      (1)   The owner has an unexpired rabies vaccination certificate for the
animal; or
      (2)   The animal is vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian
at the owner's expense at the time of release. The owner's failure to
accomplish the required vaccination shall result in the owner being issued a
citation.
   (B)   The owner of an animal that is quarantined under suspicion of rabies
or a trespasser as set forth in § 90.65(C) of this subchapter shall pay to the
city the reasonable costs of the quarantine and disposition of the animal, and
the city may bring suit to collect such costs.
   (C)   Animals that are not claimed on or before the third day following the
quarantine period may be adopted or may be humanely destroyed.
(Ord. 92-08, passed 4-23-92)
§ 90.67  TAMPERING WITH TRAPS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, destroy, damage, spring,
or cause to malfunction any trap set by the Animal Services Division or any of
its agents, or to release any dog or cat from any such trap.
(Ord. 92-08, passed 4-23-92; Am. Ord. 2014-30, passed 11-18-14)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.68  DESTRUCTION OF CERTAIN ANIMALS.
   (A)   In the event of actual and immediate danger of bodily injury to any
person because of an animal's vicious nature or actions, or in the event an
animal which constitutes a threat to the health of people or other animals is
about to elude capture, then, provided that other reasonable alternatives for
eliminating the threat have been exhausted, the animal may be humanely
destroyed by the use of any reasonable means without liability of any nature
from the owner for the death of the animal.
   (B)   An animal that has been severely injured may be destroyed in a humane
manner by the Animal Service Division personnel or a police officer, if the
animal is suffering and is not expected to survive.
   (C)   An animal that exhibits symptoms of mange, distemper, parvo, or other
communicable diseases may be destroyed in a humane manner by Animal Service
Division personnel or a police officer. Animals suspected of having a
communicable disease shall not be confined with healthy animals in an animal
shelter.
   (D)   If an injured or diseased animal in the custody of an animal shelter
or animal services personnel bears a microchip, vaccination tag or other
identification, the custodian shall make a reasonable effort to notify the
owner if such effort does not cause the animal unnecessary suffering or
otherwise pose an unreasonable risk to other animals, persons or property. Once
notified, if the owner proceeds immediately to the location of the injured
animal, it shall be released to the owner. Animals not bearing any type of
identification, or who in the event of further delay would be subject to
unnecessary suffering or pose an unreasonable risk to other animals, persons or
property, may be destroyed immediately by Animal Service Division personnel or
a police officer.
   (E)   The city shall not be responsible for obtaining veterinary services
for a diseased or injured animal. In the event a humane society obtains
veterinary services for a diseased or injured animal, the person who
subsequently claims ownership of the animal shall be liable for all expenses of
treatment. A person or entity that obtains veterinary services for an animal
may bring suit against the animal's owner to collect expenses of treatment.
   (F)   The city, its officers, agents, and employees shall not be liable for
any damages for the destruction of any animal accomplished in accordance with
this chapter.
(Ord. 92-08, passed 4-23-92; Am. Ord. 2014-30, passed 11-18-14; Am. Ord. 2019-
36, passed 10-22-19)
ANIMAL ABUSER REGISTRY
§ 90.80  ANIMAL ABUSER REGISTRY ESTABLISHED.
   The Shelter Manager shall develop an animal abuser registry. The
registration form shall contain:
   (A)   The registrant's full name, date of birth, gender, and race;
   (B)   The address at which the registrant resides or intends to reside or,
if the registrant does not reside or intend to reside at a physical address, a
detailed description of each geographical location at which the registrant
resides or intends to reside;
   (C)   The name and address of the registrant's employer;
   (D)   Each alias used by the registrant and all home, work, and cellular
telephone numbers used by the registrant;
   (E)   A recent color photograph or, if possible, an electronic digital image
of the registrant;
   (F)   A description (to include the date and location) of the offense or
incident which requires the person to register under this chapter; and
   (G)   Any other identifying information required by the Shelter Manager.
(Ord. 2019-10, passed 4-23-19)
§ 90.81  REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   A person must pay a registration fee as set forth in the city fee
schedule and register with the city on the form promulgated by the Shelter
Manager if the person is an adult who is physically present in the city for
more than ten days in a calendar year and:
      (1)   A court has made a final determination that such person has cruelly
treated an animal under Tex. Health and Safety Code §§ 821.022 or 821.025, or
substantially similar law of another jurisdiction; or
      (2)   Such person has previously been finally convicted of an offense
under Tex. Penal Code § 21.09 (bestiality), Tex. Penal Code § 42.09 (cruelty to
livestock animals), Tex. Penal Code § 42.091 (attack on assistance animal),
Tex. Penal Code § 42.092 (cruelty to non-livestock animals), Tex. Penal Code §
42.10 (dog fighting),Tex. Penal Code § 42.105 (cockfighting), or Tex. Health
and Safety Code Chapter 821 (treatment and disposition of animals), or an
offense under the law of any other jurisdiction containing elements that arc
substantially similar to the elements of an offense under this division.
   (B)   The person must satisfy the requirements of this section within:
      (1)   Thirty days after the effective date of this subchapter, if the
final conviction or determination described above occurred prior to the
effective date of this subchapter and the person resides in the city on the
effective date hereof;
      (2)   Ten days after the date of the final conviction or determination
described above, if such date is after the effective date of this subchapter
and the person resides in the city on such date; or
      (3)   In all other cases, ten days after the date the person arrives in
the city.
   (C)   If any information provided on the person's registration form changes,
the person must file a corrected registration form with the Shelter Manager
within seven days of the effective date of such change.
   (D)   The duty of a person to register under this section ends on the third
anniversary of the date of the final conviction or determination described in
division (A) above, provided that if a person who was previously subject to
registration under this section becomes subject to a subsequent final
conviction or determination described in division (A) above, the duty to
register is extended to the tenth anniversary of the date of the most recent
such conviction or determination. When a person is no longer required to
register under this section, the Shelter Manager shall remove all information
about the person from the Animal Abuser Registry.
(Ord. 2019-10, passed 4-23-19)
§ 90.82  CONTACT WITH ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   A person who must register under §
90.81 is prohibited from:
   (A)   Keeping any animal within the corporate limits of the city;
   (B)   Allowing, causing or permitting any animal to be kept on his property
within the corporate limits of the city; and
   (C)   Being employed by or volunteering at any humane society, animal
shelter, animal-welfare organization, animal breeder, pet shop, or veterinary
clinic within the corporate limits of the city.
(Ord. 2019-10, passed 4-23-19)
§ 90.83  SEIZURE AUTHORIZED.
   If an animal is found on the premises of a person required to register under
§
90.81, an animal services officer or peace officer may remove said animal and
take it to the animal shelter to be held for a period of ten days. If the
animal is not reclaimed within such time by an owner who is not required to
register under §
90.81, the owner shall be deemed divested of ownership of the animal, the
animal shall become the property of the city, and the animal shall be placed
for adoption in a suitable home, given to non-profit animal welfare
organization, or humanely destroyed. The person from whom the animal was seized
is liable to the city for the costs incurred in housing and caring for the
animal during its impoundment, and in humanely destroying the animal if the
animal is destroyed.
(Ord. 2019-10, passed 4-23-19)
§ 90.96  INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL DUTIES.
   A person commits an offense if the person knowingly interrupts, disrupts,
impedes, or otherwise interferes with any animal services personnel while such
personnel are performing a duty or exercising authority imposed or granted
under this chapter. It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the
interruption, disruption, impediment, or interference alleged consisted of
speech only.
(Ord. 2009-3, passed 1-27-09; Am. Ord. 2014-30, passed 11-18-14)
§ 90.97  OFFENSES AND VIOLATIONS.
   (A)    A person commits an offense if the person is the owner of a dangerous
dog and:
      (1)   The dog makes an unprovoked attack on another person outside the
dog's enclosure and the attack causes bodily injury to the person;
      (2)   The dog makes an unprovoked attack on a domestic animal or domestic
fowl while said dog is at large and the attack causes bodily injury or death to
the domestic animal or domestic fowl;
      (3)   The person performs an act prohibited or fails to perform an act
required  by this chapter.
   (B)   A person commits an offense if he owns or harbors a dog within the
territorial limits of the city that has been determined lo be a dangerous dog
by any other jurisdiction.
   (C)   A person commits an offense if the person provides false, misleading,
or  incomplete information in connection with any registration required by this
chapter.
   (D)   A person commits an offense if the person knowingly sells, delivers,
gives, exchanges, or otherwise transfers ownership or possession of an animal
to a person who is required to register under §
90.81, or to an individual who resides at the same address as a person who is
required to register under that section.
   (E)   A person commits an offense if the person performs an act prohibited
by this chapter, or fails to perform an act required by this chapter, and no
other penalty is prescribed for the violation.
   (F)   An animal services officer is authorized to issue a written notice of
violation and to file a complaint in the Municipal Court against any person who
violates a provision of this chapter.
(Ord. 2018-04, passed 1-9-18; Am. Ord. 2019-10, passed 4-23-19)
§ 90.98  DEFENSES AND AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES.
   (A)   It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under §
90.97(A) that the person is a veterinarian, a peace officer, a person employed
by a recognized animal services center, or a person employed by the state or a
political subdivision of the state to deal with stray animals and has temporary
ownership, custody or control of the dog in connection with that position.
   (B)   It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under §
90.97(A) that the person is an employee of the institutional division of the
Texas Department of Criminal Justice or a law enforcement agency and trains or
uses dogs for law enforcement or corrections purposes, and the incident giving
rise to such prosecution occurred within the course and scope of such
employment.
   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under §
90.97(A) that the person is a dog trainer or an employee of a guard dog company
under the Private Investigators and Private Security Agencies Act, and is not
the actual owner of the dog.
   (D)   It is a defense to prosecution under §
90.97(A) that the person injured by the dangerous dog was teasing, tormenting,
abusing, or assaulting the dog or has been previously reported to the Animal
Services Division as having teased, tormented, abused or assaulted the dog.
   (E)   It is a defense to prosecution under §
90.97(A) that the person injured by the dangerous dog was committing or
attempting to commit a crime,
   (F)   It is a defense to prosecution under §
90.97(A) that the dog was protecting or defending a person from an unjustified
attack or assault while in such person's control.
   (G)   It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under §
90.97(C) that the person lawfully owned and harbored the dog in the city on
January 19, 2018.
(Ord. 2018-04, passed 1-9-18)
CHAPTER 91:  FIRE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
91.01   Arson reward
Fire Marshal
   
91.25   Office created
   
91.26   Duties
   
91.27   Investigation of fires
   
91.28   Summoning witnesses
   
91.29   Refusing to be sworn
   
91.30   Investigations may be private
   
91.31   Authority to enter premises
   
91.32   Maintenance of buildings
   
91.33   Notice to be given
   
91.34   Enforcement
Cross-reference:
   Adoption of Standard Fire Prevention Code, see §
150.01
   Fire limits, see §
150.03
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01  ARSON REWARD.
   The city hereby offers a reward of $250 to anyone who furnishes information
leading to the arrest and conviction of any person or persons committing the
crime of arson within the corporate city limits. This reward is a standing
offer and shall be paid out of the General Fund of the city.
(Ord. 92-06, passed 3-26-92)
Cross-reference:
   Investigation of fires, see §
91.27
FIRE MARSHAL
§ 91.25  OFFICE CREATED.
   The office of Fire Marshal is hereby created and the Fire Marshal shall be
known as the Fire Official. such office shall be an integrated part of the Fire
Department, the Fire Marshal reporting directly to the Fire Chief/Director.
Such office shall be filled by appointment by the Fire Chief/Director. He shall
receive an annual salary and other benefits as determined by the Council,
payable in monthly installments, as full compensation for his services.
(Ord. 93-09, passed 5-25-93)
§ 91.26  DUTIES.
   The Fire Marshal or his designee shall investigate the origin, cause, and
circumstances of every fire occurring within this city by which property has
been destroyed or damaged, and shall especially make investigation as to
whether such fire was the result of carelessness or design. Such investigation
shall be begun within 24 hours of the occurrence of the fire. The Fire Marshal
shall keep in his office a record of all fires, together with all facts,
statistics, and circumstances, including the origin of the fires, which may be
determined by the investigation required by this subchapter.
(Ord. 93-09, passed 5-25-93)
§ 91.27  INVESTIGATION OF FIRES.
   The Fire Marshal, when in his opinion further investigation is necessary,
shall take the testimony, on oath, of all persons supposed to be cognizant of
any facts of or have means of knowledge in relation to the matter under
investigation, and shall cause the same to be reduced to writing; and if he
shall be of the opinion that there is evidence sufficient to charge any person
with the crime of arson, or with the attempt to commit the crime of arson, or
of the conspiracy to defraud, or criminal conduct in connection with such fire,
he shall cause such person to be lawfully arrested and charged with such
offense, and shall furnish to the proper prosecuting attorney, all such
evidence, together with the names of witnesses and all information obtained by
him, including a copy of all pertinent and material testimony taken in the
case.
(Ord. 93-09, passed 5-25-93)
Cross-reference:
   Arson reward, see §
91.01
§ 91.28  SUMMONING WITNESSES.
   The Fire Marshal shall have the power to summon witnesses before him to
testify in relation to any matter which is by the provisions of this chapter a
subject of inquiry and investigation, and may require the production of any
book, paper, or document deemed pertinent thereto. The Fire Marshal is hereby
authorized and empowered to administer claims and affirmations to any persons
appearing as witnesses before him. The Fire Marshal and those persons assigned
to the arson investigation team, as set forth in the Department Standard
Operating Procedure, shall work in conjunction with the Police Department for
the authority and authorization for the enforcement of applicable laws,
ordinances, and codes. The Fire Marshal or Director shall make all arrangements
for the assistance from outside agencies to assist in any fire investigation
deemed appropriate.
(Ord. 93-09, passed 5-25-93)
Cross-reference:
   Police Department, see
Ch. 32
§ 91.29  REFUSING TO BE SWORN.
   Any witnesses who refuses to be sworn, or who refuses to appear or testify,
or who disobeys any lawful order of the Fire Marshal, or who fails or refuses
to produce any book, paper, or document touching any matter under examination,
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and it shall be the duty of the Fire
Marshal to cause all such offenders to be prosecuted. Any person being
convicted of any such misdemeanor shall be fined as prescribed by law.
(Ord. 93-09, passed 5-25-93)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.30  INVESTIGATIONS MAY BE PRIVATE.
   All investigations held by or under the direction of the Fire Marshal may in
his discretion, be private, and persons other than those required to be present
may be excluded from the place where such investigation is held, and witnesses
may be kept separate and apart from each other and not allowed to communicate
with each other until they have been examined.
(Ord. 93-09, passed 5-25-93)
§ 91.31  AUTHORITY TO ENTER PREMISES.
   (A)   The Fire Marshal shall have the authority at all times of day or
night, when necessary, in the performance of the duties imposed upon him by the
provisions of this subchapter, to enter upon and examine any building or
premises where any fire has occurred, and other buildings and premises
adjoining or near the same, which authority shall be exercised only with reason
and good discretion.
   (B)   The Fire Marshal, upon complaint of any person having an interest in
any building or property adjacent and without any complaint, shall have the
right at all reasonable hours, for the purpose of examination, to enter into
and upon all buildings and premises within the city, and it shall be his duty
to enter upon and make or cause to be entered and made, a thorough examination
of all mercantile, manufacturing, and public buildings, together with the
premises belonging thereto. Whenever he shall find any building or other
structure which, for want of repair, or by reason of age or dilapidated
condition, or for any cause, is especially liable to fire, and which is so
situated as to endanger other buildings or property, or so occupied that fire
would endanger persons or property therein, and whenever he shall find an
improper or dangerous arrangement of stoves, ranges, furnaces, or other heating
appliances of any kind whatsoever, including chimneys, flues, and pipes with
which the same may be connected, or a dangerous arrangement of lighting devices
or systems, or a dangerous or unlawful storage of explosives, compounds,
petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, dangerous chemicals, vegetable products, ashes,
combustible inflammable, and refuse materials, or other conditions which may be
dangerous in character or liable to cause or promote fire or create conditions
dangerous to the firefighters or occupants, he shall order the condition to be
removed or remedied, and such order and notice shall be forthwith complied with
by the owner or occupant of the building or premises. Provided, however, that
if the owner or occupant deems himself aggrieved by such order and notice, he
may within 15 days, appeal to the Fire Chief/Director, who shall investigate
the cause of the complaint and unless by his authority the order is revoked,
such order shall remain in force and be forthwith complied with by the owner or
occupant. At the end of each month the Fire Marshal shall report to the Fire
Chief/Director all existing hazardous conditions, together with a separate
report on each fire in the city during the month.
(Ord. 93-09, passed 5-25-93)
§ 91.32  MAINTENANCE OF BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Any owner or occupant of a building or other structure or premises,
who shall keep or maintain the same when, for want of repair, or by reason of
age or dilapidated condition, or for any cause, it is especially liable to
fire, and which is so situated as to endanger buildings or property of others,
or is so occupied that fire would endanger other persons or their property
therein, shall be punished by a fine as prescribed by law.
   (B)   Any owner or occupant of any building or other structure or premises,
who shall keep or maintain the same with an improper arrangement of a stove,
range, furnace, or other heating appliance of any kind whatsoever, including
chimneys, flues, pipes with which the same may be connected, so as to be
dangerous in the matter of fire, or health, or safety of persons or property of
others; or who shall keep or maintain any building, other structure or premises
with an improper arrangement of lighting devices or systems, or with a storage
of explosives, compounds, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, dangerous chemicals,
vegetable products, ashes, combustibles, inflammable materials, refuse, or with
any other condition which shall be dangerous in character to the health or
safety of persons, or property of others; or which shall be dangerous in the
matter of promoting, augmenting, or causing fires; or which shall create
conditions dangerous to firefighters, or occupants of such buildings,
structures, or premises other than the maintainer thereof, shall be punished by
a fine as prescribed by law.
(Ord. 93-09, passed 5-25-93)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.33  NOTICE TO BE GIVEN.
   No prosecution shall be brought under §
91.32 of this subchapter until the order and notice be given as provided for in
§
91.31(B) of this subchapter, and the party notified shall fail or refuse to
comply with same.
(Ord. 93-09, passed 5-25-93)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.34  ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Every day's maintenance of any of the conditions prohibited in any of
the sections of this chapter shall be a distinct and separate offense.
   (B)   All misdemeanors herein provided for shall be prosecuted, and all
fines and forfeitures herein provided for shall be recovered and enforced, in
the same manner as provided by law for the enforcement of fines, forfeitures,
penalties, and punishments for offenses generally against the city.
(Ord. 93-09, passed 5-25-93)
CHAPTER 92:  ABANDONED AND JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES
Section
Abandoned Vehicles
   
92.01   Definitions
   
92.02   Chief of Police authorized to take possession
   
92.03   Notification of owner
   
92.04   Auction of abandoned motor vehicles
Junked Vehicle Provisions
       
92.15   Definitions
   
92.16   Junked vehicle declared to be public nuisance
   
92.17   Offense
   
92.18   Notice of nuisance
   
92.19   Hearing on removal of nuisance
   
92.20   Disposal of junked vehicles
   
92.21   Authority to enforce
   
92.22   Inapplicability of subchapter
ABANDONED VEHICLES
§ 92.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE.  A motor vehicle that is inoperable and over eight
years old and is left unattended on public property for more than 48 hours, or
a motor vehicle that has remained illegally on public property for a period of
more than 48 hours, or a motor vehicle that has remained on private property
without the consent of the owner or person in control of the property for more
than 48 hours, or a motor vehicle left unattended on the right-of-way of any
designated roadway within this city in excess of 48 hours.
   ANTIQUE AUTO.  Passenger cars or trucks which become 35 or more years old.
   COLLECTOR.  The owner of one or more antique or special interest vehicles
who collects, purchases, acquires, trades, or disposes of special interest or
antique vehicles or parts of them from his own use in order to restore,
preserve, and maintain an antique or special interest vehicle for historic
interest.
   JUNKED VEHICLE.  Any motor vehicle as defined in Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art.
6701d-11, § 1, as amended, which is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled,
or discarded.
   MOTOR VEHICLE.  Any motor vehicle subject to registration pursuant to the
Texas Certificate of Title Act.
   SPECIAL INTEREST VEHICLE.  A motor vehicle of any age which has not been
altered or modified from original manufacturer's specifications and, because of
its historic interest, is being preserved by hobbyists.
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80)
§ 92.02  CHIEF OF POLICE AUTHORIZED TO TAKE POSSESSION.
   The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to remove and take into custody any
abandoned motor vehicle found on public or private property in this city.
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80)
§ 92.03  NOTIFICATION OF OWNER.
   (A)   When a vehicle has been determined to be abandoned, a notice shall be
securely affixed to the windshield or other conspicuous place stating the
following information:
      (1)   The name and phone number of the agency (City Police Department);
      (2)   “WARNING” or “NOTICE”; This vehicle may be impounded if it is not
removed within 48 hours.
      (3)   Date and time the notice is affixed to the vehicle;
      (4)   Vehicle description (license plate or vehicle identification
number, make, and model);
      (5)   Name and badge number of officer affixing the notice.
   (B)   If, at the end of the 48-hour period, the vehicle has not been
removed, the Chief of Police shall remove and store the vehicle.
   (C)   The Chief of Police shall notify within 10 days thereof, by registered
or certified mail, return receipt requested, the last known registered owner of
the motor vehicle and all lien holders of record pursuant to the Litter
Abatement Act, as amended (Texas Transportation Code, §  683.012) that the
vehicle has been taken into custody. The notice shall describe the year, model,
make, and vehicle identification number of the abandoned motor vehicle, set
forth the location of the facility where the motor vehicle is being held,
inform the owner and any lien holders of their right to reclaim the motor
vehicle within 20 days after the date of the notice upon payment of all towing,
preservation, and storage charges resulting from placing the vehicle in
custody. Further, the notice shall state that the failure of the owner or lien
holders to exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle within the time provided
shall be deemed a waiver by the owner and all lien holders of all right, title,
and interest in the vehicle and their consent to the sale of the abandoned
motor vehicle at a public auction.
   (D)   If the identity of the last registered owner cannot be determined, or
if the registration contains no address for the owner; or if it is impossible
to determine with reasonable certainty the identity and addresses of all lien
holders, notice by one publication in one newspaper of general circulation in
the city shall be sufficient to meet all requirements of notice pursuant to
this section. Such notice by publication can contain multiple listings of
abandoned vehicles. Any such notice shall be within the time requirements
prescribed for notice by registered certified mail and shall have the same
contents required for a notice by registered or certified mail.
   (E)   The consequences and effect of failure to reclaim an abandoned motor
vehicle shall be as set forth in a valid notice given pursuant to this section.
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80; Am. Ord. 83-02, passed 2-8-83; Am. Ord. 83-13,
passed 12-13-83) 
§ 92.04  AUCTION OF ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES.
   If an abandoned motor vehicle has not been reclaimed as provided for in this
subchapter, the Chief of Police shall sell the abandoned motor vehicle at a
public auction. Proper notice shall be given of the public auction, and of the
time and place of such auction. The purchaser of the motor vehicle shall take
title to the motor vehicle free and clear of all liens and claims of ownership,
shall receive a sales receipt from the Police Department and shall be entitled
to register the purchased vehicle and receive a certificate of title. From the
proceeds of the sale of an abandoned motor vehicle, the Police Department shall
reimburse itself for the expenses of the auction, the costs of towing,
preserving, and storing the vehicle which resulted from placing the abandoned
motor vehicle in custody, and all notice and publication costs which result
from placing other abandoned motor vehicles in custody, whenever the proceeds
from a sale of such other abandoned motor vehicles are insufficient to meet
these expenses and costs.
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80)
JUNKED VEHICLE PROVISIONS
§ 92.15  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.  Any full-time, salaried employee of the City
whose primary duties include detecting and abating violations of this Code, or
the designated representative of such person.
   DEMOLISHER.  Any person whose business is to convert motor vehicles into
processed scrap or scrap metal, or to otherwise wreck or dismantle a motor
vehicle.
   JUNKED VEHICLE.  A vehicle that is self-propelled and:
      (1)   does not have lawfully attached to it either
         (a)   an unexpired license plate; or
         (b)   a valid motor-vehicle inspection certificate;
      (2)   is wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or
      (3)   is inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than:
         (a)   72 consecutive hours if the vehicle is on public property; or
         (b)   30 consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property.
   PERSON.  Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, trust, or other legal entity.
(Ord. 72-3, passed 3-14-72; Am. Ord. 83-01, passed 2-8-83; Am. Ord. 85-19,
passed 10-22-85; Am. Ord. 2000-04, passed 1-30-00)
§ 92.16  JUNKED VEHICLE DECLARED TO BE PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   A junked vehicle, including a part of a junked vehicle, that is visible from
a public place or public right-of-way:
   (A)   is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the public;
   (B)   tends to reduce the value of private property;
   (C)   creates a fire hazard;
   (D)   is an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety
of minors;
   (E)   produces urban blight adverse to the maintenance and continuing
development of municipalities; and
   (F)   is a public nuisance.
(Ord. 72-3, passed 3-14-72; Am. Ord. 83-01, passed 2-8-83; Am. Ord. 85-19,
passed 10-22-85; Am. Ord. 2000-04, passed 1-30-00)
§ 92.17  OFFENSE.
   (A)   A person commits an offense if the person maintains a public nuisance
described by §
92.16.
   (B)   An offense under this section is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine
not to exceed $200.00
   (C)   The court shall order abatement and removal of the nuisance on
conviction.
(Ord. 2000-04, passed 1-30-00)
§ 92.18  NOTICE OF NUISANCE.
   (A)   Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer shall determine that a public
nuisance exists under this subchapter, he shall send a written notice to:
      (1)   the last known registered owner of the nuisance;
      (2)   each lienholder of record of the nuisance; and
      (3)   the owner or occupant of
         (a)   the property on which the nuisance is located; or
         (b)   if the nuisance is located on a public right-of-way, the
property adjacent to the right-of-way.
   (B)   If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the
nuisance is unknown, notice may be placed on the nuisance or, if the owner is
located, hand delivered.
   (C)   The notice must state that:
      (1)   the nuisance must be abated and removed not later than the 10th day
after the date oh which the notice was mailed, and
      (2)   any request for a hearing must be made before that 10-day period
expires.
   (D)   The notice must provide not less than 10 days' notice of the nature of
the nuisance and must be sent by certified mail with a five-day return
requested.
   (E)   If notice is returned undelivered, action to abate the nuisance shall
be continued to a date not earlier than the  11th day after the date of the
return.
(Ord. 2000-04, passed 1-30-00)
§ 92.19  HEARING ON REMOVAL OF NUISANCE.
   (A)   The City Council, or a board, commission, or official designated by
the City Council, shall conduct hearings under the procedures adopted under
this subchapter.
   (B)   If a hearing is requested by a person for whom notice is required
under Section
92.18(A)(3), the hearing shall be held not earlier than the 11th day after the
date on which the notice was mailed.
   (C)   At the hearing, the junked motor vehicle is presumed, unless
demonstrated otherwise by the owner, to be inoperable.
   (D)   If the information is available at the location of the nuisance, a
resolution or order requiring removal of the nuisance must include the
vehicle's:
      (1)   description;
      (2)   vehicle identification number; and
      (3)   license plate number.
   (E)    The relocation of a junked vehicle that is a public nuisance to
another location after a proceeding for the abatement and removal of the public
nuisance has commenced has no effect on the proceeding if the junked vehicle
constitutes a public nuisance at the new location.
(Ord. 2000-04, passed 1-30-00)
§ 92.20  DISPOSAL OF JUNKED VEHICLES.
   (A)   If authorized by a resolution or order made following a hearing as
provided in §
92.19, a junked vehicle, including a part of a junked vehicle, may be removed
to a scrapyard, a motor vehicle demolisher, or a suitable site operated by any
municipality or county. Any such disposal shall comply with the applicable
provisions of Chapter 683 of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended, and
with all applicable rules adopted by the Texas Department of Transportation.
   (B)   After a vehicle has been removed pursuant to this section, it shall
not be reconstructed or made operable by any person.
   (C)   Notice shall be given to the Texas Highway Department within five days
after the date of removal identifying the vehicle or part thereof.
(Ord. 69-4, passed 2-11-69; Am. Ord. 72-3, passed 3-14-72; Am. Ord. 83-01,
passed 2-8-83; Am. Ord. 2000-04, passed 1-30-00)
§ 92.21  AUTHORITY TO ENFORCE.
   The Code Enforcement Officer, may enter upon private property for the
purposes specified in this subchapter to examine vehicles or parts thereof,
obtain information as to the identity of vehicles and to remove or cause the
removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to
this subchapter. The Municipal Court of the city shall have authority to issue
all orders necessary to enforce this subchapter.
(Ord. 72-3, passed 3-14-72; Am. Ord. 83-01, passed 2-8-83)
§ 92.22 INAPPLICABILITY OF SUBCHAPTER.
   (A)   This subchapter does not apply to a vehicle or vehicle part:
      (1)   that is completely enclosed in a building in a lawful manner and is
not visible from the street or other public or private property, or
      (2)   that is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in
connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard, or that
is an antique or special interest vehicle stored by a motor vehicle collector
on the collector's property, if the vehicle or part and the outdoor storage
area, if any, are:
         (a)   maintained in an orderly manner;
         (b)   not a health hazard; and
         (c)   screened from ordinary public view by appropriate means,
including a fence, rapidly growing trees, or shrubbery.
   (B)   In this section:
      ANTIQUE VEHICLE  means a passenger car or truck that is at least 35 years
old.
      MOTOR VEHICLE COLLECTOR  means a person who:
         (a)   owns one or more antique or special interest vehicles; and
         (b)   acquires, collects, or disposes of an antique or special
interest vehicle or part of an antique or special interest vehicle for personal
use.
      SPECIAL INTEREST VEHICLE  means a motor vehicle of any age that has not
been changed from original manufacturer's specifications and, because of its
historic interest, is being preserved by a hobbyist.
(Ord. 2000-04, passed 1-30-00)
CHAPTER 93:  NUISANCES
Section
   
93.01   Definitions
   
93.02   Public nuisances enumerated
   
93.03   Violations
   
93.04   Administrative abatement
   
93.05   Authority to enforce
   
93.06   Right of entry; search warrants
§ 93.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABATE.  To eliminate a nuisance by removal, repair, rehabilitation, or
demolition.
   DISPOSE.  To discharge, deposit, inject, dump, spill, leak, or place junk,
garbage, rubbish, refuse, or other solid waste into or on land or water.
   GARBAGE.  All decayable wastes from public and private establishments and
restaurants, including vegetable, animal, and fish offal and animal and fish
carcasses.
   HIGH GRASS.  All varieties of grasses normally cultivated and/or manicured
for purposes of ground cover, landscaping, erosion control, or forage for
domesticated livestock, that has grown to a height of more than 12 inches, or
regardless of height, may create a fire hazard, an unsanitary condition, or
become a harborage for rodents, vermin, or other disease-carrying pests.
   JUNK.  All worn-out or worthless material or discarded material, including
odds and ends, iron, or other metal, glass, cordage, and unused equipment.
   LOT.  Any tract of land located within a platted subdivision.  A LOT shall
include, in addition to the land within its boundaries, all land adjacent to
and extending beyond the property line to the curb line of adjacent streets,
and where no curb exists, to the existing street surface, and all land lying
between the property line and the center line of adjacent alleyways.
   NEIGHBORHOOD.  A platted subdivision, or property contiguous to a platted
subdivision and within 100 feet thereof, or property adjacent to a public
street and within 100 feet thereof.
   PARCEL.  Any tract of land which is not part of a platted subdivision, and
shall also include, in addition to the land within its boundaries, all land
adjacent to and extending beyond the property line to the curb line of adjacent
streets, and where no curb exists, to the existing street surface, and all land
lying between the property line and the center line of adjacent alleyways.
   PERSON.  An individual, corporation, organization, governmental subdivision
or agency, business trust, partnership, association, or any legal entity.
   PLATTED SUBDIVISION.  A subdivision that has its approved or unapproved plat
recorded with the County Clerk of Bell County, Texas, and is described in lots
and blocks in lieu of strictly metes and bounds.
   PREMISES.  All privately-owned property, including vacant land or a building
designed or used for residential, commercial, business, industrial, or
religious purposes, together with the yard, ground, walk, driveway, fence,
porch, steps, or other structure appurtenant to the property. PREMISES shall be
deemed to include both lots and parcels as herein defined.
   PUBLIC STREET.  The entire width between property lines of a road, street,
way, thoroughfare, or bridge if any part of the road, street, way, thorough-
fare, or bridge is open to the public for vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
   RECEPTACLE.  A container that is composed of durable material and designed
in a way that prevents the discharge of its contents and makes its contents
inaccessible to animals, vermin, or other pests.
   REFUSE.  Garbage, rubbish, paper, and other decayable and non-decayable
waste, including vegetable matter and animal and fish carcasses.
   RUBBISH.  All non-decayable wastes, except ashes, from a public or private
establishment or residence.
   WEEDS.  All rank and uncultivated vegetable growth or matter that:
      (1)   Has grown to more than 12 inches in height; or
      (2)   Regardless of height, may create an unsanitary condition or become
a harborage for rodents, vermin, or other disease-carrying pests, or that may
create a fire hazard.
(Ord. 89-20, passed 12-12-89; Am. Ord. 90-04, passed 4-10-90)
§ 93.02  PUBLIC NUISANCES ENUMERATED.
   The following is an enumeration of public nuisances subject to the
provisions of this chapter:
   (A)   Keeping, storing, or accumulating refuse on premises within the city
limits unless the refuse is entirely contained in a closed receptacle.
   (B)   Keeping, storing, or accumulating rubbish or any unused, discarded, or
abandoned object, including newspapers, vehicles, refrigerators, stoves,
furniture, tires, and cans, on premises within the city limits, unless the
rubbish or object is completely enclosed within a building or is not visible
from a public street or public area, or private property under other ownership.
   (C)   Maintaining premises in a manner that creates an unsanitary condition
likely to attract or harbor mosquitos, rodents, vermin, or disease carrying
pests.
   (D)   Allowing high grass and/or weeds to grow on a lot or parcel in a
neighborhood, except that vegetation for the purpose of animal grazing or crops
may be allowed within a fenced parcel.
   (E)   Maintaining any premises in a manner that is unsafe or constitutes a
hazard to safety, health, or public welfare because of inadequate maintenance,
unsanitary conditions, dilapidation, obsolescence, fire hazard, disaster,
damage, or abandonment.
   (F)   Any object, item, situation, or condition specifically identified as a
public nuisance in any other statute or ordinance for which the city is
responsible for enforcing.
(Ord. 89-20, passed 12-12-89; Am. Ord. 96-38, passed 7-23-96)
§ 93.03  VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Any person who disposes of junk, garbage, rubbish, refuse, or other
solid waste on a public high-way, right-of-way, other public or private
property, or into inland waterways in the city, or any person who allows or
permits another person to dispose of junk, garbage, rubbish, refuse, or other
solid waste on the person's property shall be prosecuted under the provisions
of Texas Litter Abatement Act and Texas Transportation Code, Chapter 683.
   (B)   A person commits an offense if that person causes, permits, allows, or
maintains a public nuisance as defined in §
93.02 of this section on premises under the person's ownership, occupancy, or
control.
   (C)   The court may order abatement and removal of the nuisance on
conviction.
(Ord. 89-20, passed 12-12-89; Am. Ord. 00-35, passed 10-24-2000)
§ 93.04  ADMINISTRATIVE ABATEMENT.
   (A)   In addition to any other remedy which may be available at law or in
equity, the city may take action to administratively abate a public nuisance if
the owner or person in control of the premises upon which the public nuisance
exists fails to do so. The city may then assess the expense of removal of the
public nuisance from the premises, and the city shall have a lien against the
subject property to secure the payment of such expense. An action to abate a
nuisance under this section shall have no effect upon a prosecution in the
municipal court under §
93.03.
   (B)   The City Manager may order the summary  abatement of a nuisance which
threatens a public calamity or otherwise poses an immediate risk of serious
harm to public health, safety or comfort.
   (C)   Except as provided in division (B), the abatement procedures under
this section must conform to the following:
      (1)   Notice shall be posted upon the premises on which or adjacent to
which the nuisance is located. Notice shall also be personally served by either
certified mail with five day return receipt requested to the property owner's
address as indicated in the County Tax Rolls, or by personal service to the
property owner.
      (2)   If personal notice cannot be served by either method indicated in
division (C)(1) of this section, a synopsis of the notice may be published
once in a newspaper of general circulation within the city, and a publisher's
affidavit shall be considered proof of service to the property owner.
      (3)   Notice shall additionally be served by certified mail, with five
day return requested, upon any lienholder of record and any occupant of the
property upon which the nuisance is located.
      (4)   At a minimum, the notice required by this section shall contain the
following information:
         (a)   A legal description of the property upon which the nuisance is
located, or if the nuisance is located on public right-of-way, then a legal
description of the adjacent property;
         (b)   A description of the public nuisance; and
         (c)   A statement that if the public nuisance is not abated within ten
days of date the notice was mailed, the city may cause the abatement of the
public nuisance and assess the expenses thereof against the subject property.
      (5)   If any notice required by this section is returned undelivered,
action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not earlier than the
eleventh day after the date of the return.
      (6)   The City Council, or a board, commission, or official designated by
the City Council, shall conduct hearings under the procedures adopted under
this chapter.
      (7)   If a hearing is requested by a person for whom notice is required
under this section, the hearing shall be held not earlier than the eleventh day
after the date on which the notice was mailed.
   (D)   The Director of Planning and Development shall keep an accurate record
of all expenses incurred for the removal and abatement of the public nuisance
under this section, including man-hours, equipment hours, materials, and fuel.
   (E)   Property classified as a homestead as defined in the Texas
Constitution and property owned by the city shall be exempt from the provisions
of this section relating to the imposition of liens upon property for recovery
of city expenses in abating public nuisances.
(Ord. 89-20, passed 12-12-89; Am. Ord. 2000-35, passed 10-24-00)
§ 93.05  AUTHORITY TO ENFORCE.
   It shall be the duty of the Building Official to take the necessary action
for the enforcement of this chapter. The Building Official, his authorized
representative, or any police officer shall issue citations or otherwise cause
complaints to be filed in Municipal Court for all violations of this chapter.
If civil action is to be pursued, the Building Official shall coordinate with
the City Attorney until the final termination of the proceedings.
(Ord. 89-20, passed 12-12-89)
§ 93.06  RIGHT OF ENTRY; SEARCH WARRANTS.
   (A)   The Building Official or his authorized representative may enter any
building, structure, or premises at all reasonable times to make an inspection
or enforce any of the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   When entering a building, structure, or premise that is occupied, the
Building Official shall first identify himself, present proper credentials, and
request entry. If the building, structure, or premise is unoccupied, he shall
first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having
charge of the premise and request entry. If entry is refused, the Building
Official may obtain a search warrant pursuant to the requirements herein.
   (C)   No person, owner, or occupant of any building or premise shall fail,
after proper credentials are displayed, to permit entry into any building or
into any property by the Building Official or his authorized agent for the
purpose of inspections pursuant to this chapter.
   (D)   The Building Official shall be the sole code enforcement officer to
whom a search warrant may be issued pursuant to Tex. Code of Crim. Proc. Art.
18.05.
   (E)   A search warrant may be issued to the City Building Official for the
purpose of allowing the inspection of any specified premises to determine the
presence of any violation of this chapter that may be classified as a fire or
health hazard, or an unsafe building condition.
   (F)   A search warrant may not be issued under this section except upon the
presentation of evidence, in the form of a sworn affidavit of probable cause to
believe that a fire or health hazard or violation or unsafe building condition
is present in the premises sought to be inspected.
   (G)   In determining probable cause, the Magistrate is not limited to
evidence of specific know-ledge, but may consider any of the following:
      (1)   The age and general condition of the premises;
      (2)   Previous violations or hazards found present in the premises;
      (3)   The type of premises;
      (4)   The purposes for which the premises are used; and
      (5)   The presence of hazards or violations in and the general condition
of premises near the premises sought to be inspected.
   (H)   Upon proper presentation of evidence by the Building Official, a
search warrant may be issued by any Magistrate of a Court of Record having
jurisdiction.
   (I)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of
the Building Official to enter any premises pursuant to any valid court order.
(Ord. 89-20, passed 12-12-89)
CHAPTER 94:  HEALTH AND SANITATION
Section
Smoking Regulations
   
94.20   Definitions
   
94.21   Offenses enumerated
   
94.22   Signs displayed
   
94.23   Smoking policy; notification of employees
   
94.24   Enforcement
   
94.25   Noncompliance
 
   
94.99   Penalty
SMOKING REGULATIONS
§ 94.20  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT.  Any enclosed indoor area under the control of the City
Council to which employees have access during the course of employment;
including, but not limited to work areas, employee lounges, employee restrooms,
conference rooms, and vehicles. A private residence is not a place of
employment.
   PUBLIC PLACE.  Any enclosed indoor area that is used by the general public
or that is a place of employment and includes, but is not limited to any
building, structure, conference room, meeting room, vehicle, or public service
area of any facility owned, operated, or managed by the city.
   SERVICE LINE.  Any indoor line at which one or more persons are waiting for
or receiving service of any kind, whether or not such service involves the
exchange of money.
   SMOKE or SMOKING.  The carrying or holding of a lighted pipe, cigar, or
cigarette of any kind, or any other lighted smoking equipment or device, and
the lighting of, emitting or exhaling the smoke of such pipe, cigar, or
cigarette of any kind.
(Ord. 92-05, passed 3-26-92)
§ 94.21  OFFENSES ENUMERATED.
   A person commits an offense if he:
   (A)   Knowingly or intentionally smokes in a place described in §
94.20 of this subchapter.
   (B)   Is the department head or supervisor, or other person in charge of a
public place and knowingly or intentionally permits or fails to make a
reasonable effort to prevent commission, by another, within such public place,
of the offense described in division (A) of this section.
(Ord. 92-05, passed 3-26-92) 
Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.22  SIGNS DISPLAYED.
   The department head, supervisor, or other person in charge of a public place
shall place a sign or signs visible at each entrance to the premises, notifying
persons entering the premises that smoking is prohibited.
(Ord. 92-05, passed 3-26-92) 
Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.23  SMOKING POLICY; NOTIFICATION OF EMPLOYEES.
   The smoking policy shall be announced within three weeks of adoption to all
employees working in the place of employment and posted conspicuously in all
workplaces under the supervisor's jurisdiction.
(Ord. 92-05, passed 3-26-92) 
Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.24  ENFORCEMENT.
   The responsibility for administering and enforcing this subchapter shall be
that of the Police Department, Department Directors, and/or supervisors or any
affected person may file a complaint in Municipal Court for a violation of this
subchapter.
(Ord. 92-05, passed 3-26-92)
§ 94.25  NONCOMPLIANCE.
   Nothing in this subchapter excuses non-compliance with any state or federal
law, city ordinance, or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, which
prohibits smoking.
(Ord. 92-05, passed 3-26-92)
§ 94.99  PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, corporation, agent, or employee thereof who violates any
of the provisions of §§
94.20 through
94.25 of this chapter shall be fined in an amount not less than $25 nor more
than $200; provided, however, in the event a defendant has previously been
convicted under this division (B) of this section, the defendant shall be fined
an amount not less than $50 nor more than $500 for a second conviction
hereunder. For a third conviction here-under, and for each conviction
thereafter, the defendant shall be fined in an amount not less than $100 nor
more than $2,000. Each day that a violation is permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 92-05, passed 3-26-92)
CHAPTER 95:  NOISE REGULATIONS
Section
   
95.01   Findings and intent
   
95.02   Definitions
   
95.03   General prohibitions of noise
   
95.04   Prima facie violations
   
95.05   Noise standards
   
95.06   Sound level measurement
   
95.07   Exemptions
   
95.08   Permits of relief
   
95.09   Amplified sound—permit process
   
95.10   Revocation and appeal
   
95.11   Enforcement responsibility
 
   
95.99   Penalty
§ 95.01  FINDINGS AND INTENT.
   (A)   The City Council finds that noise pollution is a serious concern to
all inhabitants of the community.
   (B)   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to minimize
exposure and physiological and psychological harm of excessive noise and to
protect, promote, and preserve the public health, comfort, convenience, safety,
and welfare.
   (C)   It is the express intent of the City Council to control the level of
noise in a manner which promotes commerce; protects the sleep and repose of
citizens; promotes the use, value and enjoyment of the property; and preserves
the quality of the environment.
   (D)   The City Council finds that loud, disturbing, unnecessary and 
excessive noise  degrades the environment of the city to a degree which is
harmful and detrimental to the health, welfare and safety of its inhabitants;
interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life, property and recreation;
hinders the conduct and operation of business; and constitutes a nuisance.
   (E)   The City Council finds that effective control and elimination of loud,
disturbing, unnecessary and excessive noise is essential to the furtherance of
the health and welfare of the city's inhabitants and to the conduct of the
normal pursuit of life, recreation, commerce and industrial activity.
   (F)   It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to prevent, limit,
control and eliminate loud, disturbing, unnecessary and excessive noise from
whatever source.
(Ord. 98-05, passed 2-24-98)
§ 95.02  DEFINITIONS.
   All terminology used in this chapter and not defined below shall be
interpreted to conform with applicable American National Standards Institute
Publications.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   A-WEIGHTED SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL.  The sound pressure level as measured with
a sound-level meter using the A-weighted network.  The standards notation is dB
(A) or dBA.
   AMBIENT SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL.  The sound pressure level of the all-
encompassing noise associated with a given environment, usually a composite of
sounds from many sources.  It is also the highest A-weighted sound pressure
level exceeded 90% of the time during a given measurement period, which shall
not be less than ten minutes.
   CONTINUOUS SOUND.  Any sound that exists, essentially without interruption,
for a period of ten minutes or more.
   DECIBEL.  Logarithmic and dimensionless unit of measure often used in
describing the amplitude of sound.  Decibel is abbreviated dB.
   DEVICE.  Any mechanism that is intended to produce, or that actually
produces noise when operated or handled.
   DYNAMIC BRAKING DEVICE.  A device used primarily on trucks which allows an
internal combustion engine to act an air compressor for the purpose of braking
without the use of wheel brakes, commonly referred to as "Jacob's Brake."
   EMERGENCY WORK.  Work required to restore property to a safe condition
following a public calamity or to protect persons or property from an immanent
exposure to danger.
   EMERGENCY VEHICLE.  A motor vehicle used in response to a public calamity or
to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger.
   LEQ.  The average sound level measured over the measurement period.
   MOTOR VEHICLE.  Any vehicle that is self-propelled by mechanical power,
including, but not limited to, passenger cars, trucks, truck-trailers, semi-
trailers, campers, motorcycles, mini-bikes, go-carts, snowmobiles, racing
vehicles and riding mowers.
   MUFFLER.  An apparatus consisting of a series of chambers or baffle plates
designed to transmit gasses from a motor vehicle exhaust system while reducing
sound.
   NOISE.  Any sound that is unwanted and causes or tends to cause an adverse
or physiological effect on human beings.
   NOISE DISTURBANCE.  Any sound that annoys or disturbs a reasonable person
with normal sensitivities or that injures or endangers the comfort, repose,
health, hearing, peace, or safety of another person.
   OWNER.  Any person who alone or jointly or severally with other:
      (1)   Has legal title to any premise, dwelling, building, or structure
with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or
      (2)   Has charge, care, or control of any premise, dwelling, building or
structure as legal or equitable owner or agent of the owner, or is an executor,
administrator, trustee, or guardian of the estate of the owner.
   PERSON.  Any individual, public or private corporation, partnership,
association, firm, trust, estate, the state or any of its departments or
political subdivisions, institution, bureau or agency thereof, county, city or
any legal entity that is recognized by the law.
   PLACE OF PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT.  A commercial establishment that provides
some form of public performance including, but not limited to, dance, music,
comedy, poetry or literary readings.
   PLAINLY AUDIBLE NOISE.  Any noise for which the information content of that
noise is unambiguously transferred to the listener, including, but not limited
to, the understanding of spoken speech, comprehension of whether a voice is
raised or normal, or comprehension of musical rhythms.
   PROPERTY BOUNDARY.  An imaginary line at the ground surface, and its
vertical extension that separates the real property owned by one person from
that owned by another person.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.  Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, alley, or
similar place that is owned or controlled by a public or governmental entity.
   SOUND.  A temporal and spatial oscillation in pressure, or other physical
quantity with interval forces that cause compression or rarefaction of the
medium, and that propagates at finite speed to distant points.
   SOUND LEVEL METER.  An instrument, including a microphone, amplifier, RMS
detector and integrator, time averaged, output meter or visual display or both,
and weighted networks, that is sensitive to sound pressure fluctuation.  The
instrument reads sound pressure level if properly calibrated and is of type 2
or better as specified in American National Standards Institute Publication
S1.4-1971 or its successor publications.
   SOUND PRESSURE.  The instantaneous difference between the actual pressure
and the average or barometric pressure at a given point in space due to sound.
   SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL.  The square root of the time averaged square of the
sound pressure and abbreviated LP or SPL.
   STATIONARY NOISE SOURCE.  Any device, fixed or movable, that is located or
used on property other than a public right-of-way.
   STEADY NOISE.  A sound pressure level that remains essentially constant
during the period of observation and does not vary more than 6 dB(A) when
measured with the "slow" meter characteristics of a sound level meter.
   USE DISTRICT.  Use districts for the purpose of the enforcement of this
chapter shall refer to the actual land use and shall be grouped into the
following categories:
      Residential
      Commercial
      Industrial
(Ord. 98-05, passed 2-24-98)
§ 95.03  GENERAL PROHIBITIONS OF NOISE.
   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to produce, continue,
or cause to be produced or continued, any noise disturbance within the city
limits.
(Ord. 98-05, passed 2-24-98) 
Penalty, see § 95.99
§ 95.04  PRIMA FACIE VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be prima facie evidence that a person has violated §
95.03 if that person should:
   (A)   Horns and Signaling Devices.  Sound any horn or signaling device on
any truck, automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicles within the city, except as
a danger warning signal as provided in the Transportation Code of the State of
Texas.
   (B)   Radios, Television Sets, Tape Players, Compact Disc Players, Musical
Instruments and Similar Devices.  Use, operate, or permit the use or operation
of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, television, phonograph, drum,
or other machine device for the amplification, production or reproduction of
sound.
       (1)   Between the hours of 10 p.m. and 7 a.m. in a way that produces a
plainly audible noise at the property boundary of the source; or
      (2)   On public property or on a public right-of-way at any time so as to
produce a plainly audible noise 50 feet (15.25 meters) from the device, except
as permitted by an amplified sound permit.
   (C)   Public Loudspeakers.  Use or operate a loudspeaker or sound amplifying
equipment in a fixed or movable position, or mounted in or upon any vehicle in
or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, park, place, or public property for the
purpose of commercial advertising, giving instructions, directions, talks,
addresses, lectures, or transmissions of music to any person or assemblages of
persons in a public place in violation of the noise standard set forth in §
95.05, or in such a way as to cause a noise disturbance, except in accordance
with a permit as provided in §
95.09.
   (D)   Hawkers and Peddlers.  Sell anything by outcry within any area of the
city zoned primarily for residential uses in such a manner as to violate the
noise standard set forth in §
95.05.  The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit the
selling by outcry of merchandise, food, and beverages at licensed sporting
events, parades, fairs, circuses, and other similar public entertainment
events.
   (E)   Animals.  Own, keep, or harbor any animal or animals that, by frequent
or habitual noisemaking, violate the noise standard set forth in §
95.05.  The provisions of this section shall apply to all private and public
facilities, including any animal pounds that hold or treat animals.
   (F)   Loading Operation.  Load, unload, open, or otherwise handle boxes,
crates, containers, garbage containers, or other objects between the hours of
10 p.m. and 7 a.m. outdoors so as to create a noise disturbance.
   (G)   Construction Work.  Operate or cause to be operated any equipment used
in construction, repair, alteration or demolition work on buildings,
structures, streets, alleys, or appurtenances thereto:
      (1)   In a residential or commercial land use district between the hours
of 10 p.m. and 7 a.m.; or
      (2)   In any land district where such operation exceeds the sound level
limits for an industrial land use as set forth in §
95.05.
   (H)   Domestic Power Equipment.  Operate or permit the operation of any
power equipment rated 5 horsepower or less in residential or commercial zones,
including, but not limited to, power saw, sander, lawn mower, garden equipment,
or snow removal equipment for home or building repair or ground maintenance
outdoors between the hours of 10 p.m. and 7 a.m.
   (I)   Commercial Power Equipment.  Operate or permit the operation of any
power equipment rated more than 5 horsepower, including but not limited to,
chain saws, pavement breaker, log chippers, powered hand tools, but not
including equipment being used for construction work in residential or
commercial land use district between the hours of 10 p.m. and 7 a.m.
   (J)   Places of Public Entertainment.  In any place of public entertainment,
operate or permit the operation of any loudspeaker or other source of sound
which produces, at a point that is normally occupied by a customer, maximum
sound pressure levels of 100 dB(A) as read with the "slow" response on a sound
level meter, unless a conspicuous and legible sign at least 225 square inches
in area is posted near each public entrance stating in large letters "WARNING:
SOUND LEVELS MAY CAUSE HEARING IMPAIRMENT".  This provision shall not be
construed to allow the operation of any loudspeaker or other source of sound in
violation of the noise standard set forth in §
95.05.
   (K)   Racing Events.  Permit any motor vehicle racing event at any place in
violation of the noise standard set forth in §
95.05 without first obtaining a permit as provided by §
95.08.
   (L)   Powered Model Mechanical Devices.  Fly a model aircraft powered by
internal combustion engine, whether tethered or not, or firing or operating
model rocket vehicles or other similar noise-producing devices, between the
hours of 10 p.m. and 7 a.m. or in such a way as to violate the noise standard
set forth in §
95.05.
   (M)   Dynamic Braking Devices.  Operate any motor vehicle with a dynamic
braking device engaged, except for the avoidance of imminent danger.
   (N)   Defect in Vehicle.  Operate or permit the operation or use of any
truck, automobile, motorcycle, or other motor vehicle which because of
disrepair or mode of operation violates the noise standard set forth in §
95.05.
   (O)   Refuse Compacting Vehicles.  Operate, or cause, or permit the
operation or use of any refuse compacting vehicle that creates a sound-pressure
level in excess of 74 dB(A) measured at a distance of 50 feet (15.25 meters)
from the source.
   (P)   Garbage Collection.  Collecting garbage, waste, or refuse between the
hours of 10 p.m. and 7 a.m. so as to cause a noise disturbance.
   (Q)   Standing Motor Vehicles.  Operate, or cause, or permit the operation
of any motor vehicle or any auxiliary equipment attached thereto either in
violation of the noise standard set forth in §
95.05, or in such a way as to cause a noise disturbance in a residential zone
for a consecutive period of ten minutes or longer.
   (R)   Quiet Zones.  Create noise in excess of the residential standard as
defined in §
95.05 so as to be heard within the confines of any school, hospital,
institution of learning, court, or other designated area that requires
exceptional quiet while in session.  Conspicuous signs shall be displayed at
the property boundary indicating that the same is a quiet zone.
   (S)   Bells and Alarms.  Sound, operate, or permit the sounding or operation
of an electronically amplified signal from any burglar alarm, bell, chime or
clock, including but not limited to, bells, chimes, or clocks in schools,
houses of religious worship, or governmental buildings that violate the
standards in §
95.05 for longer than five minutes in any hour.
   (T)   Fixed Siren, Whistles and Horns.  Sound or cause the sounding of any
whistle, horn, or siren as a signal for commencing or suspending work or for
any other purpose in violation of the noise standard set forth in §
95.05 except as a sound signal of imminent danger.
   (U)   Recreational Vehicles.
      (1)   Operate a recreational vehicle in a way that violates the noise
standard set forth in §
95.05; or
      (2)   Operate any recreational vehicle that produces a maximum sound
level in excess of 81 dB(A) measured at a distance of 50 feet (15.25 meters)
from the source.
   (V)   Motor Vehicle Noise.  Operate or cause to be operated a motor vehicle
unless the exhaust system of the vehicle is:
      (1)   Free from defects in parts and materials that are intended to
reduce noise levels;
      (2)   Equipped with a muffler properly installed and functioning or other
noise dissipating device; and
      (3)   Not equipped with any cut-out, by-pass, or similar device.
   (W)   Exceeding Noise Standard.  Create any noise, or allow any noise to be
created or continued on property owned, leased, occupied or otherwise
controlled by such person, if the resulting sound pressure level when measured
on any other property either incorporated or unincorporated, exceeds:
      (1)   The noise standard specified in §
95.05 for a cumulative period of more than five minutes in any ten minute
period; or
      (2)   The noise specified in §
95.05 plus 5 dB(A) for a cumulative period of more than 2½ minutes of every ten
minute period;
      (3)   The noise standard specified in §
95.05 plus 10 dB(A) for a cumulative period of more than one minute of every
ten minute period; or
      (4)   The noise standard specified in §
95.05 plus 15 dB(A) for a cumulative period of more than 10 seconds of every
ten minute period; or
      (5)   The noise standard specified in §
95.05 plus 20 dB(A) for any period of time.
(Ord. 98-05, passed 2-24-98) 
Penalty, see § 95.99
§ 95.05  NOISE STANDARDS.
   (A)   The following noise standards, unless otherwise specifically
indicated, shall apply to all property within the city:
            10 p.m. -
            7 a.m.       7 a.m. -
Use District      (dB(A))      10 p.m.
Residential      55         No standard
                  specified
Commercial      65         No standard
                  specified
Industrial      70         No standard
                  specified
   (B)   Each of the noise limits specified here shall be reduced by 5 dB(A)
for impulse or simple tone noises, or for noises consisting of speech or music;
provided, however, that if the ambient noise level exceeds the resulting
standard, the ambient shall be the standard.
   (C)   When a noise source can be identified and measured in more than one
use district the limits of the most restrictive use district shall apply at the
boundaries between different use districts.
(Ord. 98-05, passed 2-24-98) 
Penalty, see § 95.99
§ 95.06  SOUND LEVEL MEASUREMENT.
   Sound level measurements shall be made with a sound level meter using the
"A-weighted" scale.  Such meter shall be calibrated and its accuracy validated
annually.
(Ord. 98-05, passed 2-24-98)
§ 95.07  EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   The restrictions set forth in §§
95.03,
95.04, and
95.05 shall not apply to:
      (1)   Noises produced by necessary and properly operating safety signals,
warning devices and emergency pressure relief valves;
      (2)   Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle when
responding to an emergency call or in time of an emergency;
      (3)   Noise resulting from emergency work; or
      (4)   Noise resulting from activities of temporary duration permitted by
law for which a permit has been approved by the city in accordance with §
95.08 provided that such noise does not exceed the limits, either in sound
pressure level or duration, allowable under the permit and applicable law.
(Ord. 98-05, passed 2-24-98) 
Penalty, see § 95.99
§ 95.08  PERMITS OF RELIEF.
   (A)   Application for a permit of relief from the noise restrictions of this
chapter or the basis of undue hardship may be made in writing to the City
Manager.  Any permit granted by the City Manager shall contain all conditions
upon which the permit has been granted, including, but not limited to, the
effective dates, time of day, location, sound pressure level, or equipment
limitation.  The requested relief may be granted upon reasonable and sufficient
evidence showing:
      (1)   That additional time is necessary for the applicant to alter or
modify his activity or operation to comply with this chapter; and
      (2)   That the activity, operation, or noise source will be of temporary
duration and cannot be performed in a way that would comply with these rules
and regulations;
      (3)   That no reasonable alternative is available to the applicant; and
      (4)   The legislative intent set forth in §
95.01 will not be unnecessarily frustrated by the granting of the permit.
   (B)   The City Manager may prescribe any reasonable conditions or
requirements deemed necessary to mitigate the adverse impact upon the nearby
properties.
(Ord. 98-05, passed 2-24-98)
§ 95.09  AMPLIFIED SOUND—PERMIT PROCESS.
   (A)   Permit Required.  It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a
law enforcement or governmental agency and/or its employees to use, or operate
within the city a loudspeaker or sound-amplifying equipment in a fixed or
movable position or mounted upon any sound truck for the purposes of giving
instructions, directions, talks, addresses, lectures, or transmitting music to
any persons or assemblages of persons in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk,
park, or other public place without first obtaining an Amplified Sound Permit
from the city.  This prohibition includes the use of sound-amplifying equipment
within buildings if the equipment produces a plainly audible noise at the
property boundary of the property where the building is located.  Churches,
schools, hospitals and sporting events conducted under the auspices of city
recreational activities are exempt from this provision.
   (B)   Permit Application and Fee.  An application for an amplified sound
permit shall be obtained from the Planning and Development Department and shall
contain the following:
      (1)   The name, address, and telephone number of the owner and each
operator or user of the sound amplifying equipment;
      (2)   The approximate distance for which sound will be audible from the
sound-amplifying equipment;
      (3)   A general description of the sound-amplifying equipment which is to
be used;
      (4)   The license and motor number of sound truck; and
      (5)   The dates and times of proposed use.
   (C)   Processing Fee.  A processing fee, as established by the fee schedule
adopted annually by the City Council, shall be paid to the city upon filing of
Permit Application and upon each application for permit renewal.
   (D)   Permit Review.  The Director of Planning and Development shall either
approve or disapprove the application as soon as practicable, but in any event
not later than 45 days from the date of filing the application and all
necessary supplemental information.
      (1)   The failure of the Director of Planning and Development to approve
the application within the time specified in this section shall result in the
administrative denial of the application.
      (2)   The Director of Planning and Development shall promptly notify the
applicant in writing of the approval or denial of the application.  If the
application is denied, the notice shall set forth the reasons for the denial,
and any right to appeal the determination to the Zoning Board of Adjustment. 
If the application is approved, the Director of Planning and Development shall
promptly issue a permit subject to all the conditions set forth in this
section.
   (E)   Regulation.  The permitted use of sound-amplified equipment shall be
subject to the following regulations:
      (1)   The only sound permitted shall be limited to music or human speech,
or both, and shall exclude any extraneous noise.
      (2)   No permit shall issue to operate any sound-amplifying equipment
within 200 feet of any church, school, hospital, or nursing home.  Sound-
amplifying equipment operated by a church, school, hospital, or nursing home
for its own use is exempt from this provision.
      (3)   The sound pressure level shall comply with the other provisions of
this chapter, except as otherwise specified in this permit.
      (4)   The permittees shall not violate any other state or local law
including, but not limited to, the Texas Election Code, the Texas Penal Code
and the Traffic Regulations of the State of Texas.
   (F)   Special Events Permits.  The holder of a valid Special Events Permit
as provided in Chapter 100 is not required to obtain an Amplified Sound Permit
for the same event.
   (G)   Exceptions.  Person(s)  operating sound-amplifying equipment for their
personal use within their dwellings, businesses or automobiles are exempt from
obtaining an amplified-sound permit.  However, the use of said equipment by
private citizens to include the playing of any radio, phonograph, television, 
tape player,  compact disc player or other musical instrument in such manner or
with such volume as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of
persons of ordinary sensibilities in or at any dwelling, hotel or other type of
residence is hereby prohibited.  The resulting sound pressure levels shall
comply with the other provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 98-05, passed 2-24-98; Am. Ord. 2001-13, passed 4-10-01.)
§ 95.10  REVOCATION AND APPEAL.
   (A)   If the holder of a permit issued pursuant to §§
95.08 or
95.09 violates any of the regulations herein, the permit may be revoked by the
City Manger.  If such permit is revoked, the city shall send the aggrieved
party  letter specifying the reason(s) for the revocation and notifying the
persons of the right to appeal to the address shown on the permit application. 
The letter shall be sent to the party by certified mail—return receipt
requested.
   (B)   The permit holder may appeal the revocation to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment in accordance with the procedures set forth in §
155.221.  Except in those situations where it is determined the health and
safety is threatened, the filing of an appeal stays the action of the city in
revoking a license until the Zoning Board of Adjustment makes a final decision.
(Ord. 98-05, passed 2-24-98)
§ 95.11  ENFORCEMENT RESPONSIBILITY.
   The City Police Department shall have enforcement responsibility for this
chapter as it concerns stationary or mobile (vehicular) sources.
   (A)   The Police Department may, but is not required to, issue a written
notice of violation prior to initiating a court complaint for violation of this
chapter.  Such notice shall:
      (1)   Describe the property;
      (2)   Give a statement of the cause for its issuance;
      (3)   Set forth an outline of the remedial action that complies with the
provisions of this chapter; and
      (4)   Set a reasonable time for the performance of any required remedial
act.
   (B)   Service of notice pursuant to division (A) of this section shall be
deemed complete if the notice is served in one of the following ways:
      (1)   Served in person;
      (2)   Sent by certified mail to the last known address of the owner or
other responsible person(s); or
      (3)   Published in a newspaper of general circulation.
   (C)   In addition to penalties identified in §
95.99, any violation of this chapter is declared to be a nuisance and may be
subject to summary abatement by a restraining order or injunction issued by a
court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 98-05, passed 2-24-98)
§ 95.99  PENALTY.
   Any person violating this chapter or any portion thereof shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $2,000,
and each day that such violation occurs or continues shall be considered a
separate offense and punishable accordingly.
(Ord. 98-05, passed 2-24-98)
CHAPTER 96:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
Abandoning or Closing Public Ways
   
96.20   Application
   
96.21   Administration fee
   
96.22   Notices mailed to abutting property owners
   
96.23   Procedure if portion of street is abandoned or closed
   
96.24   Public meeting
   
96.25   Exception
Street Cutting
   
96.35   Permit for digging required; exceptions
   
96.36   Permit fee
   
96.37   Application
   
96.38   Time limit for restoration
   
96.39   Supervision by Public Works Inspector
   
96.40   Requirements for cutting and excavating
   
96.41   Work at expense of applicant
Plants and Objects Obstructing Traffic
   
96.55   Definitions
   
96.56   Plants higher than three feet; restrictions
   
96.57   Encroaching or obstructing sidewalks
   
96.58   Placing plants near fire hydrants
   
96.59   Minimum clearance of trees in sidewalk areas
   
96.60   Encroaching on or obstructing roadways and alleys
Enforcement and Maintenance
   
96.70   Abatement of violations
   
96.71   Trimming and removal of plants and trees in and over streets
 
   
96.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Establishment and control of streets, see
Charter § 2.09
   Street improvements, see
Charter § 2.10
   Duty of occupants; clean sidewalks, see §
51.02
   Right-of-way management, see
Ch. 104
ABANDONING OR CLOSING PUBLIC WAYS
§ 96.20  APPLICATION.
   All persons desiring to have the City Council exercise its powers under
Section
2.09 of the City Charter or 311.007 of the Texas Transportation Code regarding
abandoning, altering, closing and vacating streets, alleys and other public
ways and portions thereof, shall file their application with the Director of
Planning and Development, in writing, directed to the City Council.  The
application shall contain a description of the street, alley or portion
thereof, as the case may be, and attached to the application shall be a list of
all owners abutting the street, alley or portion thereof, as the case may be,
together with the last known address of all such owners.  In the event that all
abutting property owners do not join in the application, a statement shall be
attached to the application stating the reason for non-participation of those
who have not signed.  The Director of Planning and Development shall make the
City Tax Rolls available to any applicant under this chapter for the purpose of
determining the names and addresses of all abutting property owners and the tax
rolls shall be conclusive as to the names of the abutting property owners for
the purposes of this chapter.
(Ord. 96-57, passed 10-22-96)
§ 96.21  ADMINISTRATION FEE.
   Upon the filing of the application with the Director of Planning and
Development as provided in §
96.20, an administration fee shall be deposited with the Director of Planning
and Development in the amount of $35 to cover the expense of administering the
procedure outlined in this chapter, and the cost of mailing notices and release
forms to all abutting property owners.  The application fee is non-refundable.
(Ord. 96-57, passed 10-22-96)
§ 96.22  NOTICES MAILED TO ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNERS.
   Upon the filing of the application and fee as provided in §§
96.20 and
96.21, the Director of Planning and Development shall mail notices of the
application and release forms by certified mail, return receipt requested, to
all abutting property owners.
(Ord. 96-57, passed 10-22-96)
§ 96.23  PROCEDURE IF PORTION OF STREET IS ABANDONED OR CLOSED.
   In the event the application requests that only a portion of a through
street, alley or public way which is open to public access from either
direction is to be abandoned, altered, closed or vacated, then it shall be
necessary for the applicant to provide the Director of Planning and Development
with the names and last known mailing addresses of all abutting property owners
both for the portion to be closed and for that portion which is to remain open
in either direction up to the next intersection with another street, alley or
public way.  Notices and release forms will be mailed to all such abutting
property owners for the closed and open portions of the street, alley or public
way as provided in §
96.22 of this Code.
(Ord. 96-57, passed 10-22-96)
§ 96.24  PUBLIC MEETING.
   The proposed action by the City Council shall be placed on the agenda for
the next public meeting of the City Council occurring after the Director of
Planning and Development has received a properly-executed release form from
each person entitled to receive notice under §§
96.22 or
96.23 of this Code, or such other public meeting as the City Council may set.
The application, if not acted upon at the first public meeting at which it
appears on the agenda, may be continued on the agenda to subsequent public
meetings if it is in the best interest of the parties and the public as the
City Council of the City of Harker Heights, Texas, may in its sole discretion
determine.
(Ord. 96-57, passed 10-22-96)
§ 96.25  EXCEPTION.
   The procedure set forth in this subchapter shall not apply to requests for
the abandonment of utility easements.
(Ord. 96-57, passed 10-22-96)
STREET CUTTING
§ 96.35  PERMIT FOR DIGGING REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person, firm, or corporation, or combination thereof, shall
hereafter dig any holes or trenches upon, through, or beneath the streets,
avenues, alleys, squares, and public grounds of the city, nor lay any pipes,
mains, laterals, or any connecting or service pipes, nor any underground sewer
or underground wiring along, across, or beneath the streets, avenues, alleys,
squares, and public grounds of the city, without first having filed with the
Public Works Department an application and plan in writing to do so and without
having first obtained a formal written approval of such application and map and
a permit to perform such work, except in the following cases:
      (1)   Street cutting permit fee will be established by the City Council
during the Annual Budgeting Process.
      (2)   In cases of emergency that may arise on holidays or outside of
prescribed working hours of city hall offices, utility companies may cut or
puncture the right-of-way of streets and alleys without first getting a permit
to do such work, provided that where such cuttings or punctures are made by any
such utility company in the right-of-way of a street or alley, such company
shall apply for and obtain a permit for such work on the first working day
after the work is done.
   (B)   Prior to the cutting of any street, a street cutting permit must be
physically in the possession of the individual or concern performing the work.
Instructions on the procedures to restore the street to its original condition
will be included. On a paved street, after all the procedures to include
placing the concrete have been followed, the city will put in the asphalt.
(Ord. 64-3, passed 6-9-64; Am. Ord. 72-12, passed 5-9-72) 
Penalty, see § 96.99
§ 96.36  PERMIT FEE.
   The charge for a street cutting permit for a paved street will be $50.
(Ord. 72-12, passed 5-9-72)
§ 96.37  APPLICATION.
   The application for a permit shall be submitted in such form as the Public
Works Department may prescribe from time to time, and, insofar as applicable,
shall follow generally the requirements prescribed by the city ordinances for
applications for building permits, in addition to any other information
prescribed by the Public Works Department. Such application shall be
accompanied by a map or plan of such proposed work.
(Ord. 64-3, passed 6-9-64)
§ 96.38  TIME LIMIT FOR RESTORATION.
   Fifteen calendar days are allowed for the restoration of streets which are
cut under the provisions of this chapter. Upon request, an extension of time
may be made if weather conditions are such that repairs cannot reasonably be
made within this time limit.
(Ord. 72-12, passed 5-9-72) 
Penalty, see § 96.99
§ 96.39  SUPERVISION BY PUBLIC WORKS INSPECTOR.
   Work as provided for in this subchapter must be performed strictly according
to the requirements of the Public Works Department, and not otherwise; and
shall be performed under this supervision and in such manner and at such times
as he shall prescribe and approve. The excavations and the depth, grade, and
location of any such pipes, mains, laterals, sewer, or wiring shall be as
prescribed by the Public Works Department in each case, provided that all
excavations made within the right-of-way of any street or alley or across any
square or public grounds within the city limits, shall be made in accordance
with the specifications that follow in § 96.40 of this subchapter.
(Ord. 64-3, passed 6-9-64)
§ 96.40  REQUIREMENTS FOR CUTTING AND EXCAVATING.
   (A)   (1)   Streets and alleys shall be classified into three categories:
         (a)   Class One.  Business and industrial areas.
         (b)   Class Two.  Areas with improved streets and alleys.
         (c)   Class Three.  Residential areas with semi-improved streets and
alleys.
      (2)   The classifications are further described by a drawing shown as
Exhibit “A,” on file in the Department of Public Works office. The
specifications can be found in Standard Details for Public Works Construction,
adopted by Ordinance 87-12:
         (a)   If any excavation is made in any street or alley that is
improved or semi-improved, material from the excavation may be used to backfill
such excavation, provided that such material is free from vegetation, rocks,
and other debris. It shall be placed in the trench in six-inch to eight-inch
layers. This material shall be thoroughly tamped or compacted by a suitable
mechanically operated tamp to ensure compaction to a proctor of 90% or better.
All backfilling of trenches shall be done as described and shown on Exhibit
“A,” which is on file in the office of the Department of Public Works, and to
the satisfaction of the Department of Public Works or its representatives.
         (b)   Where excavation is made in an improved area, all edges shall be
cut to a straight line before a concrete slab is poured or an asphalt surface
is applied. Backfilling where curb and gutter exists shall be backfilled and
compacted from the back of the curb. In streets without curbs and gutters,
back-filling and compaction shall be from the center of bar ditch to the center
of bar ditch.
   (B)   Where excavation is in an improved area, all edges shall be cut to a
straight line before the concrete slab is poured, or the asphalt surface is
applied. After backfill has reached maximum compaction, material shall be
removed to a depth as specified below and an area extending six inches beyond
the area of excavation shall be excavated to the same depth and concrete shall
be placed over the area so excavated:
      (1)   If the area is now improved as in Class One, with any type of
concrete or asphalt surfacing, excavation shall be made to a depth of 6½ inches
and the concrete slab shall be five inches in thickness, with 1½-inch asphalt
surfacing.
      (2)   If the area is now improved as in Class One, with concrete
pavement, the concrete slab shall be the same thickness and reinforced as the
original pavement.
      (3)   In all other streets, where improved or surfaced with gravel,
backfill shall be made in the same manner as provided for other areas, under
their classification, but no concrete slab shall be required.
      (4)   If an excavation is made in any alley that is improved with any
type of asphalt or concrete pavement, backfilling and replacing of surfacing
shall be made in the same manner as specified for excavation made in improved
streets.
      (5)   When excavation is made in any improved area, either streets or
alleys, all unused excavated material shall be removed within 24 hours after
backfill is completed. No excavation material that is the consistency of mud
shall be used as a backfill material.  All of the excavations, backfills, and
repair in streets and alleys shall be in accordance with the drawings,
respectively, appearing on Exhibit “A” on file in the Department of Public
Works office.
      (6)   When excavation is made in an area between the curbline and the
sidewalk line, excavation material may be used for backfill, material shall be
thoroughly compacted and the area finished in a manner equal to that as
originally existed.
(Ord. 64-3, passed 6-9-64) 
Penalty, see § 96.99
§ 96.41  WORK AT EXPENSE OF APPLICANT.
   All such work shall be performed at the sole expense of the person, firm, or
corporation making such application, and without expense to the city.
(Ord. 64-3, passed 6-9-64)
PLANTS AND OBJECTS OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC
§ 96.55  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLEY.  A street that:
      (1)   Is not used primarily for through traffic; and
      (2)   Provides access to rear entrances of buildings or lots along a
street.
   CURB LINE.  The boundary between a roadway and a sidewalk, usually marked by
a curb.
   PLANT.  Any hedge, bush, shrub, vine, palm, or other vegetation, except
trees.
   PROPERTY LINE.  The boundary line which marks the division between a street
and the privately-owned property abutting that street.
   ROADWAY.  The portion of a street, other than the berm or shoulder, that is
improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel.
   SHOULDER.  The portion of a street that is:
      (1)   Adjacent to the roadway;
      (2)   Designed or ordinarily used for parking;
      (3)   Distinguished from the roadway by different design, construction,
or marking; and
      (4)   Not intended for normal vehicular travel.
   SIDEWALK.  The portion of a street that is:
      (1)   Between a curb or lateral line of a roadway and the adjacent
property line; and
      (2)   Intended for pedestrian use.
   STREET.  The width between the boundary lines of a publicly-maintained way
any part of which is open to the public for vehicular travel.
   TRAFFIC.  Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, and conveyances, including
vehicles and streetcars, singly or together, while using a street for purposes
of travel.
   VEHICLE.  A device used to transport or draw persons or property on a
street, but the term does not include a device used exclusively on stationary
rails or tracks, or a manufactured home.
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80; Am. Ord. 2000-34, passed 10-24-00)
§ 96.56  PLANTS HIGHER THAN THREE FEET; RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed any
plant having a height greater than three feet above the level of the center of
the nearest abutting street on or in that portion of any corner lot in the
city, which portion is included in a triangle on the street corner of the lot
formed by a diagonal line intersecting the property lines at points 20 feet
from the street corner intersection of the line.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for either the owner or the occupant of any
corner lot in the city to place, maintain, or permit or cause to be placed or
maintained any plant having a height greater than three feet above the level of
the center of the nearest abutting street on or in that area which lines
between the property lines of such corner lot and the curb lines of streets
abutting such property lines and which area extends for a distance of 50 feet
back from the intersection of the curb lines of such abutting streets.
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80) 
Penalty, see § 96.99
§ 96.57 ENCROACHING OR OBSTRUCTING SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, maintain, or cause to be
placed or maintained any object in such a manner as to encroach upon or
obstruct any portion of a sidewalk to the degree that the object impedes the
free passage on and use of the entire width of the sidewalk by the public.
   (B)   This section does not apply to:
      (1)   Signs, barricades or other traffic control devices lawfully in
place;
      (2)   Objects lawfully in place for the purpose of providing utilities or
governmental services, such as utility lines or fire hoses; or
      (3)   Any other object otherwise permitted or required by law to encroach
upon or obstruct the sidewalk.
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80; Am. Ord. 2000-34, passed 10-24-00) 
Penalty, see § 96.99
§ 96.58  PLACING PLANTS NEAR FIRE HYDRANTS.
   It shall be unlawful for either the owner or the occupant of any property in
the city to place, maintain, or permit or cause to be placed or maintained
thereon any tree, plant, or object within five feet of any fire hydrant in the
city.
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80) 
Penalty, see § 96.99
§ 96.59  MINIMUM CLEARANCE OF TREES IN SIDEWALK AREAS.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any property in the city
to maintain or permit limbs of trees growing thereon to overhang or grow above
the area between his property line and the curb line of any abutting street,
unless such limbs and all branches and foliage thereon are kept trimmed and
pruned to a minimum clearance of eight feet above the street level at the
nearest curb line.
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80) 
Penalty, see § 96.99
§ 96.60  ENCROACHING ON OR OBSTRUCTING ROADWAYS AND ALLEYS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, maintain, or cause to be
placed or maintained any object in such a manner as to encroach upon or
obstruct any portion of a roadway or alley to the degree that the object
impedes the free passage on and use of the entire width of the roadway or alley
by the public.
   (B)   This section does not apply to:
      (1)   Vehicles lawfully traveling on, or parked or stopped in or upon,
the roadway or alley;
      (2)   Signs, barricades or other traffic control devices lawfully in
place;
      (3)   Objects lawfully in place for the purpose of providing utilities or
governmental services, such as utility lines or fire hoses; or
      (4)   Any other object otherwise permitted or required by law to encroach
upon or obstruct the roadway or alley.
(Ord. 80-04, passed 6-10-80; Am. Ord. 2000-34, passed 10-24-00)
ENFORCEMENT AND MAINTENANCE
§ 96.70  ABATEMENT OF VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer shall determine that any
violation of this chapter has occurred, he shall send a written notice to the
violator.
   (B)   The notice must state that the violation must be corrected and removed
not later than the tenth day after the date of the notice.
   (C)   If the violation is not corrected or remedied within ten days
following the date of the notice required by this section, the Code Enforcement
Officer is authorized and directed to correct or remove the violation, and to
assess the expense of such correction or removal against the violator.
   (D)   This section shall not be construed to limit the authority granted by
any other law for a police officer or other authorized person to remove an
object which is obstructing traffic.
   (E)   The court may order abatement and removal of the source of an
obstruction or encroachment on conviction of an offense under this chapter.
(Ord. 2000-34, passed 10-24-00)
§ 96.71  TRIMMING AND REMOVAL OF PLANTS AND TREES IN AND OVER STREETS.
   The Operations Manager is authorized and directed to remove plants and trees
found in any street. The Operations Manager is further authorized and directed
to trim branches, limbs, and foliage of any plant or tree which overhangs or
grows above any street, so as to provide a minimum clearance of eight feet
above the street level at the curb line, and so as to be graduated toward the
center of the street to a minimum clearance of 12 feet above the street level
at the center of the street.
(Ord. 2000-34, passed 10-24-00)
§ 96.99  PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no penalty
is otherwise provided shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
10.99.
CHAPTER 97:  AIRPORT REGULATIONS
Section
Joint Airport Zoning
   
97.01   Adoption of Killeen Municipal Airport Hazard Zoning Ordinance
   
97.02   Killeen/Harker Heights, Bell County Joint Airport Zoning Board created
   
97.03   Composition
JOINT AIRPORT ZONING
§ 97.01  ADOPTION OF KILLEEN MUNICIPAL AIRPORT HAZARD ZONING ORDINANCE.
   The Killeen Municipal Airport Hazard Zoning Ordinance is hereby adopted by
the Killeen, Harker Heights, Bell County Joint Airport Zoning Board, and is
incorporated into this code of ordinances as if fully set forth herein. Such
ordinance may not be amended by action of the City Council.
(Ord. 88-13, passed 4-26-88)
§ 97.02  KILLEEN/HARKER HEIGHTS, BELL COUNTY JOINT AIRPORT ZONING BOARD
CREATED.
   Subject to like provisions being made by the City Council of the City of
Killeen, Texas, and the Commissioner's Court of Bell County, Texas, by proper
order, duly promulgated and entered on their minutes, and as authorized by the
provision of Tex. Loc. Gov't Code §§ 241.001 et seq., there is hereby created a
Joint Airport Zoning Board, to be known as the Killeen, Harker Heights, Bell
County Joint Airport Zoning Board, which shall have the powers and exercise the
duties set forth in Tex. Loc. Gov't Code § 241.014, as it may be amended from
time to time.
(Ord. 87-28, passed 8-11-87)
§ 97.03  COMPOSITION.
   The Killeen, Harker Heights, Bell County Joint Airport Zoning Board shall be
composed of seven members, two to be appointed by the City Council of the City
of Killeen, Texas, two to be appointed by the City Council of the City of
Harker Heights, Texas, and two members to be appointed by the Commissioner's
Court of Bell County, Texas. The seventh member shall be elected by a majority
of members so appointed and the seventh member shall serve as Chairperson of
the Board.
(Ord. 87-28, passed 8-11-87)
CHAPTER 98:  FAIR HOUSING
Section
General Provisions
   
98.01   Declaration of policy
   
98.02   Definitions
   
98.03   Interpretation and effect
   
98.04   Discrimination in sale or rental of housing
   
98.05   Discrimination in housing financing
   
98.06   Discrimination in providing brokerage service
   
98.07   Unlawful intimidation
   
98.08   Exemptions and exclusions
   
98.09   Violations
Administration and Enforcement
   
98.20   Enforcement
 
   
98.99   Penalty
General Provisions
§ 98.01  DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   (A)   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to bring about
through fair, orderly and lawful procedure, the opportunity of each person to
obtain housing without regard to race, color, creed, religion, sex, national
origin, physical or mental handicap, marital status, parenthood, or age.
   (B)   It is further declared that such policy is established upon a
recognition of the inalienable rights of each individual to obtain housing
without regard to race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical
or mental handicap, marital status, parenthood, age; and further that the
denial of such rights through considerations based on race, color, creed,
religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, marital status,
parenthood, or age is detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the
inhabitants of the city and constitutes an unjust denial or deprivation of such
inalienable rights which is within the power and the proper responsibility of
government to prevent.
(Ord. 96-53, passed 10-8-96)
§ 98.02  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGE.  The calendar age of an individual 18 years of age or over.
   CREED.  Any set of principles, rules, opinions and precepts formally
expressed and seriously adhered to or maintained by a person.
   DIRECTOR.  The Director of Emergency Services.
   DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE.  An act which is unlawful under this
chapter.
   DWELLING.  Any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as,
or designed and intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more persons
and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or
location thereof of any such building, structure or portion thereof.
   FAMILY.  A single individual or a group of individuals living together under
one common roof.
   MAJOR LIFE ACTIVITIES.  Functions such as, but not limited to, caring for
one's self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking,
breathing, learning and working.
   MARITAL STATUS.  An individual's status as single, married, divorced,
widowed or separated person.
   PARENTHOOD.  A person's status as a parent or legal guardian of a child or
children under the age of 18.
   PERSON.  One or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations,
labor  organizations, legal  representatives, mutual companies, joint stock
companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in
bankruptcy, receivers and fiduciaries.
   PHYSICAL OR MENTAL HANDICAP.  Any physical or mental impairment which
substantially limits one or more major life activities.
   PHYSICAL OR MENTAL IMPAIRMENT shall include:
      (1)   Any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement or
anatomical loss affecting one or more of the following body systems:
neurological; musculoskeletal; special sense organs; respiratory including
speech organs; cardiovascular; reproductive; digestive; genitourinary; hemic
and lymphatic; skin; and endocrine; or
      (2)   Any mental or psychological disorder, such as mental retardation,
organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness, and specific learning
disabilities.
   TO RENT includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a
consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant.
   SENIOR ADULT.  A person 55 years of age or older.
(Ord. 96-53, passed 10-8-96; Am. Ord. 2007-14, passed 4-10-07)
§ 98.03  INTERPRETATION AND EFFECT.
   This chapter shall in no way be interpreted as creating a judicial right or
remedy which is the same or substantially equivalent to the remedies provided
under Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended for the Federal
Equal Credit Opportunity Act (15 U.S.C. 1691).  All aggrieved parties shall
retain the rights granted to them by Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of
1968, as amended and the Federal Equal Credit Opportunity Act.  In construing
this act, it is the intent of the City Council that the courts shall be guided
by Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended and the Federal Equal
Credit Opportunity Act, where appropriate.
(Ord. 96-53, passed 10-8-96)
§ 98.04  DISCRIMINATION IN SALE OR RENTAL OF HOUSING.
   Except as exempted, it shall be unlawful:
   (A)   To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer or to
refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or
deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, creed, religion, sex,
national origin, physical or mental handicap, marital status, parenthood, or
age.
   (B)   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or
privileges of a sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services or
facilities in connection therewith because of race, color, creed, religion,
sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, marital status, parenthood,
or age.
   (C)   To make, print or publish, or cause to be made, printed or published,
any notice, statement or advertisement with respect to the sale or rental of a
dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation of discrimination based on
race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental
handicap, marital status, parenthood or age, or an intention to make any such
preference, limitation or discrimination.
   (D)   To represent to any person because of race, color, creed, religion,
sex, national  origin, physical  or mental handicap, marital status,
parenthood, or age that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale, or
rental when such dwelling is in fact so available.
   (E)   To induce or to attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any
dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the
neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, creed,
religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, marital status,
parenthood, or age.
(Ord. 96-53, passed 10-8-96)
§ 98.05  DISCRIMINATION IN HOUSING FINANCING.
   It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance
company, or other person whose business consists in whole or in part in the
making of commercial real estate loans to deny a loan or other financial
assistance to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing,
constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling or to discriminate
against him/her in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration or other
terms or conditions of such loan or other financial assistance because of the
race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental
handicap, marital status, parenthood, or age of such person or such persons
associated therewith or because of the race, color, creed, religion, sex,
national origin, physical or mental handicap, marital status, parenthood, or
age of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants or occupants of the
dwelling or dwellings for which such loan or other financial assistance is to
be made or given.
(Ord. 96-53, passed 10-8-96)
§ 98.06  DISCRIMINATION IN PROVIDING BROKERAGE SERVICE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to deny another person access to
membership in, or participation in any multiple listing service, real estate
brokers' organization, or other service, organization or facility relating to
the business of selling or renting dwellings or to discriminate against another
person in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation,
on account of race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or
mental handicap, marital status, parenthood, or age.
(Ord. 96-53, passed 10-8-96)
§ 98.07  UNLAWFUL INTIMIDATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to harass, threaten, harm, damage, or
otherwise penalize any individual, group or business because such individual,
group or business has complied with the provision of this chapter or has
exercised in good faith rights under this chapter, or has enjoyed the benefits
of this chapter, or because such individual, group, or business has made a
charge in good faith, testified in good faith or assisted in good faith in any
manner in any investigation, or any proceeding hereunder or has made any report
to the Director.
(Ord. 96-53, passed 10-8-96)
§ 98.08  EXEMPTIONS AND EXCLUSIONS.
   (A)   Nothing in this chapter shall apply to:
      (1)   Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner, provided that:
         (a)   Such private individual owner does not own more than three
single-family houses at any one time; and,
         (b)   If the owner does not reside in the house at the time of the
sale or was not the most recent resident of such house prior to sale, the
exemption granted by this division (A)(1)(b) shall apply only with respect to
one such sale within any 24-month period; and,
         (c)   Such bona fide private individual owner does not own any
interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on such person's behalf, under any
expressed voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or any portion of
the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three such single-family
houses at any one time; and,
         (d)   The sale or rental is made without the use in any manner of the
sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental service of any real estate
broker, agent or salesman, or of such facilities or services of any person in
the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of
any such broker, agent, salesman, or person; and,
         (e)   The sale or rental is made without the publication, posting or
mailing of any advertisement or written notice in violation of this chapter;
but nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow
agents, abstractors, title companies and other such professional assistance as
necessary to perfect or transfer the title.
      (2)   Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or
intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of
each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living
quarters as his/her residence.
   (B)   For the purposes of division (A) of this section, a person shall be
deemed to be in the business of selling or renting dwelling if:
      (1)   He/she has within the preceding 12 months, participated as
principle in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any
dwelling or any interest therein: or,
      (2)   He/she has within the preceding 12 months, participated as agent,
other than in the sale of his/her own personal residence in providing sales or
rental facilities or sales or rental services in two or more transactions
involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or,
      (3)   He/she is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for
occupancy by, or occupied by five or more families.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious organization,
association or society, or a nonprofit institution or organization operated,
supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization,
association or society from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings
which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the
same religion or from giving preference to such person, unless membership in
such religion is restricted on account of race, color, sex, national origin,
physical or mental handicap, marital status, parenthood, or age.
   (D)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a private club not in fact open
to the public which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides
lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from
limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members, or from
giving preference to its members.
   (E)   Nothing in this chapter shall bar any person from owning and operating
a housing accommodation in which rooms are leased, subleased or rented only to
persons of the same sex, when such housing accommodation contains common
lavatory, kitchen or similar facilities available for the use of all persons
occupying such housing accommodation.
   (F)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the sale, rental, lease or
occupancy of any dwelling designed and operated exclusively for senior adults
and their spouses, unless the sale, rental, lease or occupancy is further
restricted on account of race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin,
physical or mental handicap and marital status.
   (G)   Nothing in this chapter shall bar a person who owns, operates, or
controls rental dwellings whether located on the same property or on one or
more contiguous parcels of property, from reserving any grouping of dwellings
for the rental or lease to tenants with a minor child or children; provided,
however, in the event that the reserved area is completely leased or rented,
the person owning, operating or controlling the rental dwelling may not refuse
to rent or lease any other available dwelling to the prospective tenant on the
basis of the tenant's status as parent or any other of the protected
classifications set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 96-53, passed 10-8-96)
§ 98.09  VIOLATIONS.
   No person shall violate any provision of this chapter, or knowingly obstruct
or prevent compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 96-53, passed 10-8-96)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 98.20  ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Generally.  The Director shall have the responsibility of
administering and implementing this chapter.  The Director may delegate the
authority to investigate and conciliate complaints to other designated city
employees.
   (B)   Complaints­Generally.
      (1)   Any  person who  claims  to  have  been  injured  by  a
discriminatory housing practice or who believes that he/she will be irrevocably
injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur
(hereinafter referred to as the "charging party") may file a complaint with the
Director. Such complaints shall be in writing and shall identify the person
alleged to have committed or alleged to be committing a discriminatory housing
practice and shall state the facts upon which the allegations of a
discriminatory housing practice are based. The Director shall prepare complaint
forms and furnish them without charge to any person upon request.
      (2)   The Director shall receive and accept notification and referral
complaints from the U.S. Attorney General and the Secretary of Housing and
Urban Development pursuant to the provision of Title VIII, Fair Housing Act of
1968, Public Law 90-284, and shall treat such complaints hereunder in the same
manner as complaints filed pursuant to division (A) of this section.
      (3)   All complaints shall be filed within 180 days following the
occurrence of an alleged discriminatory housing practice. Upon the filing or
referral of any complaint, the Director shall provide notice of the complaint
by furnishing a copy of such complaint to the person named therein (hereinafter
referred to as the "respondent") who allegedly committed or were threatening to
commit an alleged discriminatory housing practice.  The respondent may file an
answer to the complaint within 15 days of receipt of the written complaint.
      (4)   All complaints and answers shall be subscribed and sworn to before
an officer authorized to administer oaths.
      (5)   If at any time the Director shall receive or discover credible
evidence and shall have probable cause to believe that any person or persons
have committed a discriminatory housing practice as to which no complaint has
been filed or is about to be filed, the Director may prepare and file a
complaint upon his/her own motion and in his/her own name and such complaint
shall thereafter be treated in the same manner as a complaint filed by a person
aggrieved.
   (C)   Investigation and Conciliation.
      (1)   Upon the filing or referral of a complaint as herein provided, the
Director shall cause to be made a prompt and full investigation of the matter
stated in the complaint; provided, however, that before any charge becomes
accepted for investigative purposes, the Director or investigator shall have
personally reviewed with the charging party the allegations contained therein
and shall have determined that the charge comes within the provisions of this
chapter.  In the event such review results in the determination that a
particular charge does not come within the provisions of this chapter, the
charging party shall be given a clear and concise explanation of the reasons
why it does not.
      (2)   If the Director determines that there is not probable cause to
believe that a particular alleged discriminatory housing practice has been
committed, the Director shall take no further action with respect to that
alleged offense.
      (3)   During or after the investigation, but subsequent to the mailing of
the notice of complaint, the Director shall, if it appears that a
discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is threatening to occur,
attempt by informal endeavors to effect conciliation, including voluntary
discontinuance of the discriminatory housing practice and to obtain adequate
assurance of future voluntary compliance with provisions of this chapter. 
Nothing said or done in the course of such informal endeavors may be made
public by the Director, the Commission, the investigator, the conciliator, the
charging party, or the respondent, or be used as evidence in a subsequent
proceeding without the written consent of all persons concerned.
      (4)   Upon completion of an investigation where the Director has made a
determination that a discriminatory housing practice has in fact occurred, if
the Director is unable to secure from the respondent an acceptable conciliation
agreement, then the Director shall refer the case to the City Attorney for
prosecution in municipal court or to other agencies as appropriate. The City
Attorney shall, after such referral make a determination as to whether to
proceed with prosecution of such complaint in municipal court.
(Ord. 96-53, passed 10-8-96; Am. Ord. 2007-14, passed 4-10-07)
§ 98.99  PENALTY.
   If a discriminatory housing practice is found to have in fact occurred and
the case has been referred to municipal court, the respondent shall be assessed
a penalty of not less than $300 per violation.
(Ord. 96-53, passed 10-8-96)
CHAPTER 99:  ALARMS REGULATIONS
Section
   
99.01   Definitions
   
99.02   Proper alarm system operation and maintenance
   
99.03   Manual reset required
   
99.04   Inspection
   
99.05   Notification of false alarms
   
99.06   False alarm service charges
   
99.07   Termination of alarm service or response by city
   
99.08   Appeal from false alarm service charges, suspension of response or
order to discontinue service
   
99.09   Indirect alarm reporting
   
99.10   Protection of financial institutions
   
99.11   Confidentiality
   
99.12   Fee amounts
   
99.13   Offenses
   
99.14   Fee schedule
§ 99.01  DEFINITIONS.
   The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this chapter and shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
   ALARM ADMINISTRATOR.  The City Manager and not a police officer or a
firefighter of the city.
   ALARM SITE.  A premises or location serviced by an alarm system.
   ALARM SYSTEM.  A device or system that transmits or relays a signal intended
to summon police, fire, medical or other emergency services of the city, as
illustrated by, but not limited to, local alarms. ALARM SYSTEM does not
include:
      (1)   An alarm carried by a person or installed on a vehicle, unless the
vehicle is permanently installed at the site and is used for a habitation;
      (2)   An alarm designed to alert only the occupants of the alarm site; or
      (3)   An alarm installed upon premises occupied or used by the city.
   ALARM USER.  Any person who uses, operates, or causes to be used or operated
an alarm system in the city.
   BURGLAR ALARM NOTIFICATION.  The notification intended to summon the police,
which is initiated or triggered manually or by an alarm system designed to
respond to a stimulus characteristic of unauthorized intrusion.
   DIRECTOR.  The Chief of Police or Fire Chief.
   EMERGENCY MEDICAL ASSISTANCE ALARM.  An alarm system which is intended to
summon emergency medical assistance.
   FIRE ALARM NOTIFICATION. Notification to summon the Fire Department
initiated or triggered manually or by an alarm system designed to respond to
smoke, fire or other stimulus characteristic of fire.
   FALSE BURGLAR ALARM  NOTIFICATION.  A burglar alarm notification from a site
at which the responding police officer, after an inspection of the interior or
exterior of the premises, finds no evidence of unauthorized intrusion or
attempted unauthorized intrusion, and the response by the police officer is
made within 30 minutes of the alarm notification.
   FALSE EMERGENCY MEDICAL ASSISTANCE ALARM NOTIFICATION.  An emergency medical
assistance alarm notification from a site at which the responding public safety
personnel find there is no evidence of need for medical assistance.
   FALSE FIRE ALARM NOTIFICATION.  A fire alarm notification from a site at
which the responding fire personnel find no evidence of fire.
   FALSE ROBBERY ALARM  NOTIFICATION.  A robbery alarm notification from a site
at which the responding police officer finds no evidence of a robbery.
   LOCAL ALARM.  An alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site that is
audible or visible from the exterior of a structure and has as its primary
purpose the summoning of aid from a city department.
   ROBBERY ALARM NOTIFICATION.  A notification by means of an alarm system
designed to be purposely activated by a human to summon the police when a
robbery occurs.
(Ord. 2001-19, passed 6-12-01)
§ 99.02  PROPER ALARM SYSTEM OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   An alarm user shall:
      (1)   Cause an adjustment to be made to the sensory mechanisms of an
alarm system so that the alarm system will not be activated by forces unrelated
to actual unauthorized intrusions or emergencies.
      (2)   Maintain the premises containing an alarm system in a manner that
ensures proper operation of the alarm system.
      (3)   Comply with applicable Underwriters Laboratories restrictions or
guidelines with reference to the alarm system or alarm equipment.
      (4)   Adjust the mechanism so that an alarm signal will sound for not
longer than or 15 minutes after being activated for systems operating under
Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. standards 365 or 609, or ten minutes after
being activated for all other systems.
      (5)   Provide personnel who will, within 30 minutes after being notified,
reset the alarm system and provide access to the premises. Nothing herein shall
be construed to limit or prevent the authority of public safety personnel to
forcibly enter a premises when authorized by law.
      (6)   Maintain at the alarm site a complete set of legible written
operating instructions for each alarm system installed at that site.
   (B)   If the alarm user, or his or her designee, fails to respond to the
alarm site within 30 minutes to reset the alarm system and provide access to
the premises, a fee will be assessed to the alarm user in the manner set forth
in §
99.06, in addition to the actual expenses incurred in securing the premises and
any other fees authorized by this chapter.
(Ord. 2001-19, passed 6-12-01)
§ 99.03  MANUAL RESET REQUIRED.
   A person in control of a local alarm or an alarm system that causes an alarm
notification to be sent directly to city personnel shall adjust or cause the
adjustment of the mechanism so that upon activation of the system, the system
will transmit only one alarm signal and will not transmit another alarm signal
without first being manually reset.
(Ord. 2001-19, passed 6-12-01)
§ 99.04  INSPECTION.
   Upon reasonable notification, the Alarm Administrator or the Director may
inspect an alarm site, alarm system, and written system operating instructions
of an alarm user.
(Ord. 2001-19, passed 6-12-01)
§ 99.05  NOTIFICATION OF FALSE ALARMS.
   (A)   The Alarm Administrator shall establish a procedure for written
notification to the alarm user of a false alarm. Options include but are not
limited to the responding personnel leaving a door hanger or notice at the
alarm site.
   (B)   At a minimum, a notification pursuant to this section shall specify
the following:
      (1)   The date and time of response to the alarm;
      (2)   The name or identification number of one or more of the responding
personnel; and
      (3)   A statement urging the alarm user to ensure that the system is
properly operated, inspected, and serviced in order to avoid false alarms and
resulting fines.
   (C)   A failure by the Alarm Administrator to give the notice required by
this section, or the failure of the alarm user to receive such notice, shall
neither invalidate or impair the assessment of any fee assessed pursuant to
this chapter, nor shall such failure constitute a defense to prosecution for
any violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 2001-19, passed 6-12-01)
§ 99.06  FALSE ALARM SERVICE CHARGES.
   (A)   If, within any 12 month period occurring after the effective date of
this chapter, five false burglar alarm notifications are made from an alarm
site, the Alarm Administrator shall assess the alarm user at that alarm site a
fee for each subsequent false burglar alarm notification made from the site
during the 12 month period.
   (B)   The Alarm Administrator shall assess an alarm user for each false
robbery alarm notification emitted from the alarm site.
   (C)   If, within any 12 month period occurring after the effective date of
this chapter, two false fire alarm notifications are made from an alarm site,
the Alarm Administrator shall assess the alarm user at that alarm site a fee
for each subsequent false fire alarm notification emitted from the site during
the 12 month period.
   (D)   If, within any 12 month period occurring after the effective date of
this chapter, two false emergency medical assistance alarm notifications are
made from an alarm site, the Alarm Administrator shall assess the alarm user at
that alarm site a fee for each subsequent false emergency medical assistance
alarm notification made from the site during the 12 month period.
   (E)   The Alarm Administrator shall send written notice to the alarm user of
any fee assessed under this chapter. The notice shall be hand delivered to the
alarm user, or sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the alarm
user at the alarm user's last known address.
   (F)   An alarm user shall pay any fee assessed under this chapter within 30
days after the date the fee is assessed.
   (G)   No fee shall be assessed pursuant to this section, if:
      (1)   The alarm notification is cancelled prior to city personnel
arriving at the alarm site; or
      (2)   The alarm is shown by the alarm user to have been, in the Alarm
Administrator's sole determination, justified, or due to a natural or man made
catastrophe or other situation specifically exempted by the Alarm
Administrator.
(Ord. 2001-19, passed 6-12-01)
§ 99.07  TERMINATION OF ALARM SERVICE OR RESPONSE BY CITY.
   (A)    Police and Fire Department responses to alarm system notifications
may be terminated if any service charge assessed pursuant to §
99.06 has not been paid and the Alarm Administrator determines, in his sole
discretion, that the system in question has a history of unreliability, which
unreliability shall be conclusively established if within any 12 month period
the system generates:
      (1)   Six false burglar alarms; or
      (2)   Three false robbery alarms; or
      (3)   Three false fire alarms; or
      (4)   Three false medical emergency assistance alarms.
   The Director shall give written notification of response termination to the
owner or occupant of the premises at least 30 days prior to the effective date
of response termination. Notice may be given by posting same outside the main
entrance to the primary structure at the site, or by mailing same via regular
and certified mail, return receipt requested, to the premises.
   (B)   Police and Fire Department responses to alarm system notifications may
be reinstated upon a sufficient showing that the conditions which caused the
false alarms have been corrected and if the Alarm Administrator determines that
the alarm system is likely to be maintained and operated in a responsible
manner in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Until the system is repaired to the satisfaction of the Alarm
Administrator, the Alarm Administrator may require discontinuation of service
of an alarm system that, because of mechanical malfunction or faulty equipment,
causes at least five false alarms of any type within a 12 month period.
(Ord. 2001-19, passed 6-12-01)
§ 99.08  APPEAL FROM FALSE ALARM SERVICE CHARGES, SUSPENSION OF RESPONSE OR
ORDER TO DISCONTINUE SERVICE.
   (A)   If the Alarm Administrator assesses a false alarm service charge,
suspends Police or Fire Department responses to alarm system notifications, or
orders service of an alarm system discontinued, the Alarm Administrator shall
send notice to the applicant or alarm user by certified mail, return receipt
requested, setting forth the Alarm Administrator's decision and a statement of
the right to an appeal. The applicant or alarm user may appeal the decision of
the Alarm Administrator to the City Council by filing with the City Secretary a
written request for a hearing, setting forth the reasons for the appeal, within
14 days after the notice was mailed by the Alarm Administrator. The filing of a
request for an appeal hearing with the City Secretary stays an action of the
Alarm Administrator until the City Council makes a final decision. If a request
for an appeal hearing is not made within the 14 day period, the action of the
Alarm Administrator is final as to administrative remedies of the city.
   (B)   The City Council shall conduct a hearing on the appeal and consider
evidence offered by any interested person. The formal rules of evidence do not
apply at an appeal hearing, but the City Council may adopt rules for the
orderly conduct of the hearing and shall make a decision on the basis of a
preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing. The City Council shall
render a decision within 45 days after the request for an appeal hearing is
filed, and if no decision is made within that time the decision of the Alarm
Administrator shall be deemed affirmed. The City Council may affirm, reverse,
or modify the action of the Alarm Administrator, and its decision is final as
to administrative remedies of  the city.
(Ord. 2001-19, passed 6-12-01)
§ 99.09  INDIRECT ALARM REPORTING.
   (A)   A person who is engaged in the business of relaying alarm
notifications to the city shall:
      (1)   Be licensed by the Texas Board of Private Investigators and Private
Security Agencies;
      (2)   Send notification of an alarm to the city by a human operator;
      (3)   Allow an inspection of the business premises by the Alarm
Administrator or Director at any time;
      (4)   Report alarms only over a special telephone number, or numbers,
designated by the Alarm Administrator;
      (5)   Send alarm notifications to the city in a manner and form
determined by the Alarm Administrator;
      (6)   Attempt to verify every automatic alarm notification before
relaying the alarm notification to the city;
      (7)   Promptly notify the city upon determining that the notification has
been cancelled or does not require response by city personnel; and
      (8)   Maintain all records relating to alarm notifications relayed to the
city for a period of at least one year after the date of the alarm
notification, and make those records available for inspection by the Alarm
Administrator or the Director upon request.
   (B)   An alarm user shall not knowingly report alarm signals through a
relaying intermediary that does not meet the requirements of this chapter and
any rules and regulations promulgated by the Alarm Administrator.
(Ord. 2001-19, passed 6-12-01)
§ 99.10  PROTECTION OF FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS.
   (A)   A financial institution required by applicable law to have an alarm
system may install, with permission of the Chief of Police, a signal line
directly to the Police Department for the purpose of reporting burglaries and
robberies. Such an installation, if approved, must comply with all applicable
provisions of this chapter. The financial institution shall execute a letter of
agreement with the city permitting the installation, at the financial
institution’s expense, of all necessary equipment on an indicator panel
monitored in the communications division of the Police Department.
   (B)   The financial institution, at its expense, shall provide service for
the alarm system on a 24 hour basis, seven days a week. In no event shall the
city become liable for service charges for repairs and maintenance to the
indicator panel monitor.
   (C)   The financial institution shall pay a monthly fee for each indicator.
The Chief of Police shall have the right, at reasonable times and upon oral
notice, to inspect the alarm system at the alarm site and require necessary
repairs or improvements. If the Chief of Police finds that the alarm system
continually fails to operate or be operated to his satisfaction, he may
terminate the privilege to have equipment and indicators in the communications
center of the Police Department and require prompt removal of same at the
expense of the financial institution.
   (D)   The financial institution may cancel its agreement with the city at
any time by giving the city written notice through the Chief of Police. Upon
giving such notice the institution, at its expense, shall have its equipment
and indicators promptly removed from the monitor panel in the communications
center.
   (E)   The Chief of Police has the right to require any change,
modernization, or consolidation of financial institution alarm signaling
equipment that he deems advisable. In no event shall the city become liable for
such changes.
   (F)   Instead of a direct line, a financial institution may choose to report
burglaries and robberies by transmission through an alarm reporting service
using a telephone number designated by the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 2001-19, passed 6-12-01)
§ 99.11  CONFIDENTIALITY.
   To the maximum extent permitted by law, information contained in
applications for appeals under this chapter shall be confidential and not
subject to public disclosure. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the
disclosure of such information as may be deemed necessary by the Alarm
Administrator to provide police or emergency service to an alarm site, or to
conduct a hearing on an appeal under this chapter.
(Ord. 2001-19, passed 6-12-01)
§ 99.12  FEE AMOUNTS.
   All fees established or permitted pursuant to this chapter shall be in the
amounts set forth in the then-current City Fee Schedule. The Council
specifically finds and determines such fees to be fair and equitable, and to
represent the actual expenses incurred by the city for responding to false
alarms.
(Ord. 2001-19, passed 6-12-01)
§ 99.13  OFFENSES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Intentionally or knowingly activate or cause to be activated any
alarm system except in an emergency which reasonably appears to require
response by city police, fire, medical, or other emergency services;
      (2)   Use, operate, or cause to be used or operated an alarm system
during a time when the Alarm Administrator has ordered that use of the system
be discontinued;
      (3)   Use, operate, or cause to be used or operated an alarm system that
sends more than one alarm signal to city personnel without such system first
being manually reset;
      (4)   Use, operate, or cause to be used or operated an alarm system that
sounds an alarm signal for longer than 15 minutes after being activated;
      (5)   Refuse, upon proper request by the Alarm Administrator or the
Director, to allow inspection of the person's alarm site, alarm system, or
written system operating instructions for the alarm system;
      (6)   Engage in the business of relaying alarm notifications to the city
without complying with §99.09 (A); or
      (7)   Intentionally or knowingly report alarm signals through a relaying
intermediary that does not meet the requirements of this chapter and any rules
and regulations promulgated by the Alarm Administrator.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person or business to use, operate or
energize an alarm system or alarm device which activates an automatic dialing
device which sends a signal to the city Police Department or Fire Department
except with the written approval of the Chief of Police and the Fire Marshall.
(Ord. 2001-19, passed 6-12-01)
§ 99.14  FEE SCHEDULE.
   Alarm system fees shall be as approved by the City Council as part of the
current fiscal year's operating budget. Violators of this chapter shall pay a
fee designated in the then-current Harker Heights Fee Schedule.
(Ord. 2001-19, passed 6-12-01)
CHAPTER 100:  SPECIAL EVENTS
Section
   
100.01   Purpose
   
100.02   Definitions
   
100.03   Permit required
   
100.04   Application for permit – filing and fee
   
100.05   Application for permit – form and content
   
100.06   Permit review; issuance or denial
   
100.07   General permit conditions
   
100.08   Special permit conditions
   
100.09   Revocation of permit
   
100.10   Appeal
   
100.11   Emergency suspension of event
   
100.12   Cordoning off the route or site of an event
   
100.13   Offenses
   
100.14   Fee Schedule
§ 100.01  PURPOSE.
   This chapter is adopted for the purpose of regulating parades, athletic
events, public assemblies and other such special events occurring on, near, or
within a city park or governmental facilities, or on a public street, sidewalk,
or other public right-of-way which might obstruct, delay, or otherwise
interfere with the normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or which do
not comply with applicable traffic laws or controls, or which may otherwise
require the special attention and involvement of city personnel or facilities.
Furthermore, it is the intent of this chapter to protect nearby property
owners, residents and businesses from special events that may be disruptive,
obnoxious, unsafe, or inappropriate given site conditions, traffic patterns,
land use characteristics, and the nature of the proposed use.
(Ord. 2001-28, passed 8-28-01)
§ 100.02  DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General definitions.  For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
   AGGRIEVED PERSON.   Any person who is adversely affected by a determination
made or action taken by a city officer or employee pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter in a manner significantly greater than the public generally,
including, but not limited to, any applicant for a permit required by this
chapter who is adversely affected by the action of a city official denying or
revoking such permit.
   ATHLETIC EVENT.   Any organized event in which a group of persons
collectively engage in a sport or form of competitive physical exercise,
including without limitation jogging, running, racing, bicycling, and roller
skating.
   EXERCISE OF FREE SPEECH RIGHTS.   The articulation of a verbal statement,
distribution of literature, or other expressive conduct, the primary purpose of
which is to convey a religious, political, philosophical, or ideological
message to others, and any other expressive conduct protected by the
Constitution of Texas or of the United States.
   PARADE.   Any organized march or procession on a festive, ceremonial, or
special occasion of a group of persons, animals, or vehicles.
   PUBLIC ASSEMBLY.   Any group of people gathered for the common purpose of
participating in an organized demonstration, rally, or other organized
activity.
   SPECIAL EVENT.
      (1)   A parade, athletic event, public assembly, or any other organized
gathering of persons which takes place on a periodic or special occasion, and
which occurs:
         (a)   Wholly or partially on or within a publicly maintained facility,
park, street, sidewalk, alley, or right-of-way; or
         (b)   Wholly or partially on privately owned property if the parade,
athletic event, public assembly, or other gathering obstructs, delays, or
otherwise interferes with the normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic in
or on a publicly maintained facility, park, street, sidewalk, alley, or right-
of-way.
      (2)   The term does not include:
         (a)   Funeral processions;
         (b)   A procession of vehicles operated in compliance with ordinary
traffic laws upon a street;
         (c)   Any activity performed by persons, including officers, agents,
or employees of the city, during the course of an event sponsored by the city,
or in the course of performing official duties on behalf of the city;
         (d)   Any activity performed by any other person pursuant to his or
her duties and powers as a public official; or
         (e)   Any small, informal gathering of persons, the activities of
which are consistent with the usual, customary, and routine uses of the
facility or grounds upon which the gathering occurs, which activities do not
impair the customary use such facility or grounds by others, and which do not
require a coordinated response by municipal staff to provide police, fire, or
emergency medical protection, traffic control, and the like.
   (B)   Other definitions.  The definitions set forth in "Traffic, Traffic
Areas, and Traffic Control," Chapter 541, Subchapter D, (Texas Transportation
Code) are hereby adopted as such definitions may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 2001-28, passed 8-28-01)
§ 100.03  PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   A permit approved and issued in a manner provided by this chapter
shall be required for any special event within the city.
   (B)   A special events permit is non-transferable and any attempted or
purported transfer shall immediately void the permit.
   (C)   Neither any provision of this chapter nor the issuance of a permit
under this chapter shall be construed to authorize any act in violation of any
other applicable law or rule, including without limitation
Chapter 51, Title VII,
Chapter 90,
Chapter 95,
Chapter 96, or Title XIII.
(Ord. 2001-28, passed 8-28-01)
§ 100.04  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT –  FILING AND FEE.
   (A)   Applications for a special events permit shall be filed with the City
Secretary at least 30 days prior to the start of the event. The time for filing
an application for a permit authorizing any event may be waived if the City
Manager determines that sufficient time remains to review, investigate, and act
on the application in the manner required by this chapter.  However, where an
application for a permit is not filed at least 30 days prior to the start of
the event, any right to appeal to the City Council shall be deemed waived if
there is insufficient time for such appeal.
   (B)   Every application for a permit under this chapter shall be accompanied
by a non-refundable application fee in an amount established by the City
Council in the City Fee Schedule, which permit fee shall be used to defray the
costs related to the issuance of such permit and which shall be in addition to
such further and additional special event fees as may be imposed by this
chapter.
(Ord. 2001-28, passed 8-28-01)
§ 100.05  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT –  FORM AND CONTENT.
   (A)   Filing of applications.  Applications for a special events permit
shall be filed by a natural person in a form prescribed by the City Manager,
shall be verified, and shall contain the information required by this section.
   (B)   Information required for all events. All applications shall contain:
      (1)   The name, home and business address, and home and business
telephone numbers of the person filing the application;
      (2)   If the event is to be conducted by an entity or organization, the
name, address, and telephone number of the entity or organization, the name,
home and business address, and home and business telephone number of the
president, leader, or other head of the entity or organization, and
documentation of the authority under which the applicant is applying for the
permit on behalf of the organization;
      (3)   The name, home and business address, and home and business
telephone number of each person who will be present and in charge of the event
on the day of the event;
      (4)   The name, home and business address, and home and business
telephone number of any person to be employed to monitor or supervise the
event;
      (5)   The nature of the event;
      (6)   The proposed date and estimated starting and ending time of the
event;
      (7)   The proposed location of the event, including its boundaries;
      (8)   The estimated number of participants in the event;
      (9)   The type and estimated number of vehicles, animals, and structures
which will be used in the event;
      (10)   A description of any sound amplification equipment to be employed
at the event;
      (11)   The parking requirements for the event; and
      (12)   A drawing showing access routes for emergency vehicles, and the
location of any food, water, sanitary facilities, or first aid stations to be
provided at the event. The drawing need not be to scale.
   (C)   Additional information required for parades. In addition to the
information required by division (B) of this section, every application for a
permit to authorize a parade shall include the following information:
      (1)   The time when units of the parade will begin to assemble;
      (2)   The proposed assembly point for the parade;
      (3)   The proposed parade route;
      (4)   The interval space to be maintained between units of the parade;
      (5)   The number, type, and size of floats; and
      (6)   The composition and maximum size of any signs or banners to be
carried along the parade route.
   (D)   Supplemental information.  In addition to other information required
by this section, applications shall include such supplemental information which
the City Manager shall find reasonably necessary, given the nature of the
event, in order to determine whether to approve or disapprove a permit
authorizing such event in the manner hereinafter provided by this chapter.
(Ord. 2001-28, passed 8-28-01)
§ 100.06  PERMIT REVIEW; ISSUANCE OR DENIAL.
   (A)   Upon the filing of a properly completed application and fee for a
permit under this chapter, the City Manager shall immediately forward the
application to the Chief of Police, the Director of Emergency Services, and the
head of any other municipal department affected by the event for review and
recommendation.
   (B)   The City Manager shall either approve or disapprove the application as
soon as practicable, but in any event not later than ten days from the date of
filing the application and all necessary supplemental information. Except as
provided in division (D) of this section, the failure of the City Manager to
deny the application within such time shall result in the administrative
approval of the application.
   (C)   The City Manager shall approve the issuance of a permit under this
chapter unless the City Manager determines that:
      (1)   The applicant has failed to properly complete the application or
has failed to provide supplemental information as required by
§ 100.05;
      (2)   The information contained in the application, including
supplemental information, is found to be false or misleading in any material
respect;
      (3)   An application for another event to be held on the same date as
that requested by the applicant has been previously filed or approved, and as a
result of the proximity or size of such other event, the event proposed by the
applicant would cause undue traffic congestion or seriously impair the city's
ability to provide proper and efficient police, fire, or ambulance services;
      (4)   The time, route, or size of the event will substantially disrupt
the safe and orderly movement of traffic contiguous to the site or route of the
event, or disrupt the use of a street during peak traffic periods;
      (5)   The concentration of persons, animals, or vehicles at the site of
the event or at the site of an assembly or disbanding area around the event
will prevent proper police, fire, or ambulance services to areas contiguous to
the event;
      (6)   The location or size of the event will seriously jeopardize or
impair police, fire, or ambulance service to the event or other areas in the
city, provided, however, that nothing herein authorizes the denial of a permit
because of the need to protect event participants from the unlawful conduct of
others;
      (7)   The event consists of a parade or athletic event moving along a
route which will not move from its point of origin to its point of termination
in ten hours or less;
      (8)   The location of the event will substantially interfere with
construction or maintenance work previously scheduled to take place on or along
the city street, sidewalk, or other public right-of-way to be occupied by the
event;
      (9)   The event will occur at a time when a school is in session and
along a route or at a location adjacent to the school or a class thereof, and
the event will substantially disrupt access to or educational activity at the
school or class;
          (10)   The event would violate any applicable law or regulation;
          (11)   The event would pose an imminent risk of serious harm to
persons or property;
          (12)   The applicant has not made sufficient provision for parking,
or for the health, safety, and sanitation of event participants; or
          (13)   The applicant has been convicted of violating a provision of
this chapter, or has had a special events permit revoked within the preceding
18 months.
   (D)   If the City Manager determines that there are grounds to deny an
application, but that such grounds could be avoided by changing the date, time,
or location of the event, or the manner in which same is conducted, the City
Manager shall notify the applicant in writing of the grounds for denial of the
application and consult with the applicant regarding alternatives which would
allow issuance of the permit. Any applicant desiring to accept such permit
alternatives shall file a written notice of acceptance with the City Secretary
not later than five days after the date of the City Manager's notice. In the
event the applicant fails to accept such permit alternatives in a manner and
within the time provided for herein, the City Manager shall deny the
application.
   (E)   The City Manager shall promptly notify the applicant in writing of the
approval or denial of the application.
      (1)   If the application is denied, the City Manager shall promptly
notify the applicant in writing of such determination, of the reasons for the
denial, and of any right to appeal the determination to the City Council.
      (2)   If the application is approved, the City Manager shall promptly
issue a permit subject to all the general conditions required by this chapter,
and such other special conditions authorized by this chapter as may be
necessary in order to protect the safety of persons and property and to ensure
the safe, orderly, and lawful operation of the event.
(Ord. 2001-28, passed 8-28-01)
§ 100.07  GENERAL PERMIT CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Indemnification agreement.  As a condition precedent to the issuance
of a special event permit, the permittee shall enter into an agreement with the
city in a form approved by the City Attorney which shall set forth the
undertaking of the permittee to indemnify, hold harmless, and reimburse the
city from any liability, damage, or loss occurring during the course of the
event authorized by such permit where such liability, damage, or loss is
proximately caused by the negligent or intentional act or omission of the
permittee, any officer, employee, or agent of the permittee, or any person
subject to the permittee's legal control. In addition, such agreement shall
provide that in the event a claim is made against the city by suit or otherwise
arising out of such negligent or intentional act or omission, then the
permittee shall defend the claim or suit by counsel acceptable to the city and
shall indemnify the city for any judgment rendered against the city, or any
sums paid out in settlement or otherwise. Such agreement shall be filed with
the City Manager prior to the issuance of the permit.
   (B)   Liability insurance. As a condition precedent to the issuance of a
special event permit, the City Manager may require the permittee to obtain
public liability insurance acceptable to the City Manager and City Attorney
which provides insurance coverage against liabilities for death, personal
injury, or property damage arising out of or in any way connected with such
event. The City Manager may not require liability insurance if the event
involves an exercise of free speech rights.
   (C)   Traffic control and standby fees.  As a condition precedent to the
issuance of a special events permit, the City Manager may require the permittee
to prepay to the city a fee in an amount equal to the city's total estimated
costs, based upon the recommendations of the Chief of Police, Director of
Emergency Services, and the most recent Fee Schedule adopted by the City
Council, for providing all of the personnel and materials deemed necessary in
order to control and monitor pedestrian and vehicular traffic in and around the
site of such event, and to provide emergency services response to event
participants.
      (1)   No fee may be collected for the purpose of protecting event
participants from the unlawful conduct of others in response to the event. The
City Manager may not require a fee deposit if the event involves an exercise of
free speech rights.
      (2)   If this section requires payment of fees, traffic control, and
standby fees of $500 or more, or if the special event is cancelled, the city
shall provide to the permittee an itemized statement of actual costs incurred
by the city within 30 days after the event, or after cancellation thereof. If
the actual costs exceed the amount prepaid, the permittee shall pay any
difference within 30 days after receipt of the itemized statement from the
city. If the actual costs are less than the amount prepaid, the city shall
refund to the permittee any difference within 30 days after the itemized
statement is provided.
(Ord. 2001-28, passed 8-28-01)
§ 100.08  SPECIAL PERMIT CONDITIONS.
   (A)   The City Manager may condition the issuance of a special events permit
upon the permittee's compliance with such reasonable requirements concerning
the time, place, and manner of conducting the event as are necessary to protect
the safety of persons and property, or to control vehicular and pedestrian
traffic in and around the site of the event, provided that such requirements
shall not unreasonably restrict the exercise of free speech rights.
   (B)   When appropriate, special permit conditions may include without
limitation:
      (1)   Requiring the assembly or disbanding area for a parade or athletic
event to occur at a specified location;
      (2)   Requiring accommodation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic in and
around the site of an event, including restricting an event to a city sidewalk,
or to only a portion of a city street or other public right-of-way;
      (3)   Restricting the number and type of vehicles, animals, or structures
to be displayed or used in the event;
      (4)   Requiring inspection and approval by city personnel of stages,
booths, floats, and other structures or vehicles to be used or operated in the
event in order to insure the safety of such structures or vehicles;
      (5)   Requiring provision and use of special lighting, traffic warnings,
and barricades;
      (6)   Requiring the provision of qualified personnel to assist with
ambulance response, traffic control, or security;
      (7)   Requiring provision of food, water, first aid stations, or sanitary
facilities (including disabled-accessible sanitary facilities) such as portable
toilets and hand-washing stations;
      (8)   Requiring provision and use of garbage containers, and the clean up
and restoration of the site of the event at the termination of the event;
      (9)   Restricting the use of sound amplification equipment, and the
amount of noise generated by motors and other equipment used in the course of
the event;
          (10)   Requiring the permittee to send notice of the event to nearby
property owners prior to the date of such event, either by serving copies of
such notice on such property owners individually, by publishing such notice in
a newspaper of general circulation, or by posting such notice along the route
or at the site of the event;
          (11)   Regulating the hours during which the event will be conducted;
or
          (12)   Requiring notification of permit conditions to event
participants.
(Ord. 2001-28, passed 8-28-01)
§ 100.09  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   The City Manager shall revoke a special events permit where the City
Manager determines that there were grounds for denying the permit if such
grounds were first disclosed or otherwise made known to the City Manager after
approval of the permit.
   (B)   The City Manager, Chief of Police, or Director of Emergency Services
may revoke a special events permit upon determining that the event is being
conducted in violation of the terms and conditions of the permit, or that the
event participants have violated or threatened to violate any applicable law or
regulation or any condition of the permit. However, this subsection shall not
authorize the revocation of a permit because of the need to protect
participants from the conduct of others. Whenever possible, a permit shall not
be revoked in the manner provided by this subsection unless and until the
permittee or responsible event participants have been notified of the violation
and afforded a reasonable opportunity to correct same.
   (C)   If the Chief of Police or Director of Emergency Services revokes a
permit authorizing a special event prior to the date of such event, such city
officer shall promptly notify the permittee in writing of such action and shall
provide copies of the notice to the City Manager and all remaining city
officers charged with carrying out any responsibilities under this chapter.
However, where the Chief of Police or Director of Emergency Services revokes a
permit authorizing a special event on the day of such event, such city officer
shall announce such action to the event participants, to those city officers
and employees engaged in monitoring or controlling traffic during the event,
and to the person in charge of the event if such person can be located at the
site of the event. Thereafter, the city officer revolting such permit shall
promptly notify the permittee in writing of such action and shall provide a
copy of the notice to the City Manager. In a written notice issued pursuant to
this subsection, the city officer revoking the permit shall set forth the
reasons for the revocation.
(Ord. 2001-28, passed 8-28-01)
§ 100.10  APPEAL.
   (A)   Right of appeal. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any
aggrieved person may appeal a decision by a city official denying or revoking a
special events permit.
   (B)   Notice of appeal. Appeals pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
shall be made by filing a notice of appeal with the City Secretary not later
than five days following the date of written notice of such decision, provided
that the City Council may extend the time for filing such notice of appeal for
good cause shown. Such notice of appeal shall be in a form prescribed by the
City Manager, shall contain a brief statement of the reasons why the aggrieved
person believes that the decision does not comply with the provisions of this
chapter, and shall set forth the relief requested by such person from such
decision.
   (C)   Hearing of appeal.  The City Council shall conduct a hearing on the
appeal and consider evidence offered by any interested person. The formal rules
of evidence do not apply at an appeal hearing, but the City Council may adopt
rules for the orderly conduct of the hearing and shall make a decision on the
basis of a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing. The City
Council shall render a decision within 15 days after the request for an appeal
hearing is filed, and if no decision is made within that time the decision
under appeal shall be deemed affirmed. The City Council may affirm, reverse, or
modify the decision under appeal, and its decision is final as to
administrative remedies of the city.
(Ord. 2001-28, passed 8-28-01)
§ 100.11  EMERGENCY SUSPENSION OF EVENT.
   The City Manager, Chief of Police, Director of Emergency Services, and any
sworn peace officer employed by the city may temporarily suspend a special
event whenever there is an emergency which requires the event to be temporarily
suspended to protect property or public safety. During a  suspension as herein
provided, the permittee and event participants shall fully comply with the
suspending officer's instructions.
(Ord. 2001-28, passed 8-28-01)
§ 100.12  CORDONING OFF THE ROUTE OR SITE OF AN EVENT.
   The Director of Public Works is authorized and directed to place barricades
on or within the city's parks, streets, sidewalks or other public rights-of-
way, and to undertake such other actions as may be necessary to cordon off the
route or site of a special event authorized by a permit issued in the manner
provided for by this chapter. In addition, the Director of Public Works, when
appropriate, shall post the route or site of such event as a no parking zone
for the duration of the event and sufficiently in advance thereof as may be
necessary to preclude vehicles parking along the route or at the site of the
event.
(Ord. 2001-28, passed 8-28-01)
§ 100.13  OFFENSES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to administer, conduct, sponsor,
organize, assist, or knowingly participate in any special event within the city
without a valid permit authorizing such event as required by this chapter.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person who administers, conducts,
sponsors, organizes, assists, or participates in a special event within the
city to knowingly violate any term, condition, or restriction contained in a
permit issued as provided by this chapter.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally or knowingly make
any materially false or misleading statement in an application for a special
events permit under this chapter.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly obstruct, impede,
hamper, or otherwise interfere with any special event authorized by a permit
issued pursuant to this chapter, or with any person, animal or vehicle
participating or used in such event.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle, except an
emergency vehicle, between vehicles or persons traversing the route of a parade
or athletic event authorized by a permit issued pursuant to this chapter when
such vehicles or persons traversing the route of such parade or athletic event
are in motion.
(Ord. 2001-28, passed 8-28-01) 
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 100.14  FEE SCHEDULE.
   Special events fees shall be as approved by the City Council as part of the
current fiscal year's operating budget. Violators of this chapter shall pay a
fee designated in the then-current Harker Heights Fee Schedule.
(Ord. 2001-28, passed 8-28-01)
CHAPTER 101: HUNTING
Section
   
101.01   Definitions
   
101.02   Hunting permit required
   
101.03   Application, issuance, denial and revocation of permit
   
101.04   Hunting permit terms and effect
   
101.05   Display of hunting permit
   
101.06   Revocation of permit
   
101.07   Additional hunting regulations
   
101.08   Exceptions
§ 101.01  DEFINITIONS.
   HUNT  shall have the meaning set forth in Tex. Parks & Wildlife Code §
1.101.
(Ord. 2004-42, passed 9-14-04)
§ 101.02  HUNTING PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for a person to hunt any animal or bird within the city
unless the person holds a hunting permit approved and issued in a manner
provided by this chapter.
(Ord. 2004-42, passed 9-14-04)
§ 101.03  APPLICATION, ISSUANCE, DENIAL AND REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Applications for a hunting permit shall be filed with the City
Secretary.
   (B)   Applications for a hunting permit shall be made by a natural person in
a form prescribed by the City Manager, shall be verified, and shall contain the
following information:
      (1)   The full legal name, home address, date of birth, and home
telephone number of the person filing the application;
      (2)   A United States Geological Survey scaled map of the hunting area,
showing the total area of the property and all structures that are occupied or
suitable for occupancy by humans or animals within the hunting area or within
300 yards of any property line of the hunting area;
      (3)   The name, home address, and home telephone number of each owner of
the hunting area, if different than the applicant;
      (4)   The type of weapons to be used in the hunt, including the caliber
of any firearm to be used;
      (5)   A copy of the applicant's valid Texas hunting license appropriate
for the species to be hunted and the weapons to be used, or equivalent license
approved by the Texas Parks and Wildlife Commission, or proof that the
applicant is exempt by law from obtaining such a license;
      (6)   If the applicant does not own the hunting area, a written consent
from each owner of such hunting area authorizing the applicant to hunt there;
      (7)   A statement that the applicant is fully qualified under federal and
state law to possess and use each type of weapon to be used in the hunt; and 
      (8)   A statement that the applicant is not currently under indictment,
information or accusation for, and has not within the ten year period preceding
the filing of the application been convicted of or placed on deferred
adjudication for:
         (a)   Any offense involving firearms or a deadly weapon;
         (b)   Any offense involving alcohol, controlled substances as defined
in Chapter 481, Tex. Health & Safety Code, or other dangerous drugs;
      (c)   Any offense involving cruelty to animals;
         (d)   Any felony; or
         (e)   Any Class A or Class B misdemeanor, or any offense under Tex.
Penal Code § 42.01.
   (C)   The City Manager shall either approve or disapprove the application
within 20 days following the date of filing the application, and the failure of
the City Manager to approve the application within such time shall result in
the administrative denial of the application. The City Manager shall approve
the issuance of a permit under this chapter unless the City Manager determines
that:
      (1)   The hunting area is less than ten square acres in size;
      (2)   The hunt would violate any applicable law or regulation;
      (3)   Within the preceding 24 months the applicant has either been
convicted of violating a provision of this chapter, or has had a hunting permit
revoked hereunder;
      (4)   The applicant is delinquent in the payment of a tax or other money
owed to the city; or
      (5)   The applicant has made any material misrepresentation, or failed to
disclose any material fact, in an application filed pursuant to this section.
   (D)   If the application is approved, the City Manager shall promptly issue
the permit. If the application is denied, the City Manager shall notify the
applicant in writing and state the basis for such denial.
(Ord. 2004-42, passed 9-14-04)
§ 101.04  HUNTING PERMIT TERMS AND EFFECT.
   (A)   A permit issued under this chapter shall identify the permit holder,
the type of weapons permitted, the permitted hunting area, and the effective
dates of the permit.
   (B)   A permit issued under this chapter is valid only during the yearly
period for which the license is issued without regard to the date on which a
license is acquired. Each yearly period begins on September 1 and extends
through August 31 of the next year.
   (C)   No person may acquire or possess more than one hunting permit during a
permit year. For purposes of this subsection, a violation does not occur unless
a person acquires or possesses more than one permit having the same expiration
date.
   (D)   A hunting permit is non-transferable and any attempted or purported
transfer shall immediately void the permit.
   (E)   Neither any provision of this chapter nor the issuance of a permit
under this chapter shall be construed to authorize any act in violation of any
other applicable law or rule.
(Ord. 2004-42, passed 9-14-04)
§ 101.05  DISPLAY OF HUNTING PERMIT.
   (A)   A person required by this chapter to hold a hunting permit shall have
such permit in his or her possession while hunting within the city limits, and
shall display the permit on the demand of a magistrate, court officer, or peace
officer. However, if on or before the trial of any person charged with a
violation of this subsection, the person produces for the court or the
prosecuting attorney the proper hunting permit issued to the person and valid
at the time of the offense, the court having jurisdiction of the suit shall
dismiss the charge.
   (B)   If a person required by this chapter to hold a hunting permit parks a
vehicle in a hunting area while hunting, the person shall place a hunting
placard issued by the city on the rearview mirror of the vehicle's front
windshield. This subsection shall not apply if the person is hunting on land
owned by the person. For purposes of this subsection, the registered owner of
the vehicle is presumed to be the person who parked the vehicle.
(Ord. 2004-42, passed 9-14-04)
§ 101.06  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)    The City Manager may revoke a hunting permit if the City Manager
determines that:
      (1)   There were grounds for denying the permit, if such grounds were
first disclosed or otherwise made known to the City Manager after approval of
the permit;
      (2)   The holder has violated any provision of this chapter;
      (3)   During the permit term, the permit holder has hunted outside the
permitted hunting area and within the city limits;
      (4)   During the permit term, the permit holder has hunted within the
city limits with a weapon other than a permitted weapon;
      (5)   Any of the information contained in the permit holder's application
for a permit under this chapter becomes false in any material respect;
      (6)   The permit holder has wrongfully endangered human life or the
property of others while hunting; or
      (7)   The permit holder demonstrates a lack of proficiency in the use of
the weapon such that a game animal is not humanely taken.
   (B)   If a permit is revoked, the City Manager shall send written notice to
the holder's last known address and shall state the basis for such revocation.
(Ord. 2004-42, passed 9-14-04)
§ 101.07  ADDITIONAL HUNTING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   All persons hunting within the city limits shall be required to do so
with the utmost regard for the safety of other persons and their property.
   (B)   The discharge of firearms within the city limits must at all times
comply with §
130.45 of this code.
   (C)   A person may not hunt within 100 yards of an occupied residence not
owned or controlled by the person.
   (D)   No holder of a permit issued under this chapter may use a weapon in
such manner that a projectile from the weapon exits the boundaries of the
permitted hunting area.
   (E)   No person under the age of 18 years may hunt in the city limits unless
the person is in the visible presence of the person’s adult parent, guardian,
or spouse, or other adult to whom the person has been committed by a court.
(Ord. 2004-42, passed 9-14-04)
§ 101.08 EXCEPTIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to regulate agricultural
operations covered by Agricultural Code § 251.005(c), or the discharge of
firearms or other weapons in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city or
in an area annexed by the city after September 1, 1981, if the firearm or other
weapon is:
   (A)   A shotgun, air rifle or pistol, BB gun, or bow and arrow discharged:
      (1)   On a tract of land of ten acres or more and more than 150 feet from
a residence or occupied building located on another property; and
      (2)   In a manner not reasonably expected to cause a projectile to cross
the boundary of the tract; or
   (B)   A center fire or rim fire rifle or pistol of any caliber discharged:
      (1)   On a tract of land of 50 acres or more and more than 300 feet from
a residence or occupied building located on another property; and
      (2)   In a manner not reasonably expected to cause a projectile to cross
the boundary of the tract.
(Ord. 2005-24, passed 8-9-05)
CHAPTER 102: TREE CARE
Section
   
102.01   Definitions
   
102.02   Director’s authority
   
102.03   Offenses
 
   
102.99   Penalty
§ 102.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DIRECTOR.  The Harker Heights Parks and Recreation Director.
   PRIVATE TREES.  Any trees, shrubs, bushes or woody vegetation within the
territorial limits of the city that are not public trees.
   PUBLIC TREES.  Any trees, shrubs, bushes or woody vegetation on city
property, including all city parks, streets and rights-of-way.
(Ord. 2011-21, passed 8-9-11)
§ 102.02  DIRECTOR’S AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The Director shall have the responsibility to plant, prune, maintain
and remove public trees.
   (B)   The Director may, with the consent of the property owner, treat,
remove or prune a private tree that is dead, diseased or otherwise in need of
maintenance. If applicable, the Director shall first obtain written findings
from the City Council in accordance with Tex. Health & Safety Code Ch. 756,
Subch. G.
   (C)   The Director shall have the right to treat, prune or remove a private
tree that exists in violation of any provision of this code, that harbors
insects or disease which threatens other trees, or that otherwise presents a
serious danger to persons or property. The city shall have a lien against the
property upon which such tree was located to secure the payment of all expenses
associated with such treatment, pruning or removal. Such action by the Director
shall have no effect on a prosecution for a violation of any provision of this
chapter.
   (D)   The Director may exercise the authority of the Operations Manager
under §
96.71.
(Ord. 2011-22, passed 8-9-11)
§ 102.03  OFFENSES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, remove, destroy, or
cause the injury, removal or destruction of a public tree without first having
obtained written permission from the City Manager or the Director.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to attach any cable, wire, or sign
or other object to a public tree without the written permission from the
Director.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to plant a public tree without
first having obtained written permission from the City Manager or the Director.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere
with the Director or any of his agents in the performance of any activity
authorized by this chapter.
(Ord. 2011-22, passed 8-9-11)  Penalty, see §
102.99
§ 102.99  PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no penalty
is otherwise provided shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
10.99.
(Ord. 2011-22, passed 8-9-11)
CHAPTER 103: DONATION CONTAINERS
Section
   
103.01   Definitions
   
103.02   Permit required
   
103.03   Placement
   
103.04   Construction
   
103.05   Maintenance
   
103.06   Existing donation containers
   
103.07   Enforcement
   
103.08   Appeal
   
103.09   Fee schedule
§ 103.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING. A commercial building lawfully occupied by a business or
charitable organization pursuant to a valid certificate of occupancy.
   DIRECTOR. Means the city's Director of Planning and Development.
   DONATION CONTAINER. Any box, structure, container, trailer or other
receptacle located in a public place as a collection point for any items
donated to a charitable organization. The term does not include recycle bins or
any donation container wholly situated within a building.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Has the meaning set forth in Texas Penal Code § 1.07, as
amended.
   RECYCLE. Means a process by which recyclable materials that have served
their intended use or are scrapped, discarded, used, surplus, or obsolete are
collected, separated, or processed and returned to use in the form of raw
materials in the production of new products.
   RECYCLE BIN. A receptacle used for the collection of recyclable material to
be recycled by any person.
   RECYCLABLE MATERIAL. Material that has been recovered or diverted from the
solid waste stream for purposes of recycling, or reclamation, a substantial
portion of which is consistently used in the manufacture of products which may
otherwise be produced using raw or virgin materials. Examples include most
types of paper and cardboard, plastics labeled by the manufacturer with
recycling symbol 1 through 7, glass bottles and jars, and aluminum, steel and
tin cans.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY. Each owner of a donation container, and each owner or
occupant of property upon which such donation container is located.
(Ord. 2017-09, passed 5-23-17)
§ 103.02  PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, maintain or allow a
donation container within the city or within 5,000 feet outside of the city
limits unless the city has issued a valid permit for such container.
   (B)   To obtain a permit the owner of the donation container must pay a non-
refundable fee set forth in the city fee schedule, and file a complete
application on the form approved by the Director setting forth:
      (1)   The name, street address, mailing address, electronic mail address,
and telephone number of the owner of the donation container;
      (2)   The name, street address, mailing address, electronic mail address,
and telephone number of the owner of the property upon which the donation
container will be located;
      (4)   The dimensions of the container;
      (5)   A copy of a determination letter pursuant to 26 U.S.C. 501(c)(3)
confirming that the applicant has qualified as a nonprofit charitable
organization; and
      (6)   A sworn statement from each responsible party consenting to the
placement of the donation container on the property and acknowledging
responsibility for compliance with this chapter.
   (C)   A permit issued under this section shall expire one year after the
date of issuance. The permit may be renewed by filing a new application under
this section at least 30 days prior to expiration of such permit.
   (D)   A permit holder shall notify the Director within 30 days after any
material change in the information contained in the application for a permit
under this section.
   (E)   A permit issued under this section is not transferable, and any
attempted or purported transfer shall be an offense. A permit is valid only at
the address stated in the permit.
(Ord. 2017-09, passed 5-23-17)
§ 103.03  PLACEMENT.
   (A)   Donation containers shall not be located:
      (1)   Within any residential zoning district;
      (2)   Closer than 300 feet from another donation container, even if
located on different tracts of land or lots;
      (3)   Within ten feet of the travelled portion of any street, road or
highway;
      (4)   In a manner that blocks a driveway, or interferes with traffic flow
or sight lines, or otherwise constitutes an obstruction to traffic entering,
exiting or circulating within the property on which the donation container is
located;
      (5)   Within any right-of-way or easement dedicated to or owned by any
governmental entity;
      (6)   Where it poses a safety hazard to the public;
      (7)   Where it constitutes an obstruction to pedestrian traffic using any
public sidewalk; or
      (8)   Where it constitutes an obstruction to the flow of surface water on
the property such that surface water will be diverted to other property, or
otherwise inhibits or prevents surface water from draining to an existing
drainage facility.
   (B)   No more than one donation container may be located on a single platted
lot or unplatted tract of land.
(Ord. 2017-09, passed 5-23-17)
§ 103.04  CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Donation containers must be constructed of metal or fiberglass, or
wood protected by a weather-resistant paint, stain or finish. Donation
containers shall not exceed 120 cubic feet in size, and must be enclosed to
protect the contents from the weather.
   (B)   There shall be affixed to the exterior of each donation container a
sign that is conspicuous and readily visible to persons approaching the
container to make a donation. The sign shall state "DONATIONS MUST FIT INSIDE
CONTAINER" in block letters at least three inches high. The sign shall also in
letters at least one-half inch high indicate the name, address and telephone
number of the permit holder. All sign lettering must appear in contrasting
colors against the background.
(Ord. 2017-09, passed 5-23-17)
§ 103.05  MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Donation containers shall be maintained in good condition and
appearance with no structural damage, holes, mold, rot, or visible rust.
Containers shall be kept free of graffiti.
   (B)   The area around the donation container shall be kept free of any junk,
debris or other materials and shall be emptied often enough so that the
donations do not overflow. The collection or storage of donated materials
outside the container is prohibited.
   (C)   Donation containers shall be secured against unauthorized entry at all
times, except when they are being emptied or repaired.
   (D)   Any donation container or property that is not maintained in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter is declared a nuisance.
(Ord. 2017-09, passed 5-23-17)
§ 103.06  EXISTING DONATION CONTAINERS.
   Each responsible party subject to this chapter who has a donation container
lawfully in place on the effective date hereof is granted a temporary license
to keep, maintain and operate the container in such location until 90 days from
the date this chapter is approved by City Council. Thereafter, such responsible
party is required to fully comply with this chapter.
(Ord. 2017-09, passed 5-23-17)
§ 103.07  ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Permit revocation. Any permit issued hereunder may be revoked by the
Director if the permit holder is in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter, or has knowingly made a false material statement in the application,
or otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance of a permit under the terms
of this chapter. Notice of the revocation shall be given to the permit holder
in writing, with the reasons for the revocation specified in the notice, served
either by personal service of such notice upon the permit holder or by
certified United States mail to the permit holder's last known address. The
revocation shall become effective the day following personal service, or if
mailed three days from the date of mailing, and no additional permit under this
chapter shall be issued to such person within one year thereafter.
   (B)   Abatement.
      (1)   If a responsible party does not comply with this chapter within
seven days of a notice of violation, the Director may cause the performance of
the work necessary to abate the violation and charge the expenses to the owner
of the donation container or of the property upon which it is located.
      (2)   Notice may be given personally, or by certified United States mail
to the address shown in the most recent application for a permit under this
chapter, or to the address shown in the records of the Bell County Tax
Appraisal District, or by posting same in a conspicuous location on the subject
donation container.
      (3)   If a notice is mailed in accordance with this section, and the
United States Postal Service returns the notice as "refused" or "unclaimed,"
the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is considered as
delivered.
      (4)   In a notice provided under this section, the Director may provide
that if the responsible party commits another violation of the same kind or
nature on or before the first anniversary of the date of the notice, the city
without further notice may correct the violation at the responsible party's
expense and assess the expense against the property. If a violation covered by
a notice under this division occurs within the one-year period, and the
Director has not been informed in writing by the owner of an ownership change,
then the Director without notice may take any action permitted in this section.
   (C)   Impoundment. The Director may cause the impoundment of any donation
container subject to this chapter that does not have a current, valid permit.
Any donation container impounded by the city shall be released to the owner
upon securing a permit, and the payment of the fees set forth in the city fee
schedule. Any impounded donation container not reclaimed within 30 days after
impoundment may be destroyed without further notice from the city.
   (D)   Offense. A person who violates a provision of this chapter, or who
fails to perform an act required of the person by this chapter, commits an
offense, and upon conviction such person shall be fined an amount not to exceed
$500. No culpable mental state shall be required to support a conviction for a
violation of this section. Each day's violation thereof shall constitute a
separate offense. The court may order abatement and removal of the nuisance on
conviction.
   (E)   Authority of City Attorney. The City Attorney may without further
authorization of the City Council undertake the enforcement of this chapter by
all legal means appropriate or necessary, including but not limited to:
enforcement in municipal court; filing of appropriate civil actions in courts
of appropriate jurisdiction; and defending the city from suit if suit is taken
to appeal any action of the city.
   (F)   Other remedies. The penalties provided for in this section are in
addition to any other remedies that the city may have under city ordinances and
state law. Nothing in this section shall limit the remedies available to the
city in seeking to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2017-09, passed 5-23-17)
§ 103.08  APPEAL.
   (A)   A person aggrieved by a permit denial or revocation, or other
administrative action under this chapter, shall have the right to appeal as
provided in this section. Any decision to deny or revoke a permit, or to impose
another administrative action, will be stayed pending resolution of such
appeal.
   (B)   The appellant shall initiate such appeal by filing a written notice
with the Director and the City Secretary, briefly describing the decision being
appealed, and setting forth the address, fax, electronic mail, and phone
numbers at which the appellant wishes to receive communications related to the
appeal. Such notice must be filed within seven days of the date of the notice
of the decision from which the appeal is sought.
   (C)   The City Manager shall provide for a hearing on the appeal not later
than 15 days after the notice of appeal is filed. The appellant may appear in
person or by counsel at the time and place named in the notice of setting, and
may make a defense to the action. If the appellant fails or refuses to appear,
the City Manager may proceed to hear and determine the appeal. When the City
Manager has completed such hearing and made a decision, he or she shall cause
one copy of the decision to be filed with the Director and one copy to be
forwarded to the appellant by certified mail.
(Ord. 2017-09, passed 5-23-17)
§ 103.09  FEE SCHEDULE.
   Donation container fees shall be as approved by the City Council as part of
the current fiscal year’s operating budget. Violators of this chapter shall pay
a fee designated in the then-current city fee schedule.
(Ord. 2017-09, passed 5-23-17)
CHAPTER 104:  RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT
Section
Small Cell Facilities
   
104.11   Purpose and scope
   
104.12   Definitions
   
104.13   Permit required; applications and fees
   
104.14   Action on permit applications
   
104.15   Effect of permit; duration
   
104.16   Placement of facilities
   
104.17   Design standards
   
104.18   Installation, maintenance and repair
   
104.19   Inspections
   
104.20   Removal, relocation and modification
   
104.21   Compensation to city
   
104.22 - 104.27 [Reserved]
   
104.28   Enforcement
   
104.29   Appeal
Cross-reference:
   Streets and sidewalks, see
Ch. 96
SMALL CELL FACILITIES
§ 104.11 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of this subchapter is to establish policies and
procedures for constructing small cell facilities in the city’s rights-of-way,
which will provide public benefit consistent with the preservation of the
integrity, safe usage and visual qualities of the city’s rights-of-way and the
city as a whole.
   (B)   Intent.  In enacting this subchapter, the city intends to exercise its
authority over small cell facilities located in the rights-of-way by
establishing uniform standards to address potential issues, including without
limitation:
      (1)   Prevent interference with the use of rights-of-way and other public
places;
      (2)   Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other
conditions hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
      (3)   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of
facilities lawfully located in rights-of-way or on public property at the time
a permit is granted;
      (4)   Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees;
      (5)   Preserve neighborhood character where facilities are installed; and
      (6)   Facilitate rapid deployment of small cell facilities.
   (C)   Zoning.  Applications to construct, modify or replace a small cell
facility shall be treated as a permitted use exempt from local zoning review.
   (D)   Conflicts with other chapters. This subchapter supersedes all prior
chapters or parts of chapters adopted, to the extent of such conflict.
   (E)   Conflicts with state and federal laws.  In the event that applicable
federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
subchapter, the small cell facility operator must comply with the requirements
of this subchapter, to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or
state laws and regulations.
(Ord. 2017-22, passed 8-22-17)
§ 104.12  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY EQUIPMENT.  Any equipment used in conjunction with a wireless
facility or wireless support structure. The term includes, but is not limited
to: transmission lines and equipment for telecommunications and electric power,
power storage, generation or control equipment, cables, wiring, equipment
buildings, cabinets and shelters.
   ANTENNA.  Communications equipment that transmits or receives radio
frequency signals in the provision of wireless communications services,
including associated accessory equipment.
   APPLICABLE LAW.  All applicable laws, ordinances, codes, rules and
regulations of the city, county, state, and the United States, including, but
not limited to, the Americans With Disabilities Act and all historic
preservation laws and requirements.
   APPLICATION.  A request to construct, modify or replace a small cell
facility or an associated wireless facility.
   COLLOCATION.  To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate or replace small
cell facilities on a wireless support structure. COLLOCATION also means the
location of two or more wireless service providers on a wireless support
structure.
   DIRECTOR.  The Public Works Director of the city.
   DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEM or DAS.  A network or facility that meets the
height and size characteristics of a small cell facility, that distributes
radio frequency signals to provide wireless service, and that consists of:
      (1)   Remote antenna nodes deployed throughout a desired coverage area;
      (2)   A high-capacity signal transport medium connected to a central hub
site; and
      (3)   Equipment located at the hub site to process or control the radio
frequency signals through the antennas.
   ELIGIBLE FACILITIES REQUEST.  Has the same meaning as in 47 U.S.C.A. § 1455
(a), as amended.
   MICRO NETWORK NODES.  Miniaturized cell facility nodes usually hung on wires
between poles.
   OCCUPY or USE.  With respect to a right-of-way, to place a tangible thing in
the right-of-way, including attaching to existing or new wireless support
structures for any purpose, including, but not limited to: constructing,
repairing, maintaining or operating lines, poles, pipes, conduits, ducts,
equipment or other structures, appurtenances or facilities necessary for the
delivery of any services by a provider of wireless service.
   OPERATOR.  A person who constructs, owns or operates a small cell facility,
or that proposes to construct, own or operate such a facility, including a
provider of wireless service.
   REPLACEMENT.  Constructing a new wireless support structure of comparable
proportions and of comparable height to a preexisting wireless support
structure, in order to accommodate collocation of small cell facilities; and
the associated removal of the preexisting wireless facilities or wireless
support structure.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY.  The surface of, and the space within, through, on, across,
above or below, any public street, public road, public highway, public freeway,
public lane, public path, public alley, public court, public sidewalk, public
boulevard, public parkway, public drive, public utility easement, any other
land dedicated or otherwise designated for a compatible public use, which is
owned or controlled by a municipal corporation. RIGHT-OF-WAY does not include a
private easement.
   SMALL CELL FACILITY or NETWORK NODE.  Wireless facilities that, individually
and collectively, are part of a system that meets the following qualifications:
      (1)   Each antenna is of no more than six cubic feet in volume, or such
greater limits as the Federal Communications Commission has excluded from
review under Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act, as amended;
      (2)   The equipment enclosure is cumulatively no larger than 20 eight
cubic feet in volume, or such higher limits as the Federal Communications
Commission has excluded from review under Section 106 of the National Historic
Preservation Act, as amended; and
      (3)   The increased or resulting height of the wireless support structure
on which the small cell facility is placed is no more than ten feet higher than
before, or no more than 50 feet high overall, whichever is greater; or, if
placed on a new utility pole, the new utility pole is no more than ten feet
higher than existing utility poles adjacent to the new pole, or no more than 50
feet high overall, whichever is greater.
Accessory equipment is not to be included in the calculation of equipment
volume and may be located outside the equipment enclosure. The term SMALL CELL
FACILITY includes a DAS and other wireless technology meeting the above
qualifications.
   TRANSPORT FACILITIES.  Physical lines (usually fiber) between network nodes
connecting the network nodes to the network.
   WIRELESS FACILITY.  An antenna, accessory equipment, or other wireless
device or equipment of similar function, exclusive of the wireless support
structure, used to provide wireless service.
   WIRELESS SERVICE.  Any service, whether at a fixed location or mobile,
provided it uses wireless facilities.
   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE or NODE SUPPORT POLE.  A freestanding structure,
such as a telephone pole, electric utility pole, monopole, light pole, traffic
signal or sign pole, or other existing or proposed structure designed to
support, or capable of supporting, wireless facilities, including structures
owned or operated by the city.
(Ord. 2017-22, passed 8-22-17)
§ 104.13  PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES.
   (A)   Permit required.  A permit is required to install or collocate a small
cell facility in  the rights-of-way, except as otherwise provided in this
subchapter. An applicant seeking to construct, modify or replace a network of
small cell facilities may, at the applicant’s discretion, file a consolidated
application and receive a single permit for multiple small cell facilities.
   (B)   Permit application.  All applications pursuant to this subchapter must
be filed on a form provided by the city. The applicant may designate material
as “proprietary” or “confidential” by clearly marking each page of such
materials accordingly, subject to the city’s obligations under the Public
Information Act and other applicable law.
   (C)   Application requirements. Prior to installation or modification of a
wireless facility or licensee pole, the operator must complete and submit to
the Director a complete application and plan review form for location review,
together with:
      (1)   A one-time, nonrefundable, reasonable, cost-based plan review fee,
in the amount stated in the most recent city fee schedule, not to exceed the
fees charged to other persons performing work in the rights-of-way;
      (2)   A general description of the proposed work, the purposes and intent
of the facility, and the uses to which the facility will be put, with the scope
and detail of the description being appropriate to the nature and character of
the work to be performed, and with special emphasis on those matters likely to
be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
      (3)   A map showing the intended location of the wireless facility or
licensee pole, and its distance from a historic landmark, park or school, if
any;
      (4)   Representative drawings or pictures of the intended wireless
facility or licensee pole;
      (5)   Engineering and construction plans and drawings; and
      (6)   Written confirmation of an agreement between the wireless carrier
and the applicant for the carrier to use the wireless facility or licensee
pole, if applicable.
   (D)   Code compliance.  The operator must provide the city with an
evaluation of a structural engineer, indicating the proposed small cell
facility passes the wind-force and ice-load standards required by this
subchapter.
   (E)   Routine maintenance and replacement. An application is not required
for:
      (1)   Routine maintenance; or
      (2)   The replacement of a small cell facility with another small cell
facility that is substantially similar or smaller in size, weight and height,
and that has the same or less wind-, ice- and structure-loading
characteristics.
   (F)   Information updates.  An amendment to information contained in a
permit application must be submitted in writing to the Director within 30 days
after any information contained in a prior application becomes inaccurate,
incomplete or misleading.
(Ord. 2017-22, passed 8-22-17)
§ 104.14  ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Review of small cell facility applications.  Within 90 calendar days
of receiving a complete small cell facility application, the city must:
      (1)   Review the application in light of its conformity with applicable
regulations of this subchapter;
      (2)   Make its final decision to approve or disapprove the application;
and
      (3)   Advise the applicant in writing of its final decision, supported by
substantial, competent evidence contained in a written record, publicly and
contemporaneously released. If the city denies an application, the denial must
be based on the requirements of this subchapter. The city may not deny an
application if the denial:
         (a)   Is discriminatory with respect to collocation or modification
requests of other providers of functionally equivalent services, including
wireless service providers;
         (b)   Prohibits or creates the effect of prohibiting the provision of
wireless service by the applicant; or
         (c)   Regulates the collocation, placement, installation or
modification of small cell facilities on the basis of the environmental effects
of radio emissions, if the applicant demonstrates that such small cell
facilities will comply with the FCC’s regulations concerning such emissions.
   (B)   Deadline tolling.  To toll the 90-day deadline, the city must provide
a written notice of incomplete (NOI) to the applicant within 30 days of receipt
of application, clearly and specifically delineating all missing documents or
information. The delineated information is limited to documents or information
publicly required and reasonably related to determining if the request
qualifies as a small cell facility. Upon receipt of a supplemental submittal,
the city has ten days to identify in writing anything missing from the initial
NOI. Second or subsequent NOIs may not specify missing documents or information
that were not delineated in the original NOI. Request for information not
identified in initial NOI will not toll the 90-day deadline, and the deadline
is not tolled by a moratorium on the review of applications. However, the city
and the applicant may mutually agree to toll the deadline at any time.
   (C)   Deemed approval.  If the city fails to act on an application by the
deadline established by this section, the applicant may provide notice that the
time period for acting has lapsed and the application is then deemed approved.
   (D)   Visual impact.  In order to minimize negative visual impact to the
surrounding area, the Director may deny a request for a proposed location if
the applicant proposes to install wireless facilities or ground equipment where
250 cubic feet of wireless facilities or ground equipment already exist at that
time.
   (E)   City review of eligible facilities requests.   Notwithstanding any
other provision of this subchapter, the city must approve and may not deny
applications for eligible facilities requests within 60 calendar days,
according to the procedures established under 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001 (Wireless
Facility Modifications).
(Ord. 2017-22, passed 8-22-17)
§ 104.15  EFFECT OF PERMIT; DURATION.
   (A)   Authority granted; no property right or other interest created.  A
permit from the city authorizes an applicant to undertake only certain
activities in accordance with this subchapter in city rights-of-way, and does
not create a property right or grant authority to the applicant to impinge upon
the rights of others who may have an interest in the rights-of-way, or
authorize any act otherwise regulated or prohibited by applicable law.
   (B)   Expiration. No permit issued under this subchapter shall be valid for
a period longer than six months, unless construction is actually begun within
that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.
(Ord. 2017-22, passed 8-22-17)
§ 104.16  PLACEMENT OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   Locations.  Subject to the requirements of this subchapter, small cell
facilities may be placed on the rights-of-way and on city-owned wireless
support structures in the rights-of-way. Licensee poles and ground equipment in
the right-of-way must be placed, as much as possible, within two feet of the
outer edge of the right-of-way line. Licensee poles and wireless facilities
must not impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic in the right-of-way. The
operator may request from the Director a waiver of underground construction
requirements to allow for “microtrenching”, at a depth of less than 24 inches
for lateral connections connecting wireless facilities to the fiber-optic
network.
   (B)   Parks.
      (1)   Placement of wireless facilities and licensee poles in any parks is
prohibited, unless dedicated as right-of-way and the placement complies with
applicable law, private deed restrictions, and other public or private
restrictions on the use of the park.
      (2)   An operator must not install ground equipment in a right-of-way
that is within 150 feet of the boundary line of a park, unless approved by the
Director in writing.
      (3)   An operator must not install a licensee pole in a right-of-way that
is within 300 feet of the boundary line of a park, unless approved by the
Director in writing.
   (C)   Traffic signals.  An operator must neither allow nor place a wireless
facility on a traffic control device or traffic signal, or any structure
supporting a traffic control device or traffic signal.
   (D)   City infrastructure.  An operator must neither allow nor install
wireless facilities and licensee poles on any part of a city bridge, overpass
or tunnel, unless approved by the Director in writing.
   (E)   Streets.  An operator must neither allow nor install licensee poles or
ground equipment in a right-of-way that is adjacent to a street or thoroughfare
that is 50 feet or less in width, if both sides of the street or thoroughfare
are adjacent to exclusively single-family residential lots, unless approved by
the Director in writing.
   (F)   Schools. An operator must adhere to the federal radio frequency (RF)
emissions standards set forth in Federal Communications Commission OET Bulletin
65 (as amended), when installing or allowing installation of wireless
facilities or licensee poles within 150 feet of a school.
   (G)   Deviations.  In the event that the actual locations of any facilities
deviate in any material respect at the locations identified in the plans,
drawings and specifications submitted with the application, the operator must
notify the city immediately after the completion of the permitted work.
(Ord. 2017-22, passed 8-22-17)
§ 104.17  DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   Aesthetic requirements.
      (1)   The wireless facilities must be concealed or enclosed as much as
possible in an equipment box, cabinet or other unit that may include
ventilation openings. External cables and wires hanging off a pole must be
sheathed or enclosed in a conduit, so that wires are protected and not visible
or visually minimized to the extent possible.
      (2)   The antenna and related equipment of small cell facilities must be
a color that is consistent with or most blends into the wireless support
structure on which it is installed, unless a different color is required for
public safety or service reliability reasons.
      (3)   All ground equipment must be installed below ground. The Director
may waive this requirement, provided that the ground equipment must be no more
than three feet in height, three and a half feet in width, two feet in depth,
and a total of not more than 21 cubic feet, excluding any concrete pad that is
at grade, or no more than one inch above grade.
      (4)   The operator may, at its own expense, install camouflaged wireless
facilities or licensee poles, provided the operator obtains the requisite
approvals and permits. The operator must install wireless facilities or
licensee poles that conform to the design standards for the proposed
installation site, if any, unless otherwise approved by the Director.
      (5)   From time to time, the Planning and Development Director may
request that the operator explore the feasibility of using certain equipment
(including certain wireless facility, ground equipment, and licensee poles) to
improve the aesthetics of the wireless facilities, licensee poles, ground
equipment, or any portion thereof, to minimize the impact to the aesthetics of
the surrounding area.
   (B)   Size and height.
      (1)   A small cell facility must conform to the size and height
limitations as defined for a small cell facility in this subchapter. Moreover,
no part of a small cell facility installed on a wireless support structure may
be higher than the lesser of ten feet above the highest point of the tallest
existing utility pole located within 500 linear feet in the same right-of-way,
or 55 feet above ground level; nor may the facility be lower than nine feet
above grade level, measured from the bottom of the wireless support structure,
except for cabling necessary to reach the ground. Wireless facilities on a
utility pole or licensee pole must be installed at least eight feet above the
ground.
      (2)   Wireless facilities installed on a utility pole or licensee pole
must not exceed four feet in height, two feet in width, and two feet in depth,
unless otherwise approved in writing by the Director. Extensions to an existing
wireless facility must not result in a combined width of more than three feet,
as measured from the edge of the utility pole or licensee pole, and any
subsequent modifications to the pole. The operator shall be allowed an
additional cabinet for emergency battery back-up power that will not be counted
towards the dimension requirements previously stated in this paragraph,
provided the battery back-up power cabinet does not exceed two feet in height,
two feet in width, and 21 inches in depth.
      (3)   Licensee poles must not exceed 40 feet in height, as measured from
the ground, and with subsequent modifications must not exceed 45 feet in
height, as measured from the ground. Licensee poles must not exceed three feet
in diameter or three feet in width, as measured from the edge of the utility
pole or licensee pole, and any subsequent modifications to the pole.
      (4)   Micro network nodes must be no longer than 24 inches x 15 inches x
12 inches.
   (C)   Support structure extensions.  Extensions to support structures must
be fabricated from material having a degree of strength capable of supporting
the antenna and any related appurtenances and cabling, and capable of
withstanding wind forces and ice loads in accordance with applicable
engineering standards.
   (D)   Wiring and cabling.  Wires and cables connecting the antenna panel and
appurtenances serving the small cell facility must be installed in accordance
with the version of the National Electrical Code and the National Electrical
Safety Code adopted by the city and in force at the time of installation. In no
event shall wiring and cabling serving the small cell facility interfere with
any wiring or cabling installed by a cable television or video service
operator, electric utility, or telephone utility.
   (E)   Guy wires restricted.  Guy wires and similar support structures may
not be used as part of the installation of any small cell facility, unless the
small cell facility is proposed to be attached to an existing utility pole that
incorporated guy wires prior to the date of the small cell application.
   (F)   Noise.  Wireless facilities must not generate sound pressure levels
exceeding 45 decibels, as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting
network, three feet from any residential building wall (including retirement/
convalescent homes), any public library, or any child care or elementary school
classroom or playground.
   (G)   Electrical supply.  The operator shall be responsible for obtaining
any required electrical power service. The operator must not allow or install
generators or back-up generators in the right-of-way. The city shall not be
liable for any stoppages or shortages of electrical power, including without
limitation stoppages or shortages caused by any act, omission or requirement of
the public utility, or the act or omission of any other tenant or licensee of
the structure, or for any other cause beyond the control of the city. The
operator shall not be entitled to any abatement of compensation required by
this subchapter for any such stoppage or shortage of electrical power.
   (H)   Grounding.  The small cell facility (including any ground-mounted
equipment) must be grounded in accordance with the requirements of the most
current edition of the National Electrical Code adopted by the city regarding
grounding of wireless facilities.
   (I)   Fiber connection. The operator shall be responsible for obtaining
access and connection to fiber optic lines or other backhaul solutions that may
be required for its wireless facilities or licensee pole.
   (J)   Code compliance.  A small cell facility must be designed to withstand
wind forces and ice loads in accordance with applicable standards established
in the most recent version of Chapter 25 of the National Electric Safety Code
for utility poles, in Section 222-G  established by the Telecommunications
Industry Association (TIA) and the Electronics Industry Association (EIA) for
steel wireless support structures, and the applicable industry standard for
other structures.
   (K)   Signage.
      (1)   The operator must post its name, location-identifying information,
and emergency telephone number in an area on the cabinet of a wireless facility
that is visible to the public. Signage required under this section must not
exceed four inches by six inches, unless otherwise required by law (e.g., RF
ground notification signs) or the Director.
      (2)   RF warning signage must be placed up higher on the pole near the
antenna, using a background color that is the same color as the pole. Where
applicable, such signage should also face out toward the street, rather than
toward any residential window behind the pole.
      (3)   Other than warning or notification signs required by applicable
law, or identification and location markings, the operator must not post or
allow any signage or advertising on the wireless facilities, licensee pole or
utility pole.
(Ord. 2017-22, passed 8-22-17)
§ 104.18  INSTALLATION, MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR.
   (A)   Generally. The installation of any equipment not described in or
included in an approved application is prohibited. The operator must, at its
own cost and expense, maintain the wireless facilities and licensee poles in
good order and condition, and keep same reasonably safe and clean, and in
accordance with applicable law and the requirements promulgated by the
Director, as such may be amended from time to time. Whether permitted or not,
the wireless facilities and licensee poles may not render the right-of-way non-
compliant with applicable law. The operator’s work shall be subject to the
regulation, control and direction of the Public Works Director. All work done
in connection with the installation, operation, maintenance, repair,
modification and/or replacement of the wireless facilities and licensee poles
must be performed in a good and workmanlike manner, and in compliance with
applicable law.
   (B)   Tree maintenance.  The operator, its contractors and agents must
obtain written permission from the Director before trimming trees hanging over
its licensee poles to prevent branches of such trees from contacting attached
wireless facilities or the licensee poles. The operator shall trim under the
supervision and direction of the Director. The city shall not be liable for any
damages, injuries or claims arising from the operator’s actions under this
section.
(Ord. 2017-22, passed 8-22-17)
§ 104.19  INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Visual inspections.  The Director may, without notice, perform visual
inspections of any wireless facilities or licensee poles located in the right-
of-way.
   (B)   Other inspections.  Except in an emergency, if the inspection requires
physical contact with the wireless facilities, the Director must provide
written notice to the operator at least five business days prior to the planned
inspection, and the operator may have a representative present during the
inspection. In the event of an emergency, the city may (but is not required to)
notify the operator of an inspection.
(Ord. 2017-22, passed 8-22-17)
§ 104.20  REMOVAL, RELOCATION AND MODIFICATION.
   (A)   Notice.  Within 90 days following written notice from the city of a
public works project, an operator must, at its own expense, protect, support,
temporarily or permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the
position of any small cell facilities within the rights-of-way, whenever the
city has determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration is
reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance or installation
of any city improvement in or upon, or the operations of the city in or upon,
the rights-of-way.
   (B)   Emergency removal or relocation of facilities.  The city retains the
right and privilege to cut or move any small cell facilities located within the
rights-of-way of the city, as the city may determine to be necessary,
appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If
circumstances permit, the city shall attempt to notify the operator, if known,
prior to cutting or removing a facility; and must notify the operator, if
known, after cutting or removing a small cell facility.
   (C)   Abandonment of facilities.  The operator must notify the city within
90 days of abandoning a small cell facility within the rights-of-way of the
city.  Following receipt of such notice, the city may direct the operator to
remove all or any portion of the facility, if the Director determines that such
removal will be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare.
(Ord. 2017-22, passed 8-22-17)
§ 104.21  COMPENSATION TO CITY.
   (A)   Right-of-way fee.  An operator must pay compensation to the city for
use of the rights-of-way in the amount of $250 annually per small cell
facility, or such higher amount as may be authorized by Texas Local Government
Code § 284.054, as amended, based on changes in the consumer price index after
the effective date of this section.
   (B)   Attachment fee.  An operator who attaches small cell facilities to
city-owned wireless support structures must pay compensation to the city in the
amount of $336 per attachment per year for use of a city-owned wireless support
structure.
   (C)   Other fees.  The application fee specified in this subchapter and the
fees authorized by this section  shall be the sole compensation, direct or
indirect, that an operator shall be required to pay to the city in connection
with the ownership, placement, operation and use of small cell facilities,
including any and all services provided pursuant to the facility or facilities.
However, compensation for attachment to municipally-owned utility poles shall
be governed by state law.
(Ord. 2017-22, passed 8-22-17)
§§ 104.22 - 104.27 [RESERVED]
§ 104.28  ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Permit revocation. Any permit issued hereunder may be revoked by the
Director if the permit holder is in violation of any of the provisions of this
subchapter, or has knowingly made a false material statement in the
application, or otherwise becomes disqualified to hold a permit under this
subchapter. Notice of the revocation must be given to the permit holder in
writing, with the reasons for the revocation specified in the notice, served
either by personal service of the notice upon the permit holder, or by
certified United States mail to the permit holder’s last known address. The
revocation shall become effective the day following personal service, or, if
mailed, three days from the date of mailing, and no additional permit under
this subchapter shall be issued to that person within one year thereafter.
   (B)   Administrative abatement.
      (1)   If an operator does not comply with this subchapter within ten days
of a notice of violation, the Director may order that the noncompliant
facilities be shut down, pending full compliance with this subchapter, or cause
the performance of the work necessary to abate the violation and charge the
expenses to the operator.
      (2)   Notice may be given personally, or by certified United States mail
to the address shown in the most recent application for a permit under this
subchapter.
      (3)   If a notice is mailed in accordance with this section, and the
United States Postal Servicereturns the notice as “refused” or “unclaimed,” the
validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is considered as
delivered.
      (4)   In a notice provided under this section, the Director may provide
that, if the operator commits another violation of the same kind or nature on
or before the first anniversary of the date of the notice, the city, without
further notice, may take any action permitted by this section. If a violation
covered by a notice under this subsection occurs within the one-year period,
and the Director has not been informed in writing by the operator of an
ownership change, then the Director, without notice, may take any action
permitted this section.
   (C)   Offense.  A person who violates a provision of this subchapter, or who
fails to perform an act required of the person by this subchapter, commits an
offense, and, upon conviction, shall be fined an amount not to exceed $2,000.
No culpable mental state shall be required to support a conviction for a
violation of this section. Each day’s violation thereof shall constitute a
separate offense.
   (D)   Authority of City Attorney.  The City Attorney may, without further
authorization of the City Council, undertake the enforcement of this subchapter
by all legal means appropriate or necessary, including, but not limited to:
enforcement in municipal court; filing of appropriate civil actions in courts
of appropriate jurisdiction; and defending the city from a suit if a suit is
taken to appeal any action of the city.
   (E)   Other remedies.  The penalties provided for in this section are in
addition to any other remedies that the city may have under city ordinances and
state law. Nothing in this section shall limit the remedies available to the
city in seeking to enforce the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2017-22, passed 8-22-17)
§ 104.29  APPEAL.
   (A)   Generally.  A person aggrieved by a permit denial or revocation, or
other administrative action under this subchapter, shall have the right to
appeal as provided in this section. Any decision to deny or revoke a permit, or
to impose another administrative action, will be stayed pending resolution of
an appeal.
   (B)   Initiating an appeal.  The appellant shall initiate an appeal by
filing a written notice with the Director and the City Secretary, briefly
describing the decision being appealed, and setting forth the address, fax,
electronic mail, and phone numbers at which the appellant wishes to receive
communications related to the appeal. The notice must be filed within seven
days of the date of the notice of the decision from which the appeal is sought.
   (C)   Hearing and decision.  The City Manager must provide for a hearing on
the appeal not later than 15 days after the notice of appeal is filed. The
appellant may appear in person or by counsel, at the time and place named in
the notice of setting, and may make a defense to the action. If the appellant
fails or refuses to appear, the City Manager may proceed to hear and determine
the appeal. When the City Manager has completed the hearing and made a
decision, he or she must cause one copy of the decision to be filed with the
Director, and one copy to be forwarded to the appellant by certified mail.
(Ord. 2017-22, passed 8-22-17)
CHAPTER 105:  PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
   
105.01   Intent
   
105.02   Definitions
   
105.03   General rules and regulations
   
105.04   Restricted areas and hours
   
105.05   Alcohol
   
105.06   Animals
   
105.07   Recreational activities
   
105.08   Vehicles
   
105.09   Additional rules
   
105.98   Enforcement
   
105.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Parks and Recreation Advisory Board, see §§
33.35 et seq.
§ 105.01  INTENT.
   It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to protect the public safety
and the general welfare by establishing conditions, restrictions, and manner of
use regulations pertaining to the municipal park system owned or operated by
the city.
(Ord. 2019-34, passed 10-22-19)
§ 105.02  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL. A living being of the biological kingdom Animalia, having a capacity
for spontaneous movement and rapid motor response to stimulation, and not of a
species having a capacity for articulate speech.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the City's Parks and Recreation Department.
   DRONE. An unmanned aircraft system (UAS) or an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV)
that can fly under the control of a remote pilot or via global positioning
system (GPS) guided autopilot mechanism.
   PARK. Any property in the City of Harker Heights designated as a park,
playground, recreation facility, greenspace, swimming pool, or hike and bike
path, including buildings, parking lots, driveways, improvements and facilities
located in such areas or used in whole or in part for such purposes.
   PARK ATTENDANT. Any person employed or designated by the city to perform
duties or tasks within the park and recreation areas.
   VEHICLE. A device that can be used to transport or draw persons or property
on a highway, roadway, or public road. The term does not include:
      (1)   A device exclusively used on stationary trails or tracks;
      (2)   Manufactured housing as that term is defined by Tex. Occupations
Code Ch. 1201;
      (3)   A baby carriage;
      (4)   A disability mobility device; or
      (5)   A vehicle in the service of the city or a public utility.
(Ord. 2019-34, passed 10-22-19)
§ 105.03  GENERAL RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The following rules and regulations shall be in force in all parks of the
City of Harker Heights located within or without the corporate limits of the
city.
   (A)   Injury to plants, improvements, etc. It shall be unlawful for any
person to cut, deface, mark, pluck, injure, damage, or destroy any shrub, tree,
plant, grass, turf, fountain, seat, fence, building, structure, ornament,
monument, or any other natural or artificial improvement in a park. (See also §
131.02.)
   (B)   Park facility use and program rates and other related charges. Park
facility rental rates, program registration rates, and other related charges
will be established by the City Council in the annual fee schedule.
   (C)   Disposal of litter. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or
discharge, or cause the deposit or discharge, of paper, glass, metal, litter,
rubbish, waste, garbage, refuse or trash of any description on any park lawn,
driveway, path, fountain, pond, stream, or other place except in receptacles
provided for that purpose. (See also §
51.02.)
   (D)   Commercial activity. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in
any commercial venture including offering to sell any goods, wares, merchandise
or food, or render any service for hire or to solicit funds or donations of any
item without the written permission of the Director.
   (E)   Noise regulations. See Chapter 95.
   (F)   Glass containers. It shall be unlawful for any person to use or
possess in any form a glass container in any area situated within a park.
   (G)   Fires. It shall be unlawful for any person to start or maintain an
outdoor fire in any park, except for cooking fires which shall be started and
maintained only in a stove, barbecue pit or in a portable camp stove. No person
starting or maintaining any fire in a park shall leave the fire unattended
without first completely extinguishing the fire.
   (H)   Interference with other park users. It shall be unlawful for any
person to recklessly and unreasonably prevent, disturb, disrupt, or interfere
with the lawful use of a park by another person, or any lawful activity
permitted within the park.
   (I)   Disorderly conduct. See § 42.01 of the Tex. Penal Code, as amended.
   (J)   Public nudity. It shall be unlawful for any person to appear in a
state of nudity.
(Ord. 2019-34, passed 10-22-19)
§ 105.04  RESTRICTED AREAS AND HOURS.
   (A)   Hours. All parks located within the city are closed to the public each
day from 11:00 p.m. until 5:00 a.m., unless otherwise permitted by the
Director. In addition, any municipal park, section or part thereof may be
declared closed to the public by the Director or a peace officer at any time
and for any interval of time upon a temporary basis (daily or otherwise),
either entirely or merely to certain uses as the Director or peace officer
shall find reasonably necessary to manage, use, preserve and govern park
property, buildings and activities.
   (B)   Restricted areas. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly
enter into or remain in or on a park or area designated by one or more posted
signs as "restricted" or "closed."
   (C)   Curfew in parks. See §
130.02.
   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that at
the time of the violation the person was lawfully attending a special event,
activity, or program that was sponsored by the city or conducted in the park
with written permission of the city.
(Ord. 2019-34, passed 10-22-19)
§ 105.05  ALCOHOL.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess or consume
any alcoholic beverage, as defined by the Tex. Alcoholic Beverage Code, while
in a park or a public street, public alley, or public parking lot adjacent to a
park.
   (B)   It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under division (A) of this
section that:
      (1)   The alcoholic beverage was in a  container with an unbroken seal or
other evidence of having never been opened; or
      (2)   At the time and place of the alleged offense the possession or
consumption was permitted by:
         (a)   A valid license issued by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage
Commission; or
         (b)   A permit, lease or rental agreement granted by the city.
(Ord. 2019-34, passed 10-22-19)
§ 105.06  ANIMALS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person while in a park to:
      (1)   Knowingly frighten, annoy, injure, or attempt to frighten, annoy,
or injure any animal, bird or reptile, or to remove or have possession of the
young, eggs or nest of any animal, reptile or bird, or to capture or attempt to
capture such animal, reptile or bird except with the consent of the owner
thereof.
      (2)   Keep or permit an animal unless the same is attended and kept under
the person's physical restraint at all times by means of a leash, cord, chain
or enclosure. (See also §
90.36.)
      (3)   Without written permission of the Director, ride any animal in or
upon a park area not specifically designated for such purpose. (See also §
90.06.)
      (4)   Tether or pasture, or allow or cause to be tethered or pastured,
any animal in a park. (See also §
90.49.)
      (5)   Bring a dangerous dog (as that term is defined by §
90.01) onto park property.
      (6)   If the animal is required to be vaccinated against rabies, bring
such animal onto park property without having in his or her immediate
possession proof of such current vaccination.
      (7)   Fail to have in his or her possession such materials or implements
as may be used immediately in a sanitary and lawful manner to remove and
dispose of defecation, as required by §
90.05, by an animal under his or her ownership or control in a park.
   (B)   Notwithstanding division (A) of this section, fishing shall be
permitted in areas designated by the Director and subject to such conditions as
may be imposed by the Director. In addition, the Director may authorize the
capture or killing of any animal within a park as necessary to eliminate or
minimize any nuisance or hazard to public health and safety, or to alleviate
suffering.
(Ord. 2019-34, passed 10-22-19)
§ 105.07  RECREATIONAL ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   Practicing golf. It shall be unlawful for any person to practice golf
in any portion of a park not specifically designated for that purpose.
   (B)   Shooting sports. It shall be unlawful for any person to launch, fire
or discharge any arrow, slingshot, firearm, or gun of any kind (including air
guns and paintball guns) within or across any park area not specifically
designated for that purpose. (See also §
130.44.)
   (C)   Throwing sports. It shall be unlawful for any person to practice
throwing a javelin, spear, knife, throwing star, shotput, discus, or other
dangerous object within or across any park area not specifically designated for
that purpose.
   (D)   Drones, kites, model airplanes, etc. It shall be unlawful for any
person to fly a kite, or propel or guide a drone, model airplane or rocket in
any park area traversed by high voltage transmission lines.
   (E)   Wading, swimming, or boating. It shall be unlawful for any person to
wade, swim, bathe, or boat within any park area not specifically designated for
that purpose.
   (F)   Camping. It shall be unlawful for any person to camp overnight in a
park without first obtaining a permit under this chapter.
   (G)   Climbing. It shall be unlawful for any person to climb fences,
buildings, or other structures in a park, except play equipment designated for
that purpose.
(Ord. 2019-34, passed 10-22-19)
§ 105.08  VEHICLES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Drive or operate any vehicle in, over or through any park area
except upon drives, streets, boulevards or other areas designated for such
purposes;
      (2)   Stop, stand or park any motor vehicle or to permit any such motor
vehicle to so stop, stand or park within any park except within the limit lines
of a designated parking stall or a passenger curb loading zone; or
      (3)   Wash a vehicle in any park or do routine maintenance in any park
area not specifically designated for that purpose.
   (B)   It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under division (A) of this
section that the driving, stopping, standing, or parking was due to temporary
mechanical failure of the vehicle, provided that as soon as reasonably possible
the operator completed emergency repairs or summoned tow removal equipment, as
appropriate.
   (C)   The Director is authorized to establish time limits for the parking of
motor vehicles within designated parking areas of the city's parks.
   (D)   If any motor vehicle is found within any park in violation of this
division and the identity of the operator of such vehicle cannot be determined:
      (1)   It is rebuttably presumed that the registered owner of the vehicle
is the person who stopped, stood, or parked the vehicle at the time and place
of the alleged offense; and
      (2)   The police may remove or impound the vehicle as provided by law.
(Ord. 2019-34, passed 10-22-19)
§ 105.09  ADDITIONAL RULES.
   (A)   The Director shall have the authority to adopt such additional rules
as may be reasonably necessary to protect the safety of persons and property in
parks, and to ensure that parks and recreation facilities are available for use
on an orderly and non-discriminatory basis for those persons wishing to utilize
those facilities.
   (B)   Rules adopted by the Director pursuant to this section shall be
conspicuously posted at the parks facilities to which they apply.
   (C)   The violation of a rule adopted pursuant to this section shall not
constitute an offense, but may subject the violator to ejection as provided by
§
105.99(A).
(Ord. 2019-34, passed 10-22-19)
§ 105.98  ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Compliance with rules and regulations of this chapter is a condition
of the use of the public parks and recreation areas of the city, and all peace
officers shall have the right and power to arrest any person who may violate
any of the rules, regulations, orders, or requirements of any ordinance or
general law relating to the maintenance of the parks located within or without
the corporate limits of the city.
   (B)   All park property owned and operated by the city shall be under the
jurisdiction of the Police Department of the city, and all rules and
regulations concerning said properties shall be enforced as provided herein.
   (C)   The Director and park attendants may in connection with their duties
diligently enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   Proof of the fact that any device, sign, signal or marking designating
or restricting any area of a park for particular hours, purposes, or uses was
actually in place at any location in the city shall constitute prima facie
evidence that the same was installed under the authority of law.
   (E)   It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this chapter that at
the time and place of the alleged violation the person:
      (1)   Had obtained written permission from the city or the Director to
engage in the activity for which the offense is charged;
      (2)   Was acting on instructions lawfully given by a peace officer, the
Director, or a park attendant;
      (3)   Was an employee or contractor of the city, or other public
official, acting in the course and scope of his or her official duties in
performing the activity for which the offense is charged; or
      (4)   Was responding appropriately to an emergency involving a sudden or
unexpected occurrence of a serious and urgent situation which requires
immediate action to preserve life or property, including without limitation
fire, natural disaster, an automobile accident, or seeking immediate medical
treatment for any person.
(Ord. 2019-34, passed 10-22-19)
§ 105.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Ejection. A person violating any provision of this chapter, or any
rule adopted by the Director hereunder, may be ejected from a park by the
Director, a peace officer, or any park attendant. It shall be unlawful for any
person to remain in or on any park property after being instructed by the
Director, a peace officer, or any park attendant to leave, and an unauthorized
return or refusal to leave shall constitute a criminal trespass.
   (B)   A violation of a provision of this chapter is an offense and shall be
punishable upon conviction by a fine of not more than $500. Unless otherwise
expressly provided, a culpable mental state is not required for the commission
of an offense under this chapter and need not be proved.
(Ord. 2019-34, passed 10-22-19)
TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   OCCUPATION TAX
      
111.   GARAGE SALES
      
112.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
113.   FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
      
114.   CABLE TELEVISION
      
115.   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
      
116.   SALES OF NATURAL GAS
      
117.   AMBULANCES
      
118.   TAXICABS
      
119.   WRECKERS AND TOWING BUSINESSES
      
120.   PEDDLERS AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS
      
121.   HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX
      
122.   RETAIL ELECTRICAL PROVIDERS
      
123.   REGISTRATION OF CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTORS
      
124.   CREDIT ACCESS BUSINESSES REGULATIONS
      
125.   ESTABLISHMENTS NOT LICENSED BY THE TEXAS ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE COMMISSION
CHAPTER 110:  OCCUPATION TAX
Section
   
110.01   Occupation taxes levied
   
110.02   State fees payable in advance
   
110.03   Payment of occupation tax required for conduct of business
   
110.04   Registration or receipt to be displayed
   
110.05   Rates of occupation taxes and city registration fees
   
110.06   Regulations on coin-operated machines
   
110.07   Carnivals; fee
   
110.99   Penalty
§ 110.01  OCCUPATION TAXES LEVIED.
   As hereinafter set forth, there shall be levied and collected annually an
occupation tax. Occupation taxes shall become due and payable the first day of
October of each year. In addition, a one-time initial city registration fee
shall be collected from all businesses established within the city corporate
limits. The tax/fee collected pursuant hereto shall become and be a part of the
general revenue for the current expenses of the city for the current year.
(Ord. 95-45, passed 10-10-95)
§ 110.02  STATE FEES PAYABLE IN ADVANCE.
   All permits and fees levied by the state are payable in advance. A separate
fee shall be obtained and separate fee paid for each outlet. No refund will be
made for any reason. The above state tax fees are levied by the state and
therefore taxed by the city.
(Ord. 95-45, passed 10-10-95)
§ 110.03  PAYMENT OF OCCUPATION TAX REQUIRED FOR CONDUCT OF BUSINESS.
   No person, firm, corporation, or other legal entity shall hereafter conduct
any business within the city limits until the occupation tax, city registration
fee, licensing and administration fees for such business are paid; and a
license issued therefore.
(Ord. 95-45, passed 10-10-95)
§ 110.04  REGISTRATION OR RECEIPT TO BE DISPLAYED.
   Each business, person, firm or corporation, or other legal entity engaging
in any business as set forth above shall secure and prominently display at said
place of business such city registration or receipt for occupation tax, as
appropriate.
(Ord. 95-45, passed 10-10-95)
§ 110.05  RATES OF OCCUPATION TAXES AND CITY REGISTRATION FEES.
   (A)   The following occupation taxes and city registration fees are assessed
and shall be collected from every person pursuing or who may pursue within the
corporate limits of the city any calling, occupation, profession, trade,
vocation, or business upon which a state occupation tax is levied under the
laws of the state. If any state tax is applicable thereto, city registration
fees are assessed as administration fees.
   (B)   Listed below are the rates of occupation taxes and city registration
fees assessed by the city:
      (1)   Annual occupation tax:
         (a)   Coin-operated machines: ¼ of annual state occupation tax on such
machines.
         (b)   All other businesses or professions as authorized by state law:
½ of the tax levied by the State on such profession or business.
      (2)   One-time initial registration fee: See the city's fee schedule for
applicable fee.
(Ord. 95-45, passed 10-10-95)
§ 110.06  REGULATIONS ON COIN-OPERATED MACHINES.
   The following regulations apply to coin-operated machines, as defined in
Tex. Tax Code Title 132, or its successor legislation:
   (A)   Existing laws: violations not authorized.  Nothing herein shall be
construed or have the effect to license, permit, authorize or legalize any
machine, device, table, or coin-operated machine, the keeping, exhibition,
operation, display or maintenance of which is now illegal or in violation of
any other statute, ordinance, law, rule, regulation or order.
   (B)   Records. Every “owner” of one or more coin-operated machines in this
city shall keep for the inspection at all times by authorized representatives
of the city, a complete, itemized record maintained in accordance with accepted
auditing and accounting practices of each and every such machine purchased,
received, possessed, handled, exhibited or displayed. Such record shall be kept
at the business and shall include the following information: The kind of each
such machine, the date acquired or received in the city, the date placed in
operation, and address of the owner. A person must keep the records required by
this section as long as the person owns the machine and for two years after the
date the person ceases to own the machine.
   (C)   Attachment of permit to machine. The permit issued by the State
Comptroller to evidence the payment of the tax levied herein shall be securely
attached to the machine in a manner that will require continued application of
steam and water to remove the same. A person may not attach a tax permit to a
machine that is exhibited or displayed unless the machine is registered with
the State Comptroller.
   (D)   Sealing of machines by city. The City shall seal any such machine on
which the tax has not been paid. A fee of $5 will be charged for the release of
any machine sealed as provided herein for nonpayment of tax. Whoever shall
break the seal affixed or exhibit, display or remove from location any machine
on which the seal has been broken shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor.
(Ord. 95-45, passed 10-10-95)
§ 110.07  CARNIVALS; FEE.
   Unless prohibited or restricted by another law or regulation, carnivals may
operate for up to three consecutive days and will be assessed a fee of $500 per
night, plus $50 per night, for each amusement device operated. Non-profit
organizations sponsoring carnivals may request exemption of these fees and time
restrictions. Such requests must be approved by the City Council.
(Ord. 95-45, passed 10-10-95)
§ 110.99  PENALTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, or other legal
entity, either personally or as an agent, servant or employee, to pursue or
conduct any business, occupation, vocation, calling, trade, profession, or
other activity for which an occupation tax or city registration fee is levied
by this chapter, without having first paid such tax or fee and complied with
all applicable provisions hereof. Except as other-wise provided herein, any
person, firm, corporation, or other legal entity violating or causing to be
violated, or permitting to be violated the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction therefore, shall be fined a
sum of not more than $500, and each day that any such violation shall occur or
continue shall be deemed a separate offense and shall be punishable as such.
All fines collected in the municipal court shall become a part of the general
fund.
(Ord. 95-45, passed 10-10-95)
CHAPTER 111:  GARAGE SALES
Section
   
111.01   Definition
   
111.02   General requirements
   
111.99   Penalty
§ 111.01  DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARAGE SALE.  The sale, barter, lease, or rental conditionally or otherwise
in any manner or by any means whatsoever of tangible personal property for a
consideration, and such transactions taking place on premises zoned or used
exclusively for residential purposes.
(Ord. 72-23, passed 12-12-73)
§ 111.02  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or allow a garage sale
on premises subject to that person’s ownership, occupancy or control, unless
all of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   Items offered for sale must belong to the owner or lessee of the
garage sale premises;
      (2)   All transactions must be confined to the garage sale premises;
      (3)   The retail sale of new merchandise or items acquired solely for the
purpose of resale is prohibited; and
      (4)   The duration of any sale shall not exceed three consecutive
calendar days.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or allow more than two
garage sales at the same property during any calendar year.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to permit garage sales in
violation of applicable deed restrictions or subdivision restrictions, or to
permit solicitation or other commercial activity when otherwise restricted or
prohibited by this code.
(Ord. 72-23, passed 12-12-73; Am. Ord. 2017-12, passed 6-13-17)  Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.99  PENALTY.
   Any person, corporation, or firm violating the provisions of this chapter
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof may be
fined not to exceed $500.
(Ord. 72-23, passed 12-12-73)
CHAPTER 112:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
   
112.01   License required
   
112.02   Sale near church or school
   
112.03   Hours of operation
   
112.99   Penalty
§ 112.01  LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or distribute any beer,
liquor, wine or other alcoholic beverage, or otherwise engage in any activity
for which a license or permit is required by the Texas Liquor Control Act,
within the city unless he has a current and unrevoked license so to do issued
by the city. The annual fee for such a license shall be in the amount equal to
one-half the amount of the license or permit fee imposed by the state to engage
in a similar activity. All such fees shall be paid in advance for one year at
the same time the State License or permit fees are due, unless such fee is
collected for only a portion of the year, in which event, the fee required
shall cover the period of time from the date of the license to the date the
State License or permit expires and only the proportionate part of the fees
shall be counted as one month in calculating the fee that shall be due.
   (B)   Upon payment of the applicable fee to the city and exhibition to the
City Secretary of a license or permit duly issued by the state to the applicant
or person paying such fee, the City Secretary shall, in the name of the City of
Harker Heights, issue and deliver to such applicant or person a city license to
engage in the business in the city of the character described in and authorized
by the permit or license from the state held by such applicant or person. The
license so issued in the name of the City of Harker Heights, shall authorize
the conduct of such business upon the premises described in the license from
the state and shall remain in force only so long as such permit or license from
the state remains in force.
(Ord. 81-08, passed 10-13-81) 
Penalty, see § 112.99
§ 112.02  SALE NEAR CHURCH OR SCHOOL.
   No beer or other alcoholic beverage shall be sold within the city by any
dealer where the place of business of such dealer is within 300 feet of any
church or school, the measurements to be along the property lines of street
fronts and from front door to front door and in direct line across intersection
where they occur.
(Ord. 81-08, passed 10-13-81) 
Penalty, see § 112.99
§ 112.03  HOURS OF OPERATION.
   It shall be unlawful for persons to consume or be served alcoholic beverages
in any private club or tavern during the following hours:
   (A)   On Sundays at any time between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon.
   (B)   On any other day between the hours of 2:00 a.m  and 7:00 a.m.
(Ord. 81-08, passed 10-13-81) 
Penalty, see § 112.99
§ 112.99  PENALTY.
   Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $500.
(Ord. 81-08, passed 10-13-81)
CHAPTER 113:  FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
General Provisions
   
113.01   Definitions
   
113.02   Purpose
   
113.03   Application of provisions; compliance
   
113.04   Adoption of state rules
   
113.05   Submission of plans
   
113.06   Extensions
   
113.07   Inspections
Food Handler's Registration
   
113.20   Health examination
   
113.21   Registration certificate required
   
113.22   Communicable disease control
   
113.23   Compliance
Food Service Establishments; Permits
   
113.35   Permit required
   
113.36   Application
   
113.37   Inspection of establishment
   
113.38   Fees
   
113.39   Duration of permit
   
113.40   Suspension
   
113.41   Notice
   
113.42   Removal of permit
   
113.43   Hearings
   
113.44   Revocation of food dealer's permit; notice
Manager's Certification
   
113.55   Food service manager's certification; generally
   
113.56   Certification card required
   
113.57   Operator of temporary food service establishment exempt
   
113.58   Certificate nontransferable
   
113.59   Application
   
113.60   Courses approved
   
113.61   Waiver
   
113.62   Course and examination
   
113.63   Certification identification card
   
113.64   Fees
   
113.65   Revocation
   
113.66   Fraudulent statement
   
113.67   Fraudulent use
   
113.68   Open meeting
   
113.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 113.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPROVED.  Acceptable to the Health Officer based on his determination of
conformance with appropriate standards of good public health practice. Such
approval shall be in writing and signed by the Health Officer or his authorized
representative.
   CATERER.  A food service establishment where food is completely or partially
prepared for delivery to a single customer, i.e., an individual, partnership,
corporation, association, or other legal entity; and where this food is
transported to the customer at a different location where it is meant to be
served and consumed.
   CLOSED.  Without openings large enough for the entrance of insects or other
vermin.
   COLD STORAGE.  The storing and preservation of food products by cold through
means of mechanical or electrical refrigeration.
   COMMISSARY.  Any kitchen where food is prepared and packaged for individual
consumption, to be transported by the person preparing the food of his agent to
another location off the premises.
   CONVENIENCE STORE.  A retail food store having less than 2500 square feet of
space in which food is kept or displayed.
   CORROSION-RESISTANT MATERIALS.  Those materials that maintain their original
surface characteristics under prolonged exposure to the food to be contacted,
the normal use of cleaning compounds and bactericidal solutions or other
conditions of the use or environment.
   EASILY CLEANABLE.  Surfaces are readily accessible and made of such material
and finish and so fabricated that residue may be effectively removed by normal
cleaning methods.
   EMPLOYEE.  Any individual having supervisory or management duties or any
other person working in a food establishment.
   EQUIPMENT.  Stoves, ovens, ranges, hoods, slicers, mixers, meatblocks,
tables, counters, refrigerators, sinks, dishwashing machines, steam tables, and
similar items, other than utensils, used in the operation of a food
establishment.
   FILTH.  Dust, dirt, insect excretions or secretions, insect body parts,
rodent hairs or excretions, feathers, or any foreign or injurious contaminants.
   FOOD.  Any raw, cooked, or processed edible substance, ice, beverage, or
ingredient used or intended for use or for sale in whole or in part for human
consumption.
   FOOD-CONTACT SURFACE. Surfaces of equipment and utensils with which food
normally comes in contact, and those surfaces from which food may drain, drip,
or splash back onto surfaces normally in contact with food.
   FOOD ESTABLISHMENT.  Includes all food service establishments and food
processing establishments.
   FOOD PROCESSING ESTABLISHMENT.  A commercial establishment in which food is
manufactured or packaged for human consumption and all commercial
establishments bottling water or other liquids intended for human consumption.
The term does not include a food service establishment or commissary operation.
   FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT.  Any place where food is prepared and intended
for individual portion service and includes the site at which individual
portions are provided. The term includes any such place regardless of whether
consumption is on or off the premises and regardless of whether there is a
charge for the food. The term also includes delicatessen-type operations that
prepare sandwiches intended for individual portion service, commissaries, and
retail food stores. The term does not include private homes where food is
prepared or served for individual family consumption, the location of food
vending machines, or supply vehicles.
   GARBAGE.  Every accumulation of animal, vegetable, or other waste matter
that attends the preparation, handling, consumption, storage, or decay of plant
and animal matter, including meats, fish and seafoods, birds, fruit, vegetable,
or dairy products and the waste wrappers or containers thereof.
   HEALTH OFFICER.  The Director of Public Health of the city, or his
authorized representatives.
   HERMETICALLY SEALED CONTAINER.  A container designed and intended to be
secure against the entry of microorganisms and to maintain the sterility of its
content after processing.
   KITCHENWARE.  All multi-use utensils other than tableware.
   LAW.  Applicable federal, state and local statutes, ordinances, and
regulations.
   MOBILE FOOD UNIT.  A vehicle mounted food service establishment designed to
be readily moveable.
   PACKAGED.  Bottled, canned, cartoned, or securely wrapped.
   PERISHABLE FOOD.  Any food of such type or in such condition as may spoil.
   PERSON.  An individual, partnership, corporation, association, trustee, or
other legal entity.
   PERSON IN CHARGE.  The individual present in a food establishment at the
time. If no individual is the apparent supervisor, then each employee present
shall be deemed to be the person in charge.
   POTABLE WATER.  Water from an approved source which has been determined by
the Health Officer after appropriate testing as suitable for human consumption.
   POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD.  Any food that consists in whole or in part of
milk, milk products, eggs, meat, poultry, fish, shellfish, edible crustacea, or
other ingredients, including synthetic ingredients, in a form capable of
supporting rapid and progressive bacteria growth, but not including clean,
whole, uncracked, odor-free shell eggs, or foods which have pH level of 4.5 or
below or a water activity (Aw) value of 0.85 or less.
   PRODUCE.  All vegetables, fruits, nuts, berries, melons, cantaloupes, and
other edible plant material.
   RECONSTITUTED.  Dehydrated food products recombined with water or other
liquids.
   REFUSE.  Putrescible and non-putrescible solid and semi-solid wastes,
including garbage, rubbish, and ashes.
   RETAIL FOOD STORE.  Any establishment where food and food products are
offered for sale to the ultimate consumer and intended for off-premises
consumption; provided, however, the term shall not include an establishment
where food is primarily prepared and sold for individual portion service.
   RUBBISH.  Non-putrescible solid wastes, excluding ashes, consisting of both
combustible and non-combustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, waste metal,
tin cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, crockery, plastics, and similar
materials.
   SAFE MATERIALS.  Articles manufactured from or composed of materials that
may not reasonably be expected to become, directly or indirectly, a component
of or otherwise affect the characteristics of any food. If materials are food
additives or color additives as defined in Section 201 (s) or (t) of the
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act as used, they are safe only if they are
used in conformity with regulations established pursuant to Section 409 or
Section 706 of the Act. Other materials are safe only if they are not food
additives or color additives as defined in Section 201 (s) or (t) of the
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, as used.
   SANITIZATION.  Effective bactericidal treatment by a process that provides
enough accumulative heat or concentration of chemicals for enough time to
reduce the bacterial count, including pathogens, to a safe level on utensils
and equipment.
   SEALED.  Free of cracks or other openings that permit the entry or passage
of moisture.
   SINGLE-SERVICE ARTICLES.  Caps, containers, lids, closures, plates, knives,
forks, spoons, stirrers, paddles, straws, napkins, wrapping materials,
toothpicks, and similar articles designed for one-time, one-person use.
   TABLEWARE.  Multi-use eating and drinking utensils, including flatware
(knives, forks and spoons).
   TEMPORARY FOOD-SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT.  Any food-service establishment that
operates at a fixed location for a period of time of not more than 14
consecutive days in conjunction with a single event or celebration.
   UTENSILS.  Any implement used in the storage, preparation, transportation,
or service of food.
   WHOLESOME.  In sound condition, clean, and otherwise suitable for use as
human food.
(Ord. 79-1, passed 2-13-79)
§ 113.02  PURPOSE.
   This chapter shall be liberally construed and applied to promote its
underlying purpose of protecting the public health.
(Ord. 79-1, passed 2-13-79)
§ 113.03  APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS; COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   All provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all food
establishments unless specifically limited to food processing establishments or
to food service establishments.
   (B)   No food service establishment or food processing establishment shall
be operated within the city unless it conforms with the requirements of this
chapter.
   (C)   A permit holder shall insure that the food establishment or mobile
food unit is in full compliance with this chapter at all times. The person in
charge shall insure that the food establishment is operated in full compliance
with this chapter and that all food is stored, prepared, displayed, and served
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   The sanitation requirements set out in this chapter shall be
applicable to itinerant restaurants insofar as practicable. The Health Officer
is authorized to make such inspections of itinerant restaurants as he may deem
necessary for the protection of public health, and require such compliance with
provisions of this chapter as will, in his judgment, safeguard the public
health. No itinerant restaurant shall be operated more than ten days in any
calendar year, and any operation for a longer period than ten days shall
subject such itinerant restaurant to all the provisions of this chapter,
including, but not limited to, provisions requiring permits, permanent
installations, prescribed equipment and specifications for floors, screens, and
all other improvements.
(Ord. 79-1, passed 2-13-79)
§ 113.04  ADOPTION OF STATE RULES.
   This chapter shall be enforced by the Health Officer in accordance with the
Texas Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, Tex. Health & Safety Code §§ 431.001 et
seq., together with the latest edition of Texas Health Department Rules for
Food Establishments and Retail Food Stores and the provisions of this chapter.
The cited rules as they now exist and as they may be amended from time to time
are adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter except as otherwise
provided herein and will be used as the basis for required food sanitation
standards.
(Ord. 79-1, passed 2-13-79)
§ 113.05  SUBMISSION OF PLANS.
   (A)   Plans to be submitted to Health Officer. If a food establishment is
constructed or remodeled and whenever an existing structure is converted to use
as a food establishment, three sets of properly prepared plans and
specifications for such construction, remodeling, or alteration shall be
submitted to the Health Officer for approval before construction, remodeling,
or alteration is begun. The plans and specifications shall indicate the
proposed layout, arrangement, and construction materials of work areas, and the
type of proposed fixed equipment and facilities. The Health Officer shall
approve the plans and specifications if they meet the requirements of this
chapter. No food establishment shall be constructed, remodeled, or altered
except in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the Health
Officer. If any changes are to be made concerning proposed layout, arrangement,
construction materials of work areas, or the type of proposed fixed equipment
and facilities after the first set of plans and specifications has been
approved and delivered to the owner or contractor, revised plans and
specifications shall be submitted to and reviewed and approved by the Health
Officer before such changes are made.
   (B)   Disposition of approved plans and specifications. One set of the
approved plans and specifications will be given to the owner or contractor
responsible for the construction of the establishment. The second set of
approved plans and specifications will be transferred to the representative of
the Health Officer responsible for the pre-operational inspection and will be
signed over to the establishment owner by said representative upon completion
of construction and issuance of a permit. The third set of approved plans and
specifications will remain on file with the Health Officer.
   (C)   Pre-operational inspection. Whenever plans and specifications are
required to be submitted to the Health Officer, the Health Officer or his
authorized representative shall inspect the food establishment prior to its
beginning operation to determine compliance with the approved plans and
specifications and with the requirements of this chapter.
   (D)   The requirements of this section shall be in addition to all
applicable requirements of the Building Code of the city.
(Ord. 79-1, passed 2-13-79)
 Penalty, see § 113.99
§ 113.06  EXTENSIONS.
   A food establishment licensed at the time of enactment of this chapter which
must undertake alterations or remodeling of its present facilities in order to
comply with the minimum requirements of this chapter may apply for an extension
of time to complete such work. Upon such application, the Health Officer shall
grant a reasonable time, not to exceed six months, for completion of such
alterations or remodeling if good cause is shown.
(Ord. 79-1, passed 2-13-79)
§ 113.07  INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The Health Officer shall inspect every food establishment located
within the city as often as it is deemed necessary. The Health Officer may take
and examine samples of food, drink, and other substances found on the premises
for detection of unwholesomeness and adulteration, and may condemn, forbid the
sale of, and cause to be removed or destroyed any food or drink which is
unwholesome or adulterated.
   (B)   If violations occur which do not present an imminent hazard to the
public health, the Health Officer shall immediately notify the permit holder
thereof and shall make a second inspection after the lapse of such time as he
deems necessary for the violation to be corrected. Any violations of the same
nature found on reinspection shall be grounds for immediate suspension of the
permit, court action, or both.
   (C)   In cases involving an imminent health hazard, such as a sewage back-up
into the establishment, or an absence of sanitization or refrigeration, the
establishment shall immediately cease food service operations and the permit
shall be suspended.
   (D)   If a food establishment is required to cease operations under the
provisions of this section, it shall not resume operations until such time as a
reinspection determines that conditions responsible far the cessation of
operations no longer exists. Opportunity for reinspection shall be offered
within reasonable time.
   (E)   Food from food establishments outside the jurisdiction of the city may
be sold within the city provided such food establishments maintain a valid
permit issued under Bell County Regulations.
   (F)   The Health Officer shall post one copy of the inspection report upon a
wall inside the food service establishment, retail food store, or mobile food
service unit. Such inspection report shall be displayed in clear view and shall
not be defaced or removed except by the Health Officer. He shall file one copy
of the inspection report with the records of his office.
(Ord. 79-1, passed 2-13-79)
FOOD HANDLER'S REGISTRATION
§ 113.20  HEALTH EXAMINATION.
   (A)   No food handler's registration certificate for use in the city shall
be issued by the Bell County Health Department to any person required by law or
by this chapter to have or exhibit such a certificate certifying the holder to
be free from contagious, infectious, or communicable diseases until the
applicant for such certificate shall have been first tested and examined with a
recognized standard test for syphilis which must be given under the supervision
of a physician licensed to practice in Bell County, Texas.
   (B)   In addition to division (A) of this section, each such applicant shall
be required to be further examined for tuberculosis by a tuberculin skin test
and/or x-ray examination of the lungs. In the event the applicant takes a
tuberculin skin test and it shows a positive reaction, such applicant shall be
required to have an x-ray examination of the lungs by a licensed physician in
Bell County, Texas, or by the Bell County Health Department.
   (C)   If the applicant is found to have a non-reactive result of the
standard serological test for syphilis and to have no evidence of active
tuberculosis then the applicant must undergo a physical examination and secure
from a licensed physician practicing in Bell County, Texas, a certificate
certifying that the applicant is free of all contagious, infectious, and
communicable diseases including tuberculosis and venereal diseases. After the
above has been accomplished the applicant shall then present his physical
examination certificate to the Bell County Health Department and shall
thereupon be issued a food handler's registration certificate. Each such
certificate must be renewed by each such applicant each 12 months by the same
procedure as outlined above.
(Ord. 65-3, passed - -65)
§ 113.21  REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any food handler, as defined in this chapter to
work for any food service establishment or grocery store in the city without
having a food handler's registration certificate issued to him or her by the
Bell County Health Department which is valid at the time of employment. Said
food handler's registration certificate shall be surrendered to the employer
who shall post it in a conspicuous location.
(Ord. 65-3, passed - -65) 
Penalty, see § 113.99
§ 113.22  COMMUNICABLE DISEASE CONTROL.
   When the Health Officer, the Director of the Bell County Health Department,
or a representative at said department has reason to believe that there exists
a possibility of transmission of infection from a food handler, he shall be
authorized to require any or all of the following:
   (A)   The immediate exclusion of the employee, as an employee, from all food
establishments.
   (B)   The immediate closing of the food establishment concerned until no
further danger of disease outbreak exists.
   (C)   Adequate medical examinations of the employee and of his associates,
with such laboratory examinations as may be indicated. The expense of such
examinations is to be the responsibility of the employer.
(Ord. 65-3, passed  - -65)
§ 113.23  COMPLIANCE.
   It shall hereafter be unlawful for any food service establishment or grocery
to work or employ any food handler until such food handler has fully complied
with all city ordinances now or hereafter enacted and with all the provisions
of this subchapter until such food handler has received a food handler's
registration certificate from the Bell County Health Department or the Health
Officer which is valid at the time of such employment. The Bell County Health
Department or the Health Officer shall issue food handler's registration
certificates to food handlers who satisfactorily pass the tests and health
examination hereinafter specified and shall be required to be renewed as
hereinafter stated.
(Ord. 65-3, passed  - -65; Am. Ord. 66-3, passed 4-12-66)
 Penalty, see § 113.99
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS; PERMITS
§ 113.35  PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate a food processing establishment, food service
establishment, temporary food establishment, or mobile food unit who does not
possess a “food dealer's permit.” Only a person who complies with the
requirements of this chapter shall be entitled to receive or retain such a
permit. Permits are not transferable from one person to another person or from
one place to another place. A valid permit shall be posted in view of the
public in every food service establishment. Permits for temporary food service
establishments shall be issued for a period of time not to exceed 14
consecutive days. All food dealer's permits shall remain the property of the
Bell County Health Department.
(Ord. 79-1, passed 2-13-79)
 Penalty, see § 113.99
§ 113.36  APPLICATION.
   (A)   Any person desiring to obtain a food dealer's permit shall make
written application for such permit on forms provided by the Health Officer.
Such application shall include:
      (1)   The applicant's full name and address and shall state whether such
applicant is an individual, firm, or corporation, and, if a partner-ship, the
names of the partners, together with their addresses;
      (2)   The location and type of proposed food processing or food service
establishment;
      (3)   The signature of the applicant or applicants.
   (B)   If the application is for a temporary food service establishment, the
application must also set out:
      (1)   The dates of the proposed operations;
      (2)   The name, address, and telephone number of the owner or owners of
the property where the temporary food service establishment is to be located;
      (3)   A statement signed by the owner of the property or his authorized
agent stating that arrangements have been made for the proper disposal of all
rubbish, trash, and garbage, and for maintenance of the property free of litter
and nuisance during the period of operation up to and including any clean-up
time.
      (4)   A description of such arrangements and the attendant facilities
must be included.
(Ord. 79-1, passed 2-13-79)
§ 113.37  INSPECTION OF ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   Before approving an application for a permit, the Health Officer shall
inspect the establishment and premises to determine compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   The Health Officer shall issue a permit to the applicant if the
proposed food establishment complies with the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 79-1, passed 2-13-79)
§ 113.38  FEES.
   (A)   At the time of issuance of an original food dealer's permit and each
renewal thereof, the person requesting the permit shall pay the City of Harker
Heights the permit fee set out in division (B) of this section.
   (B)   The fee for a food dealer's permit shall be deemed paid when that
particular business has paid their city occupation tax. (Refer to
Chapter 110, “Occupation Tax.”) Food service establishments which operate
exclusively as a part of a hospital, nursing home, day care center, home or
center for the aged, or any other medical care institution or facility that is
licensed by the state, or as a public school or college, a church kitchen, or a
recognized fraternal organization shall be charged no fee; however, such
establishments must otherwise comply with the applicable provisions of this
chapter.
   (C)   Mobile food service units. At the time of issuance of an original food
dealer's permit to the operator of a mobile food service unit and each renewal
thereof, the person requesting said food dealer's permit shall pay the city the
designated occupation tax for mobile food service units.
(Ord. 79-1, passed 2-13-79)
§ 113.39  DURATION OF PERMIT.
   A food dealer's permit shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance
and may be renewed on or before the first day after the expiration date of the
previous permit.
(Ord. 79-1, passed 2-13-79)
§ 113.40  SUSPENSION.
   The Health Officer may suspend any food dealer's permit with such notice as
is reasonable under the circumstances, if the permit holder does not comply
with the requirements of this chapter, or if the operation of the food
processing or food service establishment or the mobile food service unit other-
wise constitutes a substantial hazard to public health. Suspension is effective
upon service of the notice required by §
113.41 of this chapter. Where a permit is suspended, food processing and/or
food service operations shall immediately cease.
(Ord. 79-1, passed 2-13-79)
§ 113.41  NOTICE.
   (A)   Whenever a permit is suspended, written notice shall be given to the
permit holder, the person in charge or any employee or agent of the food
service establishment or mobile food service unit. Such notice shall state:
      (1)   The specific condition in the food establishment or mobile unit
which is in violation of this chapter.
      (2)   The specific condition which constitutes a substantial hazard to
public health.
      (3)   That a hearing will be held before the Health Officer or his
designate at the request of permittee.
      (4)   The date, time, and place of such hearing.
      (5)   That the permit holder may appear in person, be represented by
counsel, present testimony and cross-examine all witnesses.
   (B)   Such hearing shall be held not later than ten days after the date of
suspension.
(Ord. 79-1, passed 2-13-79)
§ 113.42  REMOVAL OF PERMIT.
   Whenever a permit is suspended, it shall be removed from the premises by the
Health Officer and retained at the Health Department until the suspension has
terminated.
(Ord. 79-1, passed 2-13-79)
§ 113.43  HEARINGS.
   (A)   All hearings shall be held by the Director of the Bell County Health
Department or his designated representative. Such official shall be referred to
as the Hearing Officer. However, the Director of the Bell County Health
Department shall not designate as hearing officer any person or persons who
have participated in the inspection of such food establishment or mobile unit,
or has prior knowledge of the allegations or circumstances discovered in such
inspection except such person designated as Hearing Officer may, prior to the
hearing, receive a copy of the notice given to the permit holder or the person
in charge.
   (B)   All hearings shall be conducted under rules consistent with the nature
of the proceedings, including but not limited to the following rules which
shall apply to such hearings:
      (1)   All parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel;
      (2)   Each party may present witnesses in his own behalf;
      (3)   Each party has the right to cross-examine all witnesses; and,
      (4)   Only evidence presented at such hearing may be considered in
reaching a decision.
   (C)   If the permit holder fails to appear at the hearing, the Health
Department shall present sufficient evidence to establish a prima facie case.
   (D)   If the Hearing Officer finds that the food service establishment, food
processing establishment, or mobile unit was in violation of this chapter or
that it constituted a hazard to public health, the Hearing Officer shall make
written findings of fact and shall order the permit suspended until all
violations of this chapter are corrected and any conditions constituting a
hazard to public health are eliminated. A copy of the findings and order of the
Hearing Officer shall be sent to the permit holder by certified mail, return
receipt requested
   (E)   If the Hearing Officer finds that the public interest will be
adequately protected by a warning or other penalties authorized under this
chapter, he may reinstate the permit.
   (F)   Whenever the reasons for a suspension no longer exist, the permit
holder or person in charge shall notify the Health Officer that the conditions
have been corrected and request an inspection. Such inspection shall be made as
soon as possible but not later than three regular working days after the
receipt of the request.
(Ord. 79-1, passed 2-13-79)
§ 113.44  REVOCATION OF FOOD DEALER'S PERMIT; NOTICE.
   (A)   Grounds for revocation. A food dealer's permit may be revoked if:
      (1)   The permit holder or his agents or employees interfere with an
inspection of the food establishment by the Health Officer or his authorized
agents.
      (2)   There are repeated or serious violations of Federal or State food
laws.
      (3)   There are repeated or serious violations of this chapter.
      (4)   In the case of mobile food service units, the permit holder or his
agent has not reported an accident to the Health Officer within 24 hours of the
time the accident occurred if such accident resulted in damage to the water
system, waste retention tank, food service equipment, or any facility which may
result in the contamination of the food being carried or any damage which
results in a violation of the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Notice. Prior to revocation, written notice shall be given to the
permit holder or person in charge. Such notice shall state:
      (1)   The grounds for revocation.
      (2)   The specific provisions of law upon which the city will rely in
seeking revocation of the permit.
      (3)   That a hearing will be held before the Director or his designated
agents.
      (4)   The date, time, and place of such hearing.
      (5)   That the permit holder may appear in person, be represented by
counsel, present testimony, and cross-examine all witnesses.
   (C)   Hearing. Such hearing shall be held in accordance with §
113.43 of this chapter. If the permit holder fails to appear at the hearing at
the time, place and date specified, the Health Department shall present
sufficient evidence to establish a prima facie case.
   (D)   Findings. After completion of a hearing, the Hearing Officer shall
make written findings. If the Hearing Officer finds that grounds do exist for
revocation of the permit, he shall revoke same. A copy of the findings and
order of revocation shall be sent to the permit holder by certified mail,
return receipt requested. If the address of the permit holder is unknown, or if
such papers are returned undelivered, such papers shall be served on the person
in charge of the food establishment or mobile food service unit.
   (E)   Upon service of a written notice that the permit has been revoked as
provided herein, all food operations shall cease.
   (F)   Whenever a permit is revoked, it shall be removed from the premises or
vehicle by the Health Officer.
   (G)   If a permit is revoked, no refund of any part of the permit fee shall
be made. Reinstatement of a permit which has been revoked shall require
application and payment of a permit fee as if it were an initial application.
   (H)   Any notice provided in this chapter may be served by personal delivery
or by certified mail, return receipt requested.
(Ord. 79-1, passed 2-13-79)
MANAGER'S CERTIFICATION
§ 113.55  FOOD SERVICE MANAGER'S CERTIFICATION; GENERALLY.
   There shall be a program of food service manager's certification conducted
under the direction of the Director of the Bell County Health Department. Such
a program shall have as its primary goal the training of persons in managerial
positions within the food service industry in safe handling practices,
including knowledge of this chapter, and the Texas Department of Health, Rules
on Food Service Sanitation. Training shall be by means of a course made
available to those persons seeking certification. If all course requirements
have been met and the applicant has demonstrated by means of an examination
that he possesses the required minimum knowledge, he shall be issued a
certification card.
(Ord. 79-1, passed 2-13-79)
§ 113.56  CERTIFICATION CARD REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating, directing, or
managing any food establishment, catering operation, or any place or vehicle
regulated by this chapter where food or drink is manufactured, produced,
processed, prepared, or otherwise manipulated to fail to employ, or fail to
keep in his employ a manager, assistant manager, supervisor, or other person in
charge of said establishment who has in his possession a current food service
manager's certification card. Provided, however, the following places of
business shall not be required to have a certified food service manager in
charge of such store or such school:
   (A)   Convenience stores, if such store is under the supervision of a food
service manager who so supervises not more than eight such stores.
   (B)   Public schools.
   (C)   Colleges.
   (D)   Churches.
   (E)   Hospitals.
(Ord. 79-1, passed 2-13-79) 
Penalty, see § 113.99
§ 113.57  OPERATOR OF TEMPORARY FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT EXEMPT.
   Persons applying for a permit to operate a temporary food service
establishment shall be exempt from the food service manager's certification
requirements if such applicant can show evidence of an adequate understanding
of the chapter dealing with temporary food service establishments, and an
adequate understanding of satisfactory operating practices and is not
simultaneously associated with another food service operation in the city or
its immediate environs.
(Ord. 79-1, passed 2-13-79)
§ 113.58  CERTIFICATE NONTRANSFERABLE.
   A food service manager's certification is not transferable from one person
to another person.
(Ord. 79-1, passed 2-13-79)
§ 113.59  APPLICATION.
   (A)   Any person desiring food service manager's certification shall make
application on forms provided by the Director. Such application shall include:
      (1)   The applicant's full name and address.
      (2)   Identifying features such as color of hair, eyes, height, weight,
sex, and age.
      (3)   A summary of the applicant's experience as a food service manager.
      (4)   The name and address of the establishment where the applicant is
currently employed.
      (5)   A description of duties.
      (6)   The signature and title of the applicant.
   (B)   A completed application for food service manager's certification shall
serve as a request for enrollment in a special course of training conducted
under the direction of the Director.
   (C)   All applications for food service manager's certification must be
accompanied by the appropriate fee.
(Ord. 79-1, passed 2-13-79)
§ 113.60  COURSES APPROVED.
   Those agencies, institutions, or other entities wishing to conduct a course
of training for food service manager's certification may do so if the course
curriculum and instructors have been approved by the Director.  All
examinations for certification are to be administered by the Bell County Health
Department.
(Ord. 79-1, passed 2-13-79)
§ 113.61  WAIVER.
   (A)   The requirement that an applicant attend a course and pass an
examination shall be waived if the applicant has been employed for three
consecutive years as a food service manager or in a similar position of
authority immediately preceding the effective date of this chapter, or if the
applicant is a graduate of a two-year program in restaurant or hotel management
approved by the Director. The Director shall approve such program only if he
finds that the curriculum is sufficient to insure that the students are
knowledgeable in safe food handling practices. An applicant must attend a
course of training and pass an examination if repeated violations of the Health
Code have occurred in the food establishment where the applicant has been in a
position with authority to prevent or eliminate such violations.
   (B)   The Health Officer may deny an application for a food service
manager's certification if the applicant knowingly makes any false, fraudulent,
or unlawful statement on the application.
(Ord. 79-1, passed 2-13-79)
§ 113.62  COURSE AND EXAMINATION.
   (A)   The training course for food service manager's certification shall be
at least ten hours in length and no more than 12 hours in length.
   (B)   Courses will be scheduled periodically in Bell County to allow
qualified individuals the opportunity for training.
   (C)   All persons completing the course of training for food service
manager's certification shall be required to demonstrate by means of an
examination that they possess a minimum essential knowledge of safe food
handling practices, including an acceptable knowledge of this chapter and the
Texas Department of Health Rules of Food Service Sanitation. A passing score
for this examination shall be at least 75 points out of a possible 100. If an
applicant fails to pass the required examination for certification, he must
take or repeat the course of training before taking another examination.
(Ord. 79-1, passed 2-13-79)
§ 113.63  CERTIFICATION IDENTIFICATION CARD.
   (A)   A person may be issued a food service manager's certification card if
he meets the requirements set forth in §
113.62. The card shall include:
      (1)   The applicant's full name and post office address.
      (2)   Identifying features such as height, weight, and age.
      (3)   The signature of the person certified.
      (4)   The signature of the Director.
      (5)   The date issued.
      (6)   The expiration date.
      (7)   A photograph of the holder.
   (B)   A person possessing a food service manager's certification card shall
have said card on his person at all times while on duty.
   (C)   A person possessing a food service manager's certification card shall
present said card for examination when requested to do so by the Health Officer
or his duly authorized representative.
   (D)   Valid food service manager's certification cards remain the property
of the Bell County Health Department and may be required to be returned to the
Health Officer in case of revocation.
(Ord. 79-1, passed 2-13-79)
§ 113.64  FEES.
   (A)   Fees for food service manager's certification and renewals thereof are
as follows:
      (1)   Food service manager's certificate. The fee for certification
during the first 12 months immediately following adoption of this chapter shall
be as set forth in the city's fee schedule. Fees for certification in
subsequent years will be determined annually by the Bell County Board of Health
and will not exceed actual costs. All such fees will be paid to the Director,
Bell County Health Department, for use in meeting reasonable and necessary
expenses incurred by the Bell County Health Department in administering the
certification program. This fee is required regardless of whether or not the
course requirement is waived. Fees are refundable only if the application is
denied by the Health Officer.
      (2)   Replacement of a certification card. An individual who has lost a
valid current food service manager's certification card may obtain a
replacement from the Health Officer for a fee in an amount as set forth in the
city's fee schedule.
   (B)   A food service manager's card shall be valid for three years and shall
be renewed on or before the first day after the expiration date of the current
certification.
   (C)   Any person desiring to renew a food service manager's certificate
shall make application on forms provided by the Director not more than 30 days
prior to nor later than 30 days after the date of expiration of the
certificate. Such person shall set forth:
      (1)   His full name,
      (2)   Address,
      (3)   Identifying features such as color of hair, eyes, weight, sex, and
age,
      (4)   The name and address of the establishment where the person is
employed,
      (5)   His title,
      (6)   A description of his duties, and
      (7)   His signature.
   (D)   Such renewal application must be accompanied by payment of the fee as
set forth in division (A)(1) of this section.
(Ord. 79-1, passed 2-13-79)
§ 113.65  REVOCATION.
   (A)   A food service manager's certificate may be revoked if:
      (1)   The food service manager interferes with an inspection of the food
establishment by the Health Officer or his authorized agents.
      (2)   There are repeated or serious violations of this chapter, state or
federal laws in the food establishment at times the food service manager is in
charge.
   (B)   Prior to revocation, written notice shall be given to the food service
manager and to his employer. Such notice shall state:
      (1)   The grounds for revocation.
      (2)   The specific violations of law upon which the Department will rely.
      (3)   That a hearing will be held before the Director or his designated
agents.
      (4)   The date, time, and place of such hearing.
      (5)   That the food service manager may appear in person, be represented
by counsel, present testimony and cross-examine all witnesses.
   (C)   Such hearing shall be held in accordance with §
113.43. If the food service manager fails to appear at the hearing at the time,
place and date specified, the Department will present sufficient evidence to
establish a prima facie case.
   (D)   After completion of the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall make
written findings. If the Hearing Officer finds that grounds do exist for
revocation of the certificate, he shall revoke same. A copy of the written
findings and order of revocation shall be sent to the food service manager and
his employer by certified mail, return receipt requested.
   (E)   Upon receiving written notice of revocation, the food service manager
shall return the card to the Health Officer. In the event a certificate is
revoked, the Health Department shall not be liable for any refund of the fee
paid for the certificate.
   (F)   A person whose food service manager's certificate has been revoked
shall not be granted a new certificate until he has attended a training course,
passed the examination subsequent to the revocation, and met all requirements
of an initial applicant.
(Ord. 79-1, passed 2-13-79)
§ 113.66  FRAUDULENT STATEMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to make any false, fraudulent,
or untruthful statement on any application for food service manager's
certification or knowingly to conceal any material fact or give or use any
fictitious name in order to secure or aid in securing a food service manager's
certification. Any such food service manager's certification card so secured
shall be void.
(Ord. 79-1, passed 2-13-79) 
Penalty, see § 113.99
§ 113.67  FRAUDULENT USE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to make use of, in any manner, a food
service manager's certification card which has not been duly issued him.
(Ord. 79-1, passed 2-13-79)
 Penalty, see § 113.99
§ 113.68  OPEN MEETING.
   It is hereby officially found and determined that the meeting at which this
chapter is passed is open to the public and that public notice of said meeting
was given as required by law.
(Ord. 79-1, passed 2-13-79)
§ 113.99  PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine in an
amount to be set by the judge.  Provided, however, if such person is convicted
of an offense under this chapter which offense is also a violation of Tex.
Health & Safety Code § 431.021, such person shall be subject to a fine in an
amount to be set by the judge; and for the second or subsequent offense shall
be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000.  However,
nothing in this chapter shall be construed as requiring the Health Officer to
report minor violations of this chapter for prosecution whenever the Health
Officer believes the public interest will be adequately served in the
circumstances by a warning.
(Ord. 79-1, passed 2-13-79)
CHAPTER 114:  CABLE TELEVISION
Section
   
114.01     Definitions
   
114.02     Review of initial basic cable rates
   
114.03     Review request for increase in basic rates
   
114.04    Cable operator information
   
114.05     Automatic rate adjustments
   
114.06    Enforcement
 
   
114.99     Penalty
§ 114.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BASIC CABLE RATES.  The monthly charges imposed by a cable operator for a
subscription to the basic service tier and the associated equipment.
   BASIC SERVICE TIER.  A separately available service tier to which
subscription is required for access to any other tier of service, including as
a minimum, but not limited to, all must-carry signals, all PEG channels, and
all domestic television signals other than superstations, provided by the cable
operator to any subscribers, except a signal of a television station which is
secondarily transmitted by a satellite carrier beyond the local service area of
such station, and any additional video programming signals as a service added
to the basic tier by the cable operator.
   BENCHMARK.  A per channel rate of charge for cable service and associated
equipment which the FCC has determined is reasonable.
   CABLE ACT OF 1992.  The Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition
Act of 1992.
   CABLE OPERATOR.  Any person or group of persons:
      (1)   Who provides cable service over a cable system and directly or
through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such a cable
system; or
      (2)   Who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any
arrangement, the management and operation of such a cable system.
   CABLE SERVICE.  The one-way transmission to subscribers of video
programming, or other programming service; and, subscriber interaction, if any,
which is required for the selection of such video programming or other
programming service. For the purposes of this definition, “video programming”
is programming provided by, or generally considered comparable to programming
provided by, a television broadcast station; and, “other programming service”
is information that a cable operator makes available to all subscribers
generally.
   CABLE SYSTEM.  A facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths
and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is
designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is
provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not
include:
      (1)   A facility that services only to retransmit the television signals
of one or more television broadcast stations;
      (2)   A facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple
unit dwellings under common ownership, control, or management, unless such
facility or facilities uses any public right-of-way;
      (3)   A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in
part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, as
amended, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system to the
extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly
to subscribers; or
      (4)   Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating
its electric utility systems.
   CHANNEL.  A unit of cable service identified and selected by a channel
number or similar designation.
   COST OF SERVICE SHOWING.  A filing in which the cable operator attempts to
show, in a manner consistent with FCC regulations, that the benchmark rate or
the price cap is not sufficient to allow the cable operator to fully recover
the costs of providing the basic service tier and to continue to attract
capital.
   FCC.  The Federal Communications Commission.
   INITIAL BASIC CABLE RATES.  The rates that the cable operator is charging
for the basic service tier, including charges for associated equipment, on the
date the city notifies the cable operator of the city's qualification and
intent to regulate basic cable rates.
   INITIAL DATE OF REGULATION.  The date on which the city notifies the cable
operator of the city's qualification and intent to regulate basic cable rates.
   INITIAL PERMITTED PER CHANNEL CHARGE.  The permitted per channel charge on
the initial date of regulation which shall be determined by the City Council to
be lawful either under the bench-mark analysis or through a cost of service
showing.
   MAXIMUM MONTHLY CHARGE.  The maximum amount per month which a cable operator
may charge per subscriber for a tier of regulated programming services offered
by a cable system and shall consist of a permitted per channel charge
multiplied by the number of channels on the tier, plus a charge for franchise
fees.
   MUST-CARRY SIGNAL.  The signal of any local broadcast station (except
superstations) which is required to be carried on the cable system and for
which the local broadcast station has notified the cable operator of its
election for must-carry rights.
   PEG CHANNEL.  The channel capacity designated for public, educational, or
governmental use required by the franchise of the cable system to be provided
to subscribers, and facilities and equipment for the use of that channel
capacity.
   PRICE CAP.  The ceiling set by the FCC on future increases in basic cable
rates regulated by the city, based on a formula using the GNP fixed weight
price index, reflecting general increases in the cost of doing business and
changes in overall inflation.
   REASONABLE RATE STANDARD.  A per channel rate that is at, or below, the
benchmark or price cap level.
   SUBSEQUENT PERMITTED PER CHANNEL CHARGE.  The permitted charge per channel
after the initial date of regulation determined pursuant to a cost-of-service
showing or the prior permitted per channel charge previously approved by the
City Council, adjusted for inflation and external costs in accordance with the
price cap analysis.
   SUPERSTATION.  Any non-local broadcast signal secondarily transmitted by
satellite.
(Ord. 94-14, passed 4-26-94)
§ 114.02  REVIEW OF INITIAL BASIC CABLE RATES.
   (A)   Notice. Upon the adoption of this chapter and the certification of the
city by the FCC, the city shall immediately notify all cable operators in the
city, by certified mail, return receipt requested, that the city intends to
regulate subscriber rates charged for the basic service tier and associated
equipment as authorized by the Cable Act of 1992.
   (B)   Cable operator response. Within 30 days of receiving notice from the
city, a cable operator shall file with the city, its current rates for the
basic service tier and associated equipment and any supporting material
concerning the reasonableness of its rates, including FCC Form 393 or any other
forms prescribed by the FCC to be used by cable operators to demonstrate the
reasonableness of their rates.
   (C)   Expedited determination and public hearing. If the City Council is
able to expeditiously determine that the initial basic rates appear to be
within the FCC'S reasonable rate standard, as determined by the applicable
benchmark analysis in division (G) of this section, the City Council shall:
      (1)   Hold a public hearing at which interested persons may express their
views; and,
      (2)   After consideration of the views of interested persons, either act
to approve the rates within 30 days from the date the cable operator filed its
basic cable rates with the city, or act to extend the review period as provided
in division (D) of this section.
   (D)   Extended review period.
      (1)   If the City Council is unable to determine whether the Initial
Basic Cable Rates are within the FCC's reasonable rate standard based on the
material before it, or if the cable operator submits a cost-of-service showing,
the City Council shall, within 30 days from the date the cable operator filed
its initial basic cable rates with the city and by adoption of a formal
resolution, invoke the following additional periods of time, as applicable, to
make a final determination:
         (a)   Ninety days if the City Council needs more time to ensure that a
rate is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard; or
         (b)   One hundred fifty days if the cable operator has submitted a
cost-of-service showing seeking to to justify a rate above the applicable
benchmark.
      (2)   If the City Council has not made a decision within the 90- or 150-
day period, the City Council shall issue a brief written order at the end of
the period directing the cable operator to keep accurate account of all amounts
received by reason of the Initial Basic Cable Rates and on whose behalf the
amounts are paid.
   (E)   Public hearing. During the extended review period and before taking
action on the initial basic cable rates, the City Council shall hold at least
one public hearing at which interested persons may express their views and
record objections.
   (F)   Objections. An interested person who wishes to make an objection to
the initial basic cable rates may request the City Secretary to record the
objection during the public hearing or may submit the objection in writing
anytime before the decision resolution is adopted. In order for an objection to
be made part of the record, the objector must provide the City Secretary with
the objector's name and address.
   (G)   Benchmark analysis. If a cable operator submits its initial basic
cable rates schedule as being in compliance with the FCC's reasonable rate
standard, the City Council shall review the rates using the benchmark analysis
in accordance with the standard form authorized by the FCC. Based on the City
Council's findings, the initial maximum monthly charge shall be established as
follows:
      (1)   The initial permitted per channel charge shall be determined as
follows:
         (a)   If the initial basic cable rates contain a per channel charge
for regulated programming services and equipment in effect on the date of
initial regulation equal to or below the benchmark per channel charge, as
adjusted forward for inflation from September 30, 1992, to the date of initial
regulation, then the permitted per channel charge shall be the per channel
charge in effect on the date of initial regulation, adjusted for equipment.
         (b)   If the initial basic cable rates contain a per channel charge
for regulated programming services and equipment in effect on the date of
initial regulation above the benchmark per channel charge, as adjusted forward
for inflation from September 30, 1992, until the initial date of regulation,
and the per channel charge for regulated programming services and equipment in
effect on September 30, 1992, was above the benchmark per channel charge, then
the initial permitted per channel charge is nine-tenths of the per channel
charge in effect on September 30, 1992, but no lower than the benchmark per
channel charge, additionally adjusted for inflation from September 30, 1992, to
the initial date of regulation, for equipment, and for any changes in the
number of channels.
         (c)   If the initial basic cable rates contain a per channel charge
for regulated programming services and equipment in effect on the date of
initial regulation above the benchmark per channel charge, as adjusted forward
for inflation from September 30, 1992, until the initial date of regulation,
and the per channel charge for regulated programming services and equipment in
effect on September 30, 1992, was below the benchmark per channel charge, then
the initial permitted per channel charge is the benchmark rate per channel
adjusted for inflation from September 30, 1992, to the initial date of
regulation, for equipment, and for any changes in the number of channels
offered on all regulated tiers.
      (2)   The initial maximum monthly charge shall be determined by
multiplying the initial permitted per channel charge times the number of
channels on the basic service tier plus a charge for franchise fees.
   (H)   Cost-of-service showings. If a cable operator does not wish to reduce
the rates to the level permitted using the benchmark analysis, the cable
operator shall have the opportunity to submit a cost-of-service showing in an
attempt to justify a maximum monthly charge per subscriber above the FCC's
reasonable rate standard. The City Council will review a cost-of-service
submission pursuant to FCC standards for cost-of-service review. The City
Council may approve initial basic cable rates above the benchmark if the cable
operator makes the necessary showing; however, a cost-of-service determination
resulting in rates below the benchmark or below the cable operator's September
30, 1992 rates minus 10%, will prescribe the cable operator's new rates.
   (I)   Decision.
      (1)   By formal resolution. After completion of its review of the cable
operator's initial basic cable rates, the City Council shall adopt its decision
by formal resolution. The decision shall include one of the following:
         (a)   If the initial basic cable rates are within the FCC's reasonable
rate standard or are justified by a cost-of-service analysis, the City Council
shall approve the initial basic cable rates as the maximum monthly charge per
subscriber; or
         (b)   If the initial basic cable rates are not within the FCC's
reasonable rate standard and the cost-of-service analysis, if any, does not
justify such rates, the City Council shall establish the maximum monthly charge
per subscriber that is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard or that is
justified by a cost-of-service analysis.
      (2)   Rollbacks and refunds. If the City Council determines that the
initial basic cable rates as submitted exceed the reasonable rate standard or
that the cable operator's cost-of-service showing justifies lower rates, the
City Council may order the rates reduced in accordance with division (G) or (H)
of this section, as applicable. In addition, the City Council may order the
cable operator to pay to subscribers, refunds of the excessive portion of the
rates with interest (computed at applicable rates published by the Internal
Revenue Service for tax refunds and additional tax payments). The method for
paying any refund and the interest rate will be in accordance with FCC
regulations as directed in the City Council's decision resolution.
      (3)   Statement of reasons for decision and public notice. If initial
basic cable rates of a cable operator are disapproved in whole or in part, or
if there were objections made by other parties to the initial basic cable
rates, the resolution must state the reasons for the decision and the City
Council must give public notice of its decision. Public notice will be given by
advertisement once in the official news-paper of the city.
   (J)   Appeal. The City Council's decision concerning rates for the basic
service tier or associated equipment, may be appealed to the FCC in accordance
with applicable federal regulations.
(Ord. 94-14, passed 4-26-94)
§ 114.03  REVIEW REQUEST FOR INCREASE IN BASIC RATES.
   (A)   Notice. A cable operator in the city who wishes to increase the rates
for the basic service tier or associated equipment shall file a request with
the city and notify all subscribers at least 30 days before the cable operator
desires the increase to take effect. This notice may not be given more often
than annually and not until at least one year after the determination of the
initial maximum monthly charge per subscriber.
   (B)   Expedited determination and public hearing.
      (1)   If the City Council is able to expeditiously determine that the
cable operator's rate increase request for basic cable service is within the
FCC's reasonable rate standard, as determined by the applicable price cap, the
City Council shall:
         (a)   Hold a public hearing at which interested persons may express
their views; and,
         (b)   After consideration of the views of interested persons, either
act to approve the rates within 30 days from the date the cable operator filed
its basic cable rates with the city, or act to extend the review period as
provided in division (C) of this chapter.
      (2)   If the City Council takes no action within 30 days from the date
the cable operator filed its request with the city, the proposed rates will go
into effect.
   (C)   Extended review period.
      (1)   If the City Council is unable to determine whether the rate
increase is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard based on the material
before it, or if the cable operator submits a cost-of-service showing, the City
Council shall, by adoption of a formal resolution, invoke the following
additional periods of time, as applicable, to make a final determination:
         (a)   Ninety days if the City Council needs more time to ensure that
the requested increase is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard as
determined by the applicable price cap.
         (b)   One hundred-fifty days if the cable operator has submitted a
cost-of-service showing seeking to justify a rate increase above the applicable
price cap.
      (2)   The proposed rate increase is tolled during the extended review
period.
      (3)   If the City Council has not made a decision within the 90- or 150-
day period, the City Council shall issue a brief written order at the end of
the period requesting the cable operator to keep accurate account of all
amounts received by reason of the proposed rate increase and on whose behalf
the amounts are paid.
   (D)   Public hearing. During the extended review period and before taking
action on the requested rate increase, the City Council shall hold at least one
public hearing at which interested persons may express their views and record
objections.
   (E)   Objections. An interested person who wishes to make an objection to
the proposed rate increase may request the City Secretary to record the
objection during the public hearing or may submit the objection in writing
anytime before the decision resolution is adopted. In order for an objection to
be made part of the record, the objector must provide the City Secretary with
the objector's name and address.
   (F)   Delayed determination. If the City Council is unable to make a final
determination concerning a requested rate increase within the extended time
period, the cable operator may put the increase into effect, subject to
subsequent refund if the City Council later issues a decision disapproving any
portion of the increase.
   (G)   Price cap analysis. If a cable operator presents its request for a
rate increase as being in compliance with the FCC's price cap, the City Council
shall review the rate using the price cap analysis in accordance with the
standard form authorized by the FCC. Based on the City Council's findings, the
basic cable rates shall be established as follows:
      (1)   If the proposed basic cable rate increase is within the price cap
established by the FCC, the proposed rates shall become the new maximum monthly
charges.
      (2)   If the proposed basic cable rate increase exceeds the price cap
established by the FCC, the City Council shall disapprove the proposed rate
increase and order an increase that is in compliance with the price cap.
   (H)   Cost-of-service showings. If a cable operator submits a cost-of-
service showing in an attempt to justify a rate increase above the price cap,
the City Council will review the submission pursuant to the FCC standards for
cost-of-service review. The City Council may approve a rate increase above the
price cap if the cable operator makes the necessary showing; however, a cost-
of-service determination resulting in a rate below the price cap or below the
cable operator's then current rate will prescribe the cable operator's new
rate.
   (I)   Decision. The City Council's decision concerning the requested rate
increase, shall be adopted by formal resolution. If a rate increase proposed by
a cable operator is disapproved in whole or in part, or if objections were made
by other parties to the proposed rate increase, the resolution must state the
reasons for the decision. Objections may be made at the public hearing by a
person requesting the City Secretary to record the objection or may be
submitted in writing at anytime before the decision resolution is adopted.
   (J)   Refunds.
      (1)   The City Council may order refunds of subscribers' rate payments
with interest if:
         (a)   The City Council was unable to make a decision within the
extended time period as described in division (C) above; and
         (b)   The cable operator implemented the rate increase at the end of
the extended review period; and
         (c)   The City Council determines that the rate increase as submitted
exceeds the applicable price cap or that the cable operator failed to justify
the rate increase by a cost-of-service showing, and the City Council
disapproves any portion of the rate increase.
      (2)   The method for paying any refund and the interest rate will be in
accordance with FCC regulations as directed in the City Council's decision
resolution.
   (K)   Appeal. The City Council's decision concerning rates for the basic
service tier or associated equipment, may be appealed to the FCC in accordance
with applicable federal regulations.
(Ord. 94-14, passed 4-26-94)
§ 114.04  CABLE OPERATOR INFORMATION.
   (A)   City may require.
      (1)   In those cases where the cable operator has submitted initial rates
or proposed an increase that exceeds the reasonable rate standard, the City
Council may require the cable operator to produce information in addition to
that submitted, including proprietary information, if needed to make a rate
determination. In these cases, a cable operator may request the information be
kept confidential in accordance with this section.
      (2)   In cases where initial or proposed rates comply with the reasonable
rate standard, the City Council may request additional information only in
order to document that the cable operator's rates are in accord with the
standard.
   (B)   Request for confidentiality.
      (1)   A cable operator submitting proprietary information to the City
Council may request in writing that the information not be made routinely
available for public inspection. A copy of the request shall be attached to and
cover all of the information and all copies of the information to which it
applies. Any such request shall be submitted to the office of the City Attorney
to ensure compliance with Tex. Gov't Code, Ch. 552, the Open Records Act.
      (2)   If feasible, the information to which the request applies shall be
physically separated from any information to which the request does not apply.
If this is not feasible, the portion of the information to which the request
applies shall be identified.
      (3)   Each request shall contain a statement of the reasons for
withholding inspection and a statement of the facts upon which those reasons
are based.
      (4)   Casual requests which do not comply with the requirements of this
section, shall not be considered.
   (C)   City Council action. Requests which comply with the requirements of
division (B) of this section, will be acted upon by the City Council. The City
Council will grant the request if the cable operator presents by a
preponderance of the evidence, a case for nondisclosure consistent with
applicable federal regulations. If the request is granted, the ruling will be
placed in a public file in lieu of the information withheld from public
inspection. If the request does not present a case for nondisclosure and the
City Council denies the request, the City Council shall take one of the
following actions:
      (1)   If the information has been submitted voluntarily without any
direction from the city, the cable operator may request that the city return
the information without considering it. Ordinarily, the city will comply with
this request. Only in the unusual instance that the public interest so
requires, will the information be made available for public inspection.
      (2)   If the information was required to be submitted by the City
Council, the information will be made available for public inspection.
   (D)   Appeal. If the City Council denies the request for confidentiality,
the cable operator may seek review of that decision from the FCC within five
working days of the City Council's decision, and the release of the information
will be stayed pending review.
(Ord. 94-14, passed 4-26-94)
§ 114.05  AUTOMATIC RATE ADJUSTMENTS.
   (A)   Annual inflation adjustment. In accordance with FCC regulations, the
cable operator may adjust its capped base per channel rate for the basic
service tier annually by the final GNP-PI index.
   (B)   Other external costs.
      (1)   The FCC regulations also allow the cable operator to increase its
rate for the basic service tier automatically to reflect certain external cost
factors to the extent that the increase in cost of those factors exceeds the
GNP-PI. These factors include retransmission consent fees, programming costs,
state and local taxes applicable to the provision of cable television service,
and costs of franchise requirements. The total cost of an increase in a
franchise fee may be automatically added to the base per channel rate, without
regard to its relation to the GNP-PI.
      (2)   For all categories of external costs other than retransmission
consent and franchise fees, the starting date for measuring changes in external
costs for which the basic service per channel rate may be adjusted will be the
date on which the basic service tier becomes subject to regulations or February
28, 1994, whichever occurs first. The permitted per channel charge may not be
adjusted for costs of retransmission consent fees or changes in those fees
incurred before October 6, 1994.
   (C)   Notification and review. The cable operator shall notify the city at
least 30 days in advance of a rate increase based on automatic adjustment
items. The city shall review the increase to determine whether the item or
items qualify as automatic adjustments. If the city makes no objection within
30 days of receiving notice of the increase, the increase may go into effect.
(Ord. 94-14, passed 4-26-94)
§ 114.06  ENFORCEMENT.
   The city may order the cable operator to refund to subscribers a portion of
previously paid rates under the following circumstances:
   (A)   A portion of the previously paid rates have been determined to be in
excess of the permitted tier charge or above the actual cost of equipment; or
   (B)   The cable operator has failed to comply with a valid rate order issued
by the city.
(Ord. 94-14, passed 4-26-94)
§ 114.99  PENALTY.
   If the cable operator fails to comply with a rate decision or refund order,
the cable operator shall be subject to a fine of $500 for each day the cable
operator fails to comply.
(Ord. 94-14, passed 4-26-94)
CHAPTER 115:  SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Section
General Provisions
   
115.01   Purpose and intent
   
115.02   Definitions
Operations Licensing
   
115.15   Generally
   
115.16   Application
   
115.17   Approval or disapproval
   
115.18   Fees
   
115.19   License to be posted
   
115.20   Expiration and renewal of license
   
115.21   Suspension
   
115.22   Revocation
   
115.23   Appeal on denial, suspension or revocation
   
115.24   Nontransferability
Work Permits
   
115.35   Permits required
   
115.36   Issuance of permits
   
115.37   Permit qualification and retention
   
115.38   Term, transfer, amendment of permit
   
115.39   Display of permits
Operating Regulations
   
115.50   Interior configuration
   
115.51   Exterior of enterprise
   
115.52   Signage
   
115.53   Obstruction of view
   
115.54   Lighting
   
115.55   Inspection
   
115.56   Conduct of owners, managers, employees and entertainers
   
115.57   Regulations concerning persons under certain age
   
115.58   Display of sexually explicit material to minors
   
115.59   Location restrictions
   
115.98   Civil remedies
   
115.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 115.01  PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented businesses
in order to protect and promote the health, safety and welfare by preventing
the decline of residential and business neighborhoods and further by preventing
the growth of criminal activity found to be associated with the unrestricted
operation of certain sexually oriented businesses. The provisions of this
chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing an unlawful limitation
or restriction on the content of any protected speech, including sexually-
oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this chapter
to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually-oriented materials protected
by the First Amendment, or to deny lawful access by the distributors and
exhibitors of sexually-oriented entertainment to their intended market.
(Ord. 95-31, passed 9-12-95; Am. Ord. 96-12, passed 2-27-96; Am. Ord. 97-6,
passed 4-22-97)
§ 115.02  DEFINITIONS.
   In this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings set
forth herein.
   ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE.  A commercial establishment which as
one of its principal business purposes offers for sale or rental for any form
of consideration any one or more of the following:
      (1)   Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or discs,
cassettes, photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video
representations, slides or other visual representations which depict or
describe “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
      (2)   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use
in connection with “specified sexual activities.” Not included in this
definition are pharmaceutical supplies.
   ADULT CABARET.  A commercial establishment which regularly features:
      (1)   Persons who appear in a state of nudity or partial nudity; or
      (2)   Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
“specified anatomical areas” or by “specified sexual activities;” or
      (3)   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
   ADULT LINGERIE STORE/MODELING STUDIO.  A commercial establishment where live
models exhibit lingerie intended for an adult audience.
   ADULT LOUNGE.  An adult cabaret which is permitted or licensed pursuant to
the Alcoholic Beverage Code where alcoholic beverages may be served, sold or
consumed.
   ADULT MOTEL.  A hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment which
offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides
patrons with closed-circuit television transmission, films, motion pictures,
video cassettes, slides, discs or other photographic reproductions which are
characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities”
or “specified anatomical areas,” and/or has a sign visible from the public
right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of
entertainment.
   ADULT MOVIE THEATER OR ADULT VIDEO THEATER.  A commercial establishment
where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes,
slides, discs or other photographic  reproductions  which are  characterized by
the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical activities” are regularly shown to groups of six or more people.
   ADULT THEATER.  A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity,
or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of “specified
anatomical areas” or “specified sexual activities.”
   ADULT VIDEO ARCADE.  Any commercial establishment to which the public is
permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically,
electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion pictures, projectors,
or other image-producing devices, to include computer and electronic games, are
maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time,
and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the
depicting or describing of “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas.”
   CHURCH, OR REGULAR PLACE OF WORSHIP.  Any structure used principally as a
place wherein persons regularly assemble for religious worship including, but
not limited to, sanctuaries, chapels, cathedrals, churches, synagogues, and on-
site buildings adjacent thereto, such as parsonages, convents, fellowship
halls, Sunday Schools and rectories.
   CITY MANAGER.  The individual lawfully acting as the City Manager of the
city pursuant to the City Charter, or his or her designated representative.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE.  Any substance defined as a controlled substance by
the Texas Controlled Substance Act, as then amended.
   DAY CARE.  A facility which provides care and/or supervision for adults or
children on a day to day basis.
   DRESSING ROOM.  An enclosed area designed to allow a single person to try on
items of apparel for the purpose of determining suitability.
   ENTERTAINER.  Any employee of a sexually-oriented business enterprise who
performs or engages in entertainment.
   ENTERTAINMENT.  Any act or performance, such as a play, skit, reading,
revue, fashion show, modeling performance, pantomime, role playing, encounter
session, scene, song, dance, musical rendition or striptease that involves the
display or exposure of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas. The term ENTERTAINMENT shall include any employee or entertainer
exposing any specified sexual activities whatever in the presence of one or
more customers.
   ESCORT.  A person who accompanies an individual for social purposes for any
consideration.
   ESCORT AGENCY.  A person or commercial enterprise which for a fee, tip, or
other consideration offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish, escorts as one
of its primary business purposes.
   ESTABLISHMENT.  Any of the following:
      (1)   The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a
new business;
      (2)   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;
      (3)   The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other
existing sexually oriented business; or
      (4)   The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
   GAMBLING.  Shall have the meaning set forth at Tex. Penal Code § 47.02, as
then amended.
   INTENDED OPERATOR.  The person principally in charge of the day to day
operation of the establishment.
   KNOWINGLY.  Shall have the meaning set forth at Tex. Penal Code § 6.03, as
then amended.
   LICENSEE.  A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented
business has been issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter.
   MODELING/NUDE MODELING STUDIO.  A commercial establishment where a person
who appears in a state of nudity or displays “specified anatomical areas” is
provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or
similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration.
   MONITOR.  A television or other video screen, used as part of an electronic
surveillance system, which displays images transmitted by electronic video
cameras to such television or video screen.
   NUDITY/PARTIAL NUDITY.  Appearing in a state of dress which displays one or
more “specified anatomical areas.”
   OPERATE OR CAUSES TO BE OPERATED. To cause to function or to put or keep in
operation. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated a
sexually oriented business whether or not that person is an owner, part owner
or license holder of the establishment. A person who, while on the premises of
sexually oriented business, does any one or more of the following shall be
deemed to be operating or conducting such a business:
      (1)   Operates a cash register, cash drawer, or other depository where
checks, cash funds or records of credit card or other credit transactions
generated in connection with the activities of the business are kept; or
      (2)   Displays or takes orders from any customer for any merchandise,
goods, entertainment or other service offered in connection with the activities
of the business or
      (3)   Delivers or provides to any customer any merchandise, goods,
entertainment or other services offered in connection with the activities of
the business; or
      (4)   Acts as a door attendant to regulate entry of customers or other
persons into the business premises; or
      (5)   Supervises or manages other persons in the performance of any of
the foregoing activities.
   PERSON.  An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, or other legal entity.
   PUBLIC.  References to the public and members of the public shall mean and
include all persons other than the owners, operators, agents and employees of a
given sexually oriented business.
   RENT.  The act of permitting space to be occupied for any form of
consideration.
   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.  One-Family Dwelling District (R-1); Two-Family
Dwelling District (R-2); Multi-Family Dwelling District (R-3); One-Family
Dwelling District - Mobile Home (R1-M); Mobile Home Park District (R-MH); or
Townhouse - Single Family Dwelling District (RT-1) as defined in the Harker
Heights Zoning Ordinance, Ordinance 77-11, as amended.
   RESIDENTIAL USE.  One-Family Dwelling District (R-1); Two-Family Dwelling
District (R-2); Multi-Family Dwelling District (R-3); One-Family Dwelling
District - Mobile Home (R1-M); Mobile Home Park District (R-MH); or Townhouse -
Single Family Dwelling District (RT-1) as defined in the Harker Heights Zoning
Ordinance, Ordinance 77-11, as amended.
   RESTROOMS.  Shall be synonymous with toilet facilities as defined in Tex.
Health & Safety Code Chapter 341. No sexually oriented business activities
shall be permitted in any such facilities.
   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER.  A business or commercial enterprise that, as one
of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration:
      (1)   Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
persons of the opposite sex; or
      (2)   Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the
same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or partial
nudity.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS.
      (1)   An adult bookstore, adult video arcade, adult bookstore or video
store, adult cabaret, adult lingerie store/modeling studio, adult lounge, adult
motel, adult movie theater, adult video theater, adult theater, escort agency,
modeling studio, nude modeling studio, sexual encounter center, or other
commercial enterprise the primary business of which is the offering of a
service or the selling, renting or exhibiting of devices or any other items,
intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to the customer.
      (2)   The following are exempted from regulation under this chapter:
         (a)   A business operated by or employing a licensed psychologist,
licensed physical therapist, licensed athletic trainer, licensed cosmetologist,
licensed barber or any other state licensed/regulated professional engaged in
performing functions authorized under the license held; or
         (b)   A business operated by or employing a licensed physician or
licensed chiropractor engaged in practicing the healing arts.
   SIGN.  Any writing, name, number, figure, character, outline, emblem,
graphic, window etching, stained or painted glass, mark, logo, mural, symbol,
spectacle, display, delineation, announcement, advertising, billboard,
signboard, flag, banner, pennant, bunting, device, appliance, structure 
erected  for the purposes of supporting a sign, or any other thing of similar
nature designed to attract attention outdoors, in or on any face or wall,
window, awning, store front of any building, or on any pole or other form of
support or structure and shall include all parts, portions, units, and
materials composing the same, together with the frame, background, and support
of anchorage thereof.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.  Specified anatomical areas are:
      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered: (a) human genitals, (b)
human buttock or anus, or (c) female breasts below a point immediately above
the top of the areola;
      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered; or
      (3)   Any combination of the above.
   Nothing in this definition should be construed to authorize or permit any
person or entity to commit an offense listed in
§ 115.37, the commission of such offenses being expressly prohibited, nor shall
this definition be construed to establish or define standards for acceptable
conduct. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, obscenity as defined
by the Texas Penal Code is specifically prohibited.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.  Specified sexual activities are those
activities which display:
      (1)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
      (2)   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy;
      (3)   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttock or female breasts;
      (4)   Intrusion, however slight, of any object, any part of an animal's
body, or any part of a person's body into the genital or anal openings of any
person's body, or into the body of an animal;
      (5)   Cunnilingus, fellatio, anilingus, bestiality, or exhibition of
excretory function;
      (6)   Flagellation, mutilation or torture for the purposes of sexual
arousal or gratification; or
      (7)   Any combination of the above.
   Nothing in this definition should be construed to authorize or permit any
person or entity to commit an offense listed in §
115.37, the commission of such offenses being expressly prohibited, nor shall
this definition be construed to establish or define standards for acceptable
conduct. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, obscenity as defined
by the Texas Penal Code is specifically prohibited.
   SUB-RENT.  The act by one who has rented a room of permitting the room to be
occupied for any form of consideration.
   SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT.  The increase in floor area occupied by the
business by more than 25%, in addition to the floor area that existed on June
21, 1994 or the date first licensed if the business was not operating on June
21, 1994.
   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL.  Includes any of the following:
      (1)   The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
      (2)   The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest
in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or
      (3)   The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device
which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for the
transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person
possessing the ownership or control.
   VIEWING ROOM.  An area designed to permit one or more persons the
opportunity to view or observe a dancer, model, or other entertainer in a
“private” or semi-private environment.
(Ord. 95-31, passed 9-12-95; Am. Ord. 96-12, passed  2-27-96; Am. Ord. 97-6,
passed 4-22-97; Am. Ord. 2001-33, passed 10-23-01)
LICENSING PROVISIONS
§ 115.15  GENERALLY.
   (A)   License required.
      (1)   A person commits an offense if he/she operates, owns, or causes to
be operated, within the territorial limits of Harker Heights, a sexually
oriented business without a valid license authorizing such operation.
      (2)   The fact that a person possesses a valid theater license, dance
hall license, amusement device license, business license, certificate of
occupancy, or other license or permit does not exempt him from the requirement
of obtaining a sexually oriented business license. Any person who owns or
operates a sexually oriented business shall comply with the requirements and
provisions of this chapter and all other applicable ordinances of the city and
laws of the state of Texas.
   (B)   An application for a license to operate a sexually oriented business
at any address, building, structure or portion thereof containing an existing
sexually oriented business will not be accepted.
   (C)   A license issued pursuant to this subchapter shall not be construed to
authorize or permit any person or entity to commit an offense listed in §
115.37, the commission of such offenses being expressly prohibited, nor shall
such license be construed to establish or define standards for acceptable
conduct. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, obscenity as defined
by the Texas Penal Code is specifically prohibited.
   (D)   Notice required.
      (1)   An applicant for a license under this chapter to operate a sexually
oriented business in a location not previously licensed shall post an outdoor
sign at the proposed business location. Such sign shall be prominently posted
at the front of the premises and oriented so as to be readily visible to
traffic on Veteran's Memorial Boulevard. The sign shall read as follows in
plain black lettering at least two inches square on a white background:
      "NOTICE: The person or entity named below intends to open a sexually
oriented business on this premises. Comments may be submitted to the Harker
Heights City Manager at (254) 953-5600."
The foregoing notice shall be followed by the name and address of the
applicant. The sign shall be maintained in the manner required by this section
for a period of not less than 60 days immediately preceding the filing of an
application to operate a sexually oriented business under this chapter.
      (2)   The sign must be between 1,000 and 5,000 square inches in size,
must be written in English, and shall contain no wording or graphics except as
specified in this section. In all other respects the sign shall comply with all
applicable provisions of Chapter 151 of this Code.
      (3)   The applicant shall provide written notice to the City Manager when
the sign required by this division has been erected, and no application to
operate a sexually oriented business upon such premises shall be filed before
the 60th day after such notice is given.
(Ord. 95-31, passed 9-12-95; Am. Ord. 96-12, passed 2-27-96; Am. Ord. 97-6,
passed 4-22-97; Am. 2001-33, passed 10-23-01; Am. Ord. 2002-09, passed 6-25-
02) 
Penalty, see § 115.99
§ 115.16  APPLICATION.
   (A)   An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the
City Manager. The application shall not be processed until it is complete and
contains:
      (1)   The name of the applicant and a statement as to whether the
applicant is an individual, partnership, corporation or other specified legal
entity;
      (2)   The name under which the business is to be operated and a
description of the sexually oriented business to be conducted;
      (3)   The name, address and telephone number of each owner and operator;
      (4)   The street address and legal description of the parcel of land on
which the business is to be located, and the telephone number of the
enterprise;
      (5)   A detailed description of the business activities to be conducted
on the premises,
      (6)   A written declaration, sworn to under oath by the applicant or its
duly authorized agent, that the information contained in the application is
true and correct; and
      (7)   If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is
an individual, he/she must sign the application for a license as applicant. If
a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an
individual, the application must have been signed by all persons who have a
right to participate in the management and control of the business, including
without limitation officers and directors of corporations, members and managers
of limited liability companies, partners in partnerships, etc.
   (B)   The application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the
configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space
occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally
prepared but must be oriented to Veterans Memorial Boulevard and drawn to a
designated scale, or drawn with marked dimensions on the interior of the
premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The applicant shall sign a
notarized statement attached to the diagram stating that the proposed plan for
the sexually oriented business complies with the requirements set forth in this
chapter. The applicant may submit a remodeling plan to scale for modification
of the current structure. If the plan is acceptable and the license is
approved, the license shall not be effective until the modification is
completed and a certificate of occupancy issued. The diagram must show all
interior walls and partitions, the locations of one or more manager stations
and the locations of lighting fixtures. The diagram must clearly  specify any
areas in the premises to which members of the public will not be permitted
access, and must designate the location where the license will be posted.
   (C)   The premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with the
law by the County Health Department, Fire Department, and Building Official.
The failure of any such department or official to complete the necessary
investigations or inquiries within 45 days of the date the properly completed
application is filed with the city shall result in the administrative approval
of the application by that department or official, unless such failure is
caused by an applicant or an applicant's agent.
(Ord. 95-31, passed 9-12-95; Am. Ord. 96-12, passed 2-27-96; Am. Ord. 97-6,
passed 4-22-97)
§ 115.17  APPROVAL OR DISAPPROVAL.
   (A)   The City Manager shall approve or disapprove the issuance of a license
to an applicant within 45 days following the date on which the complete
application is filed with the city. Failure of the City Manager to disapprove
an application by the end of the forty-fifth day following the day on which the
properly completed application is filed shall result in the administrative
approval of such application, and the license shall promptly thereafter be
issued. Such license shall nevertheless be subject to suspension or revocation
as provided herein. Each applicant must be qualified under this section, and
each applicant shall be considered the licensee if a license is granted.
   (B)   Approval must be granted unless one or more of the following is true:
      (1)   Any applicant is under 18 years of age.
      (2)   An applicant is overdue in payment of any taxes, fees, utilities,
fines, court directed payments, assessments or interest to the city, or
penalties assessed against the applicant or imposed upon the applicant in
relation to a sexually oriented business.
      (3)   An applicant has failed to provide information requested on the
application form or has supplied false or misleading information in the
application process.
      (4)   An applicant has been convicted of a violation of a provision of
this chapter within three years immediately preceding the filing of the
application. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect.
      (5)   The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have
been disapproved by the County Health Department, Fire Department, or the
Building Official.
      (6)   The license fee required by this chapter has not been paid.
      (7)   An applicant or the proposed establishment is in violation of or is
not in compliance with any applicable section of this chapter.
      (8)   The proposed business is otherwise prohibited by law.
      (9)   The outdoor sign has not been posted or maintained as required by §
115.15(D)(1) for a continuous period of at least 60 days immediately preceding
the filing of the application or, without regard such posting, the applicant
did not give the City Manager written notice as required by §
115.15(D)(3).
   (C)   When the City Manager denies renewal of a license for false or
misleading information, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one
year from the date of denial. If the applicant has been convicted of a
violation of this chapter, the applicant shall not be issued a license for
three years from the date of conviction. If any other basis of denial for
renewal of license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a
license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the denial became final
and the applicant is otherwise entitled to receive a license under this
section.
   (D)   The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the
person(s) to whom it is granted, the expiration date, the address of the
sexually oriented business, and the type of sexually oriented business for
which it is issued.
(Ord. 95-31, passed 9-12-95; Am. Ord. 96-12, passed 2-27-96; Am. Ord. 97-6,
passed 4-22-97; Am. Ord. 2002-09, passed 6-25-02) 
Penalty, see § 115.99
§ 115.18  FEES.
   (A)   The license fee for a sexually oriented business shall be in the same
amount as established and published annually in the City Fee Schedule and shall
be in addition to the City Business Registration License
   (B)   The license fees shall be charged for each license application filed
and shall be paid at the time the application and diagram are submitted for
processing.
(Ord. 95-31, passed 9-12-95; Am. Ord. 96-12, passed 2-27-96; Am. Ord. 97-6,
passed 4-22-97)
§ 115.19  LICENSE TO BE POSTED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, operate, conduct, or cause to be
operated or conducted a sexually oriented business within the territorial
limits of the city, unless the license required by this chapter is posted at or
near the principal public entrance to the business in such a manner that it
will be conspicuous to patrons who enter the premises.
(Ord. 95-31, passed 9-12-95; Am. Ord. 96-12, passed 2-27-96; Am. Ord. 97-6,
passed 4-22-97) 
Penalty, see § 115.99
§ 115.20  EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF LICENSE .
   (A)   Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may
be renewed only by making application as provided in §
115.16. Applications for renewal should be made at least 45 days before the
expiration date, and when made less than 45 days before the expiration date the
expiration of the license will not be affected.
   (B)   The City Manager may waive the requirement that the diagram be
submitted with renewal applications if the applicant certifies that the
configuration of the premises has not been altered since the diagram on file
with the original application was prepared.
(Ord. 95-31, passed 9-12-95; Am. Ord. 96-12, passed 2-27-96; Am. Ord. 97-6,
passed 4-22-97)
§ 115.21  SUSPENSION .
   (A)   The City Manager shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed 60
days if he/she determines that subsequent to the issuance of the license:
      (1)   An employee or licensee violated any provision of this chapter;
      (2)   An employee or licensee has been charged with a violation of any
statute, ordinance, or other law pertaining to the possession, use, or
consumption of alcoholic beverages or any other controlled substance while on
the business premises during business hours;
      (3)   A licensee altered the activities or character of the business such
that the business offers, provides, displays or exhibits goods, services or
entertainment not offered, provided, displayed or exhibited at the time the
license was issued, and not otherwise authorized by the license.
      (4)   An employee or licensee knowingly permitted gambling by any person
on the sexually oriented business premises; employee has been convicted of any
offense listed in §
115.37; or
      (5)   Licensee demonstrated inability to operate or manage the sexually
oriented business in a peaceful and law-abiding manner thus necessitating
action by law enforcement officers.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, conduct, or cause to
be operated or conducted a sexually oriented business within the territorial
limits of the city, during any period of time when the license authorizing such
operation has been suspended.
   (C)   The City Manager may suspend a license if he determines that,
subsequent to the issuance of the license, a licensee or operator of a sexually
oriented business has been formally charged with the commission of an offense
listed in §
115.37. Such suspension shall end upon final disposition of the offense by the
trial court, whether by acquittal, dismissal, deferred adjudication, or
conviction.
(Ord. 95-31, passed 9-12-95; Am. Ord. 96-12, passed 2-27-96; Am. Ord. 97-6,
passed 4-22-97; Am. 2001-33, passed 10-23-01) 
Penalty, see § 115.99
§ 115.22  REVOCATION .
   (A)   The City Manager shall revoke a license if he/she determines that:
      (1)   A cause of suspension under §
115.21, occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding 12
months.
      (2)   A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted to the City Manager during the application process;
      (3)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed the unlawful
possession, use, or sale of alcoholic beverages or controlled substances on the
premises;
      (4)   A licensee has been convicted of any of the Texas Penal Code
Offenses listed in §
115.37;  an employee has been convicted of any offense listed in §
115.37 and the licensee knowingly failed to prevent the conduct for which the
employee was convicted;
      (5)   A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented
business during a period of time when the license was suspended;
      (6)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual
intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or sexual contact to occur
in or on the licensed premises at any time the business is open to the public.
The term “sexual contact” shall have the meaning set forth in Tex. Penal Code §
21.01;
      (7)   A licensee is delinquent in payment of any taxes, fees, utilities,
fines, assessments or interest to the city, or penalties assessed against the
applicant or imposed upon the applicant in relation to a sexually oriented
business;
      (8)   A licensee has attempted to assign, transfer, or divide a license
to operate a sexually oriented business issued under this chapter, or
      (9)   A licensee or employee refused to allow an inspection as permitted
herein.
   (B)   When the City Manager revokes a license, the revocation shall continue
for one year.
(Ord. 95-31, passed 9-12-95; Am. Ord. 96-12, passed 2-27-96; Am. Ord. 97-6,
passed 4-22-97) 
Penalty, see § 115.99
§ 115.23  APPEAL ON DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION .
   If the City Manager denies the issuance of a license, or suspends or revokes
a license, he/she shall send to the applicant or licensee, at the address of
the business as shown on the most recent application, by certified mail, return
receipt requested, written notice of  such action and the right to appeal. The
aggrieved party may appeal the decision of the City Manager to the Zoning Board
of Adjustment in accordance with procedures set forth in the zoning ordinance
of the city as amended.  The filing of an appeal stays the action of the City
Manager in suspending or revoking a license until the Zoning Board of
Adjustment makes a final decision.
(Ord. 95-31, passed 9-12-95; Am. Ord. 96-12, passed 2-27-96; Am. Ord. 97-6,
passed 4-22-97)
§ 115.24  NONTRANSFERABILITY .
   A sexually oriented business license is not transferable, assignable or
divisible. Any attempted or purported transfer, assignment or division shall be
void.
(Ord. 95-31, passed 9-12-95; Am. Ord. 96-12, passed 2-27-96; Am. Ord. 97-6,
passed 4-22-97)
WORK PERMITS
§ 115.35  PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   The City Council finds that persons who hold or are requesting a
permit under this section are employed in sexually oriented businesses where
there is high degree of opportunity for unlawful sexual conduct or the
solicitation thereof, lewd conduct, obscenity offenses, and conduct harmful to
minors. Therefore, the enumerated offenses are directly related to the duties
and responsibilities authorized by the subject permit. There is a serious need
to protect members of the public and fellow employees of sexually oriented
business enterprises from persons who have certain criminal histories.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person who does not hold a work permit to
act as an entertainer, employee, manager, or owner of or in a sexually oriented
business.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of each licensee of each sexually oriented
business to ensure that no person acts as an entertainer, employee, manager, or
owner unless that person holds a permit.
(Ord. 97-6, passed 4-22-97)
§ 115.36  ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.
   (A)   Any person who desires to obtain an original or renewal permit shall
make application in person at the offices of the City Police Department. The
application shall be made under oath upon a form prescribed by the Chief of
Police and shall include:
      (1)   The name, home street address and mailing address (if different) of
the applicant;
      (2)   Proof of the date of birth of the applicant and the identify of the
applicant, including at least one photographic identity card issued by a
government agency;
      (3)   A separate page which can be detached from the request listing any
pending criminal charges, convictions, and time of service in jail or prison by
the applicant for any offense that is specified in §
115.37 of this chapter; and
      (4)   Three passport-type photographs of the applicant of a size
specified by the Police Department, which shall become part of the photographic
identity cards if a permit is issued.
   (B)   Each application must be fully completed and shall be accompanied by a
non-refundable processing fee of $25. Each applicant shall be required to
provide fingerprints to be used to verify the applicant's identity and criminal
history information. Each applicant shall sign a waiver and authorization form
authorizing the Police Department to request, on behalf of the applicant,
criminal history reports from the Texas Department of Public Safety and any
appropriate federal agency. No application will be accepted for filing unless
and until the requirements of this section are met.
   (C)   The Chief of Police shall issue the permit within ten business days
from the date of filing of the application, unless he finds that the
application was incorrect or incomplete, or that the applicant is otherwise
disqualified under this section. If the application is not granted, then the
applicant shall be mailed notice of the grounds for denial and their right to
provide evidence and appeal, as provided by §
115.23 of this chapter, within ten business days from the date of filing of the
application. Lists provided in compliance with division (A)(3) of this section
shall be destroyed ten days following the date of notice of decision by the
Chief of Police.
   (D)   Each permit issued by the Chief of Police shall consist of three
photographic identification cards: a personal card, an on-site card and a
Police Department file card.
   (E)   In the event that the Chief of Police fails to issue or deny a permit
application within the time specified in division (C), then the applicant
shall, upon written request, be immediately issued a temporary permit which
shall be valid until the day after the applicant is given notice of the
decision of the Chief of Police.
   (F)   If any personal card or on-site card is lost or stolen, the holder
thereof shall immediately notify the Police Department and request a
replacement, which shall be issued for a fee of $10 accompanied by three
photographs as described in §
115.36(A)(4) within three days following verification of the identity of the
holder.
   (G)   No permit application shall be accepted nor shall a permit be issued
to any person who does not provide proof that he/she is at least 21 years old.
Any permit issued by virtue of any misrepresentation or error to any person
under age 21 shall be void.
(Ord. 97-6, passed 4-22-97; Am. Ord. 2001-33, passed 10-23-01)
§ 115.37  PERMIT QUALIFICATION AND RETENTION.
   (A)   A conviction in the state for any of the below listed Texas Penal Code
offenses or a violation of this chapter shall be considered grounds for denial,
revocation or refusal to renew a permit requested under this section. Texas
Penal Code Offenses include:
      (1)   Any of the following offenses as described in Tex. Penal Code Ch.
43:
         (a)   Prostitution;
         (b)   Promotion of prostitution;
         (c)   Aggravated promotion of prostitution;
         (d)   Compelling prostitution;
         (e)   Obscenity;
         (f)   Sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor;
         (g)   Sexual performance by a child;
         (h)   Employment harmful to children; or
         (i)   Possession or promotion of child pornography;
      (2)   Any of the following offenses as described in Tex. Penal Code Ch.
21:
         (a)   Public lewdness;
         (b)   Indecent exposure; or
         (c)   Indecency with a child;
      (3)   Sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault as described in Tex.
Penal Code Ch. 22;
      (4)   Harboring a runaway child as described in Tex. Penal Code Ch. 25;
      (5)   Criminal attempt, conspiracy or solicitation to commit any of the
above offenses; or
      (6)   A violation of the Texas Controlled Substance Act of Dangerous Drug
Act punishable as a felony;
      (7)   Any offense under the laws of another state or the United States,
without regard to its title, but which substantially corresponds to the
elements of any Texas offense described or referred to above.
   (B)   Work permits may be revoked for any violation of this chapter.
   (C)   For purposes of this section the appeal of a conviction shall not
prevent its consideration, unless and until it is reversed or set aside. Any
disposition by a plea or Nolo Contendere or by deferred adjudication shall be
considered in the same manner as a conviction. Notwithstanding division (A) of
this section, if the conviction is at least three years old, the applicant may
request consideration of a work permit application.
(Ord. 97-6, passed 4-22-97)
§ 115.38  TERM, TRANSFER, AMENDMENT OF PERMIT.
   (A)   A permit is valid for one year from the date of its issuance.
   (B)   A permit is personal to the named permit holder and is not valid for
use by any other person.
   (C)   Each permit holder shall notify the City Police Department of his new
address within ten days following any change of his/her address.
(Ord. 97-6, passed 4-22-97)
§ 115.39  DISPLAY OF PERMITS.
   (A)   Each owner, manager, entertainer, or employee shall maintain their
personal work permit card in their possession at all times while on or in the
premises of an adult oriented enterprise.
   (B)   Each owner, manager, entertainer, or employee shall provide his on-
site card to the manager or on-site manager in charge of the enterprise to hold
while the owner, manager, entertainer, or employee is on the premises.
   (C)   In any prosecution under this chapter, it shall be presumed that the
owner, manager, entertainer, or employee did not have a permit unless the
permit was in possession and the on-site card on display as required by this
section.
(Ord. 97-6, passed 4-22-97)
OPERATING REGULATIONS
§ 115.50  INTERIOR CONFIGURATION.
   (A)   Unobstructed view.  Excepting only adult motels, the interior of the
sexually oriented business premises shall be configured in such a manner that
there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the
premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding
only restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video, photographic, monitoring or
other surveillance equipment. The view required in this division must be by
direct line of sight from the manager's station.
   (B)   Electronic surveillance equipment.  Businesses which were lawfully
operating and open to the public on June 21, 1994 may apply to the City Manager
to allow the use of electronic surveillance equipment as an alternative to the
direct line-of-sight requirements of this section.
      (1)   Businesses wishing to use an electronic surveillance system shall
indicate on the sketch or diagram required by this section the locations of all
cameras and the location of a single monitor station. The station must be
located in a lobby or public waiting area, but the monitor(s) must be oriented
so as to not be readily viewed by patrons.
      (2)   The City Manager may issue a written permit allowing the use of
electronic surveillance equipment only upon a showing that:
         (a)   The business is otherwise in conformity with this chapter;
         (b)   The electronic surveillance equipment will promote the intent of
this chapter;
         (c)   The equipment meets the standards set forth below; and
         (d)   Compliance with the direct line-of-sight requirements of this
section would be impractical or unnecessarily burdensome or costly.
      (3)   When electronic surveillance equipment is approved and installed, a
sign stating that “The entire premises of this business is monitored by
electronic surveillance equipment at all times” must be prominently posted at
the main entrance so as to be clearly visible to all patrons prior to entering
the establishment.
      (4)   Electronic surveillance equipment must be installed, operated and
maintained to meet the following standards at all times during which the
premises are open to the public.
         (a)   Field of view - Requires a view of at least 95% of the room
under surveillance and must at all times include a simultaneous view of all
employees and customers in the room.
         (b)   The surveillance system shall monitor all areas simultaneously
where patrons are permitted (excluding only restrooms) via split screen or
multiple screens.
         (c)   Equipment will be set up, operational and properly adjusted at
all times. If at any time the surveillance system is inoperative or fails to
meet all minimum specifications hereunder, the business shall immediately
comply with the provisions in division (B) above in its entirety.
         (d)   Electronic video cameras shall have a minimum light sensitivity
of 1 lux; however, the room illumination shall be increased as necessary to
assure surveillance equipment displays the room's contents and occupants
clearly and accurately.
         (e)   Both the monitor(s) and camera(s) shall deliver resolution of
not less than 380 horizontal TV lines, and signal-to-noise ratio shall be not
less than 45 dB.
         (f)   Electronic surveillance equipment shall provide a constant audio
feed from the cameras to the monitor(s). The audio system must feature a
frequency response of at least 250 Hz to 8 kHz ± 5 dB, with no more than 3%
total harmonic distortion. The amplitude of the audio feed shall be adjusted to
not less than 5 dB above the ambient noise level of the room in which the
monitor is located using an “A” weighted scale.
      (5)   At all times during which a member of the public is present in the
business the exits to the booths or viewing rooms shall be open and
unobstructed and a manager or other responsible employee shall observe the room
monitor(s) to ensure the safe and lawful conduct of the occupants.
      (6)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit conduct
otherwise prohibited by §§
115.53 through
115.57, or to otherwise affect regulations generally applicable to adult video
arcades, adult video stores, adult movie theaters, or adult video theaters.
      (7)   An owner or operator commits an offense if a manager or other
responsible employee fails to observe the system monitor(s) at all times during
which a member of the public is present in the business premises. It is a
defense to prosecution that at the time of the alleged offense the business was
operating in full compliance with division (A) of this section.
(Ord. 95-31, passed 9-12-95; Am. Ord. 96-12, passed 2-27-96; Am. Ord. 97-6,
passed 4-22-97)
§ 115.51  EXTERIOR OF ENTERPRISE.
   (A)   Visibility from outside premises.  It shall be unlawful for a licensee
of an enterprise to allow the merchandise or activities of the enterprise to be
visible from any point outside the licensed premises.
   (B)   Demeanor of exterior.  It shall be unlawful for the licensee of an
enterprise to allow the exterior portions of the enterprise to have flashing
lights, or any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or
pictorial representations of any manner except to the extent permitted by the
provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Coloration.  It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of an
enterprise to allow exterior portions of the enterprise to be painted any color
other than a single color. Grays, tans, and light earth tones are permissible;
however, any bold, garish or gaudy coloration that attracts attention is
excluded from this definition and prohibited. Nothing in this chapter  shall be
construed to require the  painting  of an otherwise unpainted exterior. This
provision shall not apply if the enterprise is part of a multi-unit commercial
center and the exterior portions of each unit are painted the same color so as
to reflect an overall architectural style of that center.
(Ord. 97-6, passed 4-22-97)
§ 115.52  SIGNAGE.
   (A)   Primary and secondary signs.  Notwithstanding City of Harker Heights
Ordinance 92-19 as amended or any other city ordinance, code or regulation to
the contrary, it shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any enterprise
or any other person to erect, construct, or maintain any sign for the
enterprise other than one primary sign and one secondary sign, as provided
herein.
      (1)   Primary signs shall have no more than two display surfaces. Each
such display surface shall:
         (a)   Not contain any flashing lights;
         (b)   Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape;
         (c)   Not exceed 75 square feet in area; and
         (d)   Not exceed ten feet in height or ten feet in length;
      (2)   Secondary signs shall have only one display surface. Such display
surface shall:
         (a)   Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape;
         (b)   Not exceed 20 square feet in area;
         (c)   Not exceed five feet in height and four feet in width;
         (d)   Be affixed or attached to any exterior wall or door of the
enterprise; and not contain any flashing lights.
      (3)   Primary and secondary signs shall not contain any wording,
photographs, silhouettes, drawings or pictorial representations which describe
or depict specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. In
addition, primary and secondary signs shall not contain any wording,
photographs, silhouettes, drawings or pictorial representations whose dominant
theme taken as a whole:
         (a)   Appeals to a prurient interest of a minor in sex, nudity or
excretion;
         (b)   Is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult
community as a whole with respect to what is suitable for minors; and
         (c)   Lacks serious social value for minors.
      (4)   Each letter forming a word on a primary or secondary sign shall be
of a single color, and each such letter shall be the same print-type, size and
color. The background behind such lettering on the display surface of a primary
sign shall be of a uniform and solid color.
   (B)   Compliance with restrictions.  Any sign located on the premises of a
commercial multi-unit center that displays the name, or any portion of the name
of any sexually oriented business, any name under which any sexually oriented
business was formerly operated on the premises, or any other terminology that
is commonly used to identify, or is associated with the presence of a sexually
oriented business, shall comply with all restrictions of this section. The
intent of this section is to prevent the use of signage identifying the
commercial multi-tenant center itself from being used as a subterfuge to evade
the restrictions on adult oriented business signs set forth in this section.
(Ord. 97-6, passed 4-22-97)
§ 115.53  OBSTRUCTION OF VIEW.
   Except as permitted by §
115.51 of this chapter, it shall be an offense for any owner, operator, agent
or  employee  to  knowingly  permit  the  view  area specified in §
115.50 to be obstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or
other materials at any time that any patron is present on the premises, or to
allow a patron access to any area of the premises which has been designated in
the application filed pursuant to §
115.16(B) as an area in which patrons will not be permitted.
(Ord. 97-6, passed 4-22-97)
§ 115.54  LIGHTING.
   It shall be an offense for any owner, operator, agent or employee to
knowingly allow patrons access to any area that is not illuminated by overhead
lighting fixtures to an intensity of at least one foot-candle as measured at
floor level. Such light intensity shall be maintained at all times during which
the premises are open to the public.
(Ord. 97-6, passed 4-22-97)
§ 115.55  INSPECTION.
   (A)   By accepting a license to operate a sexually oriented business, the
holder consents that a Peace Officer, Fire Marshall, Building Official or
Health Inspect or may enter the licensed premises at any time such premises are
open for business to conduct an inspection  or investigation  for the purpose
of evaluating compliance with this chapter.
      (1)   In conducting an inspection as provided herein, officers shall
remain in those areas of the business premises to which  members of the public
have access, and shall not enter into areas into which only owners, managers
and employees of that business are permitted.
      (2)   In conducting inspections as provided herein, officers shall limit
their investigations to detecting violations of the regulatory provisions of
this chapter.
      (3)   This section does not in any way limit the authority of a officer
to conduct any search authorized by a warrant, or pursuant to any exception to
the warrant requirement.
   (B)   It shall be an offense for any person to interfere with a lawful
inspection of the premises by a representative of any law enforcement agency,
County Health Department, Fire Department, or the Building Inspection Division
at any time it is occupied or open for business.
(Ord. 97-6, passed 4-22-97)
§ 115.56  CONDUCT OF OWNERS, MANAGERS, EMPLOYEES AND ENTERTAINERS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any owner, manager, employee, or entertainer
to touch a customer or the clothing of a customer while engaging in
entertainment or while exposing any specified anatomical areas or engaging in
any specified sexual activities.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any owner, manager, employee, or entertainer
to approach closer that three feet to any customer while engaging in
entertainment or while exposing any specified anatomical areas or engaging in
any specified sexual activities.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any owner, manager, employee, or entertainer
to engage in entertainment or to expose any specified anatomical areas or
engage in any specified sexual activities in the presence of a customer in any
separate area within an enterprise to which entry or access is blocked or
obscured by any door, curtain or other barrier separating entry to such area
from any other area of the enterprise.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any owner, manager, employee, or entertainer
to engage in entertainment or to expose any specified anatomical areas or
engage in any specified sexual activities in any area of an enterprise at a
time when entry or access into the enterprise is blocked by a locked door or
other barrier.
(Ord. 97-6, passed 4-22-97)
§ 115.57  REGULATIONS CONCERNING PERSONS UNDER CERTAIN AGE.
   (A)   Sexually oriented businesses shall not employ any person under the age
of 21 years.
   (B)   It shall be an offense for any person to knowingly allow a person
under the age of 21 years to appear in a state of nudity or partial nudity in
or on the premises of a sexually oriented business.
   (C)   It shall be an offense for a person under the age of 21 years to
appear in a state of nudity or partial nudity in or on the premises of a
sexually oriented business. It is a defense to prosecution under this division
if the defendant was in a restroom not open to public view or person(s) of the
opposite sex.
   (D)   It shall be an offense for a person under the age of 21 years to act
as an escort. It shall be an offense for a person to act as an escort or agree
to act as an escort for any person under the age of 18 years. The term escort
is used as defined in this chapter.
   (E)   It shall be an offense for a person to appear in a state of nudity or
partial nudity or to  allow another to appear in a state of nudity or partial
nudity in an area of a sexually oriented business which can be viewed from
outside of the licensed premises.
   (F)   No alteration after licensing shall be made to the interior
configuration of a sexually oriented business nor shall the business alter or
relocate a manager's station without prior approval of the City Manager.
   (G)   Except as permitted by §
115.51 of this chapter, at least one owner, operator or employee must be
situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present
inside the premises. A licensee commits an offense if patrons are inside the
premises and the manager's station is not occupied by an owner, operator or
employee or if entry or access into the enterprise is blocked by any locked
door or other barrier. This subsection shall not apply to adult motels.
   (H)   A sexually oriented business (excluding adult motels) shall not place
or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress in any room on the premises to which members
of the public have access, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room
open to the public.
   (I)   It shall be the duty of each licensee, owner, operator and manager of
a sexually oriented business to ensure that all persons acting as managers,
employees or entertainers on the premises hold and display work permits as
required by §§
115.35 through
115.39 of this chapter.
   (J)   It shall be the duty of the on-site manager to ensure that no manager,
employee or entertainer is allowed to conduct any business on the premises of
an enterprise unless the on-site manager has in his possession an on-site work
permit card prepared by the City Police Department. On-site work permit cards
shall be made immediately available for inspection upon request by any Peace
Officer or Code Enforcement Official. Managers or entertainers working at more
than one enterprise may retrieve their on-site work permit cards upon departing
the premises in order to present them to any other enterprise where such
persons are employed.
   (K)   It shall be an offense for any owner, operator, manager, employee or
entertainer to operate or cause to be operated any sexually oriented business
enterprise without a permit, as prescribed by §§
115.35 through
115.39 of this chapter, or to allow the operation of any sexually oriented
business enterprise by any person unless that person possesses a permit
required by §§
115.35 through
115.39 and the enterprise has in its possession an on-site card for that
person.
(Ord. 95-31, passed 9-12-95; Am. Ord. 96-12, passed 2-27-96; Am. Ord. 97-6,
passed 4-22-97) 
Penalty, see § 115.99
§ 115.58  DISPLAY OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT MATERIAL TO MINORS.
   (A)   It shall be an offense for a person, in a business establishment open
to persons under the age of 18 years, to display any graphic or visual
reproduction of material which depicts, in a manner calculated to arouse sexual
lust or passion for commercial gain or to exploit sexual lust or per-version
for commercial gain, any of the following:
      (1)   Human sexual intercourse, masturbation, or sodomy;
      (2)   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, buttocks, or
female breasts;
      (3)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, buttocks,
or that portion of the female breast below the top of the areola; or
      (4)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, whether covered
or uncovered.
   (B)   In this section “display” means to locate an item in such a manner
that, without obtaining assistance from an employee of the business
establishment:
      (1)   It is available to the general public for handling and inspection;
or
      (2)   The cover or outside packaging on the item is visible to members of
the general public.
(Ord. 95-31, passed 9-12-95; Am. Ord. 96-12, passed 2-27-96; Am. Ord. 97-6,
passed 4-22-97) 
Penalty, see § 115.99
§ 115.59  LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   It is an offense for any person to operate or cause to be operated a
sexually oriented business within 300 feet of:
      (1)   A church; or place of religious worship;
      (2)   Day care facility;
      (3)   School;
      (4)   Hospital;
      (5)   Public building; or
      (6)   Public park.
   (B)   It shall be an offense for a person to operate or cause to be operated
a sexually oriented business outside of an area fronting Veterans Memorial
Boulevard between Roy Reynolds on the west and Amy Lane on the east.
   (C)   It shall be an offense for any person to cause or permit the
operation, establishment, substantial enlargement or transfer of ownership or
control of a sexually oriented business within 300 feet of another sexually
oriented business.
   (D)   It shall be an offense for any person to cause or permit the
operation, establishment, or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented
business in the same building, structure, or portion thereof containing another
sexually oriented business.
   (E)   For the purposes of division (A) above of this section, measurement
shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or
objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part
of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest
property line of the premises of a church; or place of religious worship, day
care facility, school, hospital, public building or public park.
   (F)   For the purposes of division (C) above of this section, the distance
between any two sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight
line without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest
exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located.
   (G)   Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on June 21, 1994
that is in violation of divisions (A), (B), or (C) above of this section shall
be deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be permitted to
continue for a period not to exceed three years from June 21, 1994, unless
sooner terminated for any reason, or if voluntarily discontinued for a period
of 30 days or more.
      (1)   Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended
or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use.
      (2)   If two or more sexually oriented businesses are within 300 feet of
one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented
business which was first established and continually operating at a particular
location is the conforming use and the later established business is
nonconforming.
      (3)   A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use
is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or
renewal of the sexually oriented business license, of a church or place of
religious worship, day care facility, school, hospital, public building or
public park within 300 feet of the sexually oriented business.
(Ord. 95-31, passed 9-12-95; Am. Ord. 96-12, passed 2-27-96; Am. Ord. 97-06,
passed 4-22-97) 
Penalty, see § 115.99
§ 115.98  CIVIL REMEDIES.
   In addition to any other remedies which may be available at law or in
equity, the city may sue in the appropriate district court for an injunction to
prohibit the violation of, or enforce compliance with, any regulation contained
in this chapter.
(Ord. 95-31, passed 9-12-95; Am. Ord. 96-12, passed 2-27-96; Am. Ord. 97-6,
passed 4-22-97)
§ 115.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   If the sexually oriented business involved displays any type of nude
or partial nude modeling activity, or if it is a sexual encounter center, then
a violation of §
115.15 or §
115.52 of this chapter is punishable as a Class B misdemeanor.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided herein, a violation of this chapter is
punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000.
   (C)   Each day during which a violation of a provision of this chapter
occurs or continues shall constitute a separate violation.
(Ord. 95-31, passed 9-12-95; Am. Ord. 96-12, passed 2-27-96; Am. Ord. 97-6,
passed 4-22-97; Am. 2001-33, passed 10-23-01)
CHAPTER 116:  SALES OF NATURAL GAS
Section
   
116.01   Applicable rates
   
116.02   Gas cost adjustment
   
116.03   Tax adjustment
   
116.04   Cost of service adjustment
   
116.05   Schedule of service charges
   
116.06   Main line extension rate
§ 116.01  APPLICABLE RATES.
   The following rates are the maximum applicable to residential and commercial
consumers per meter per month or for any part of a month for which gas service
is available at the same location. Summer rates shall be applicable between the
meter reading dates in May and October (five months). Winter rates shall be
applicable at all other times. Bills are due and payable when rendered and must
be paid within ten days from the monthly billing date.
   (A)   Residential.
      (1)   If the service period is less than 28 days in the winter months,
the winter customer charge is $0.2321 times the number of days service.
      (2)   If the service period is less than 28 days in the summer months,
the summer customer charge is $0.1607 times the number of days service.
Residential   Winter   Summer
Customer Charge   $6.5000   $4.5000
All consumption   5.6544 per Mcf   5.3044 per Mcf
   (B)   Commercial.
      (1)   If the service period is less than 28 days in the winter months,
the winter customer charge is $0.3750 times the number of days service.
      (2)   If the service period is less than 28 days in the summer months,
the summer customer charge is $0.2321 times the number of days service.
Commercial   Winter   Summer
Customer charge   $10.5000   $6.5000
All consumption   5.6544 per Mcf   5.3044 per Mcf
(Ord. 67-6, passed 9-12-67; Am. Ord. 81-02, passed 4-29-81; Am. Ord. 83-06,
passed 6-23-83; Am. Ord. 85-01, passed 2-12-85)
§ 116.02  GAS COST ADJUSTMENT.
   Each monthly bill at the rate stated in §
116.01 above shall be adjusted for gas cost as follows:
   (A)   The city gate rate increase or decrease applicable to current billing
month residential and commercial sales shall be estimated to the nearest
$0.0001 per Mcf based upon:
      (1)   A volume factor of 1.0496 determined in establishing the above
rates for the distribution system as the ratio of adjusted purchased volumes
divided by adjusted sales volumes.
      (2)   The city gate rate estimated to be applicable to volumes purchased
during the current calendar month, expressed to the nearest $0.0001 per Mcf
(shown below as Re)
      (3)   The base city gate rate of $4.0200 per Mcf.
   (B)   Correction of the estimated adjustment determined by division (A) of
this section shall be included as part of the adjustment for the second
following billing month. The correcting factor (shown below as subsection (3))
shall be expressed to the nearest $0.0001 per Mcf based upon:
      (1)   The corrected adjustment amount based upon the actual city gate
rate, less
      (2)   The estimated adjustment amount billed under division (A) above,
divided by
      (3)   Distribution system residential and commercial sales Mcf recorded
on the company's books during the prior year for the month that the correction
is included as part of the adjustment.
   (C)   The adjustment determined by division (A) and (B) shall be multiplied
by a tax factor of 1.04148 to include street and alley rental and state
occupation tax due to increasing or decreasing company revenues under this gas
cost adjustment provision.
   (D)   In summary, the gas cost adjustment (GCA) shall be determined to the
nearest $0.0001 per Mcf by divisions (A), (B), and (C) as follows:
      (1)   GCA = (division (A) + division (B) X division (C))
      (2)   GCA = (1.0496) (Re - $ 4.0200) + § 116.03 X 1.04148
(Ord. 67-6, passed 9-12-67; Am. Ord. 81-02, passed 4-29-81; Am. Ord. 83-06,
passed 6-23-83; Am. Ord. 85-01, passed 2-12-85)
§ 116.03  TAX ADJUSTMENT.
   The tax adjustment shall be an amount equivalent to the proportionate part
of any new tax, or increased tax, or any other governmental imposition, rental,
fee, or charge (except state, county, city, and special district ad valorem
taxes and taxes on net income) levied, assessed, or imposed subsequent to July
1, 1984, upon or allocable to the company's distribution operations, by any new
or amended law, ordinance, or contract.
(Ord. 67-6, passed 9-12-67; Am. Ord. 81-02, passed 4-29-81; Am. Ord. 83-06,
passed 6-23-83; Am. Ord. 85-01, passed 2-12-85)
§ 116.04  COST OF SERVICE ADJUSTMENT.
   Each monthly bill for residential and commercial gas service shall be
adjusted for changes in the cost of providing such service as follows:
   (A)   Effective with bills rendered for the month of May, 1985 and annually
effective each May there-after, the residential and commercial monthly rate
shall be adjusted for changes in the cost per customer of providing gas service
(including depreciation but excluding cost of gas, gross receipts taxes, income
taxes, and return) for the previous year ended December 31 above or below such
cost incurred in the second prior calendar year. These annual adjustments shall
be cumulative. The operating expenses used in calculating the adjustments shall
be for the applicable distribution system as reported to the Railroad
Commission of Texas in the annual report of Lone Star Gas Company. Should the
percentage change in cost of service per customer of providing gas service
exceed the rate of change in the Implicit Price Deflator of the Gross National
Product over the same period of time, the adjustment will be limited to a
maximum change computed by multiplying the cost of service per customer of
providing gas service in the second prior calendar year ended December 31 by
the rate of change in the Implicit Price Deflator of the Gross National
Product. The adjustment per bill shall be rounded to the nearest whole cent.
   (B)   The adjustment determined by division (A) of this section shall be
multiplied by the same tax factor used in calculating the gas cost adjustment
contained herein to include street and alley rental and state occupation tax
due to increasing or decreasing company revenues under this cost of service
adjustment provision.
(Ord. 67-6, passed 9-12-67; Am. Ord. 81-02, passed 4-29-81; Am. Ord. 83-06,
passed 6-23-83; Am. Ord. 85-01, passed 2-12-85)
§ 116.05  SCHEDULE OF SERVICE CHARGES.
   (A)   Reconnect charge. In addition to the charges and rates set out §
116.01, the company shall charge and collect as a reconnect charge for each
reconnection or reinauguration of gas service, where service has been
discontinued at the same premises for any reason, with the exceptions indicated
in subsections (1) through (4), the sum of:
Schedule   Charge
8 a.m. - 5 p.m. Monday through Friday   $20
5 p.m. - 8 a.m. Monday through Friday    30
Saturdays, Sundays, and Holidays    30
      (1)   For a builder who uses gas temporarily during construction or for
display purposes.
      (2)   For the first occupant of the premises.
      (3)   Whenever gas service has been temporarily interrupted because of
system outage, service work, or appliance installation done by company.
      (4)   For any reason deemed necessary for company operations.
   (B)   Returned check charges. A returned check handling charge of $7.50 is
made for each check returned to the company for reasons of non-sufficient
funds, account closed, payment withheld, invalid signature, or improper
preparation.
   (C)   Collection Charge. A charge of $5 shall be made for each instance when
it is necessary for a company employee to go to a customer's residence or place
of business in order to collect amounts owed the company for gas service
previously rendered. This charge shall not apply if service is terminated at
the time of the collection action. This charge shall apply to only one trip on
the same amount owed.
(Ord. 67-6, passed 9-12-67; Am. Ord. 81-02, passed 4-29-81; Am. Ord. 83-06,
passed 6-23-83; Am. Ord. 85-01, passed 2-12-85)
§ 116.06  MAIN LINE EXTENSION RATE.
   The charge for extending mains beyond the free limit established by Lone
Star Gas Company, or any free limit established by franchise, for residential
customers shall be the lesser of the system-wide average cost of construction,
including all overheads, for the prior fiscal year, or the adjusted actual cost
as determined by applying the latest Handy-Whitman Index to the 1975 actual
base cost of $2.94. The company shall file the calculation of such charge with
the city as soon as sufficient data is available each fiscal year. Extension to
commercial and industrial customers shall be based on actual cost per foot.
(Ord. 67-6, passed 9-12-67; Am. Ord. 81-02, passed 4-29-81; Am. Ord. 83-06,
passed 6-23-83; Am. Ord. 85-01, passed 2-12-85)
CHAPTER 117:  AMBULANCES
Section
   
117.01   Definitions
   
117.02   Private emergency ambulance service regulation
   
117.03   Private non-emergency ambulance service regulation
   
117.04   Creation; operation by the Fire Department; officer in charge
   
117.05   Persons to whom available
   
117.06   Mentally ill or disorderly persons
   
117.07   Rates
   
117.08   Standby service
   
117.09   Theft of Emergency Medical Services
 
   
117.99   Penalty
§  117.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADVANCED LIFE SUPPORT.  Emergency pre-hospital care provided by a certified,
emergency medical technician-intermediate or an emergency medical technician-
paramedic using invasive medical acts under the medical supervision and control
of a licensed physician.
   AMBULANCE.  Any motor vehicle used, designated, redesigned or constructed
and equipped for the transportation of sick or injured persons.
   AMBULANCE SERVICE.  Any service offered whereby a motor vehicle specially
equipped for such purposes is used or provided at a cost to transport one or
more sick or injured persons to or from a medical  facility, nursing home, or
residence under circumstances which do not constitute an emergency.
   APPROPRIATE HOSPITAL EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT.  Depending on the type of
emergency and/or the availability of specialized care, the nearest, appropriate
hospital emergency department that may provide the level of care required.
   BASIC LIFE SUPPORT.  Emergency pre- hospital care provided by a certified
pre-hospital care provider using noninvasive medical acts. The provision of
basic life support may be under the medical supervision and control of a
licensed physician.
   EMERGENCY.  Any circumstance that calls for an immediate action and in which
the element of time in transporting the sick or injured for medical treatment
is essential to the life or health of any person. Such circumstances include
but are not limited to accidents, generally, traffic accidents, and acts of
violence resulting in personal injury and sudden illness.
   EMERGENCY AMBULANCE.  Any ambulance responding to an emergency using warning
lights and siren.
   EMERGENCY CALL.  Any request for an ambulance that is made by telephone or
other means of communication in circumstances which are or have been
represented to be an emergency requiring emergency pre-hospital care or
transport to a medical facility.
   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE.  The Emergency Medical Service of the City of
Harker Heights Fire Department and/or other providers assisting the City EMS in
an emergency capacity.
   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE PERSONNEL.  An emergency care attendant, emergency
medical technician-basic, emergency medical technician-special skills, or an
emergency medical technician-paramedic.
   EMERGENCY PRE-HOSPITAL CARE.  Care provided to the sick or injured either on
the scene or during emergency transport to a medical facility, or both.
   EMERGENCY TRANSFER.  The immediate transportation of a patient in an
ambulance, as the result of injury or illness where the element of time is
critical for the survival of the patient.
   TRANSFER.  The transportation of a sick, injured, or otherwise incapacitated
person from place to place under other than emergency circumstances.
(Ord. 78-32, passed 9-26-78; Am. Ord. 88-21, passed 9-27-88; Am. Ord. 92-02,
passed 1-23-92; Am. Ord. 2000-18, passed 6-13-00; Am. Ord. 2004-25, passed 7-
27-04)
§  117.02  PRIVATE EMERGENCY AMBULANCE SERVICE REGULATION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to furnish, operate, advertise or
otherwise engage or profess to be engaged in the operation of an emergency
ambulance within the territorial limits of the City of Harker  Heights unless
the person is:
      (1)   A member of a City of Harker Heights EMS unit officially on duty;
      (2)   An employee of a political subdivision or agency of the state; or
      (3)   Any person meeting the requirements of the State Department of
Health for personnel, vehicles, and equipment. Responds to a request of the
City Fire Department, EMS unit or Director of Emergency Management to lend
assistance when a major disaster or other occurrence results in emergency calls
exceeding the capability of the city.
   (B)   Defenses.  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution for a violation
of this section if it can be shown that:
      (1)   During a non-emergency transfer, the medical condition of the
person or persons being transported worsens so that the condition becomes a
medical emergency and the private ambulance service proceeds directly to a
medical facility as an emergency call; or
      (2)   The defendant was either: (i) participating in an emergency
transportation of a person or persons through Harker Heights in transit to a
medical facility on a call originating outside the Harker Heights’ primary
response area as listed with the Texas Department of Health, or (ii) responding
to an emergency call at a location outside Harker Heights’ primary response
area.
(Ord. 78-32, passed 9-26-78; Am. Ord. 88-21, passed 9-27-88; Am. Ord. 92-02,
passed 1-23-92; Am. Ord. 2000-18, passed 6-13-00; Am. Ord. 2004-25, passed 7-
27-04)
Penalty, see § 117.99
§  117.03  PRIVATE NON-EMERGENCY AMBULANCE SERVICE REGULATION.
   (A)   License required.  It shall be unlawful for any person to furnish,
operate, advertise or otherwise engage or profess to be engaged in the
operation of an ambulance service within the territorial limits of the City of
Harker Heights without first having obtained a license as provided herein. This
section shall not apply to:
      (1)   Those persons or entities authorized to provide emergency ambulance
service by §
117.02(A);
      (2)   Those agencies assisting Harker Heights in “mutual aid” occurrence
when Harker Heights has requested assistance; or
      (3)   The transportation of a person or persons through Harker Heights in
transit to a medical facility on a call originating outside the Harker Heights’
primary response area as listed with the Texas Department of Health.
   (B)   Application.   The application for an ambulance service license shall
be filed with the Director of Emergency Services on a form promulgated for such
purpose by the Director of Emergency Services. The application shall include a
description of the equipment to be used in the service, the qualifications of
the personnel applicant intends to employ in providing such service, the
specific services applicant expects to offer the public, the identity of the
applicant, a binder to provide insurance as required herein, and an affidavit
stating applicant’s sworn compliance with all regulations which may be
applicable to the operation of the ambulance service.
   (C)   Review.  After review by the Director of Emergency Services, the
application shall be forwarded to the City Manager, who shall approve or
disapprove the application.
   (D)   Determination of public convenience or necessity; grant of license. 
After review of the application for a license, the City Manger shall determine
whether or not a public convenience or a public necessity exists for the
granting of an ambulance service license. If such public convenience or
necessity is not found, the application shall be denied. If such public
convenience or necessity is found to exist, the license shall be granted for a
period of one year, conditioned upon the licensee paying the license fee and
furnishing proof of insurance as required by this section.
   (E)   License fee and insurance required.  The fee for an ambulance service
license shall be established by ordinance. It shall be paid to the City of
Harker Heights, Texas prior to the issuance of the ambulance service license or
any renewal thereof. During the term of the license, the licensee must maintain
liability insurance coverage in force in an amount of not less than $500,000
per occurrence, and $1,000,000 in the aggregate, and shall provide proof of
such coverage upon request by the Director of Emergency Services.
   (F)   Transferability.  A license issued under this section is non-
transferable and any attempted or purported transfer shall immediately void the
license.
   (G)   Renewal.  If a licensee desires renewal of its license, then not less
than 30 days prior to the expiration of the then-current license, the licensee
shall submit an application for renewal to the office of the Director of
Emergency Services for review and recommendation of the City Manager. The City
Manager may renew such license if the renewal of the license will serve the
public convenience or necessity.
   (H)   Revocation. 
      (1)   Any license issued hereunder may be revoked by the City Manager
upon a determination that the licensee:
         (a)   Supplied false or misleading information in its application
under this section;
         (b)   Has failed to comply with the requirements of division (E) of
this section; or
         (c)   Has violated §
117.02 of this code.
      (2)   The City Manager shall give written notice of the revocation to the
license holder. The revocation shall be effective on the date stated in the
notice and may not be appealed.
   (I)   Liability disclaimer.  Neither the city nor any officer or agent
thereof shall be held liable in any pecuniary responsibility or insolvency of
any person or insurer or in any manner become liable for any sum or action on
account of any claim or act or omission relating to any private ambulance
service or the licensing thereof.
(Ord. 2004-25, passed 7-27-04) 
Penalty, see § 117.99
§ 117.04  CREATION; OPERATION BY THE FIRE DEPARTMENT; OFFICER IN CHARGE.
   There shall be, and it is hereby created, a service to the people to be
called the City Emergency Medical Service (EMS), which service shall be
provided by the City Fire Department under the authority of the Director of
Emergency Services. The primary purpose of the service shall be for the care
and transportation of persons with moderate to life threatening trauma or
illness, and only secondarily as a transfer service for the infirm. The
Director of Emergency Services is authorized to allocate or withhold equipment
and personnel as deemed necessary to assure that adequate emergency care and
transportation is available at all times for the legitimate emergency medical
needs of the city. The City Emergency Medical Service shall transport all
emergency patients to the most appropriate hospital emergency department.
(Ord. 78-32, passed 9-26-78; Am. Ord. 88-21, passed 9-27-88; Am. Ord. 92-02,
passed 1-23-92; Am. Ord. 2000-18, passed 6-13-00; Am. Ord. 2004-25, passed 7-
27-04) 
Penalty, see § 117.99
§ 117.05  PERSONS TO WHOM AVAILABLE.
   The emergency medical service shall be available to all persons within the
city limits. The service may also be available to persons:
   (A)   In the portions of Bell County or other counties which are included
within any inter-local mutual aid agreement between the city and the
commissioners court of that county.
   (B)   In any area covered by mutual aid agreement between the city and
another municipality; or
   (C)   At the request of any government entity during a bona fide emergency,
as approved by the Director of Emergency Services or his designee.
(Ord. 78-32, passed 9-26-78; Am. Ord. 88-21, passed 9-27-88; Am. Ord. 92-02,
passed 1-23-92; Am. Ord. 2000-18, passed 6-13-00; Am. Ord. 2004-25, passed 7-
27-04)
§  117.06  MENTALLY OR DISORDERLY PERSONS.
   (A)   In the case of a person who behaves in a manner that presents a
potential danger to themselves or others, EMS has the discretion to transport
them or not unless accompanied by an attendant, nurse or police officer. The
city shall not be responsible for obtaining an attendant, nurse or police
officer.
   (B)   In the event of an emergency commitment for evaluation or observation
as ordered or authorized by the city, the individual shall not be transported
without the presence of a police officer in the ambulance.
   (C)   Any intoxicated, disorderly or unruly person ordered by a doctor or
police officer to be transported in an ambulance may be refused by the city
unless such person shall be accompanied by a police officer in the ambulance.
(Ord. 78-32, passed 9-26-78; Am. Ord. 88-21, passed 9-27-88; Am. Ord. 92-02,
passed 1-23-92; Am. Ord. 2000-18, passed 6-13-00; Am. Ord. 2004-25, passed 7-
27-04) 
Penalty, see § 117.99
§ 117.07  RATES.
   Any person who uses or receives the emergency medical services of the city
shall pay the city for such services. Charges for emergency medical services
shall include, but is not limited to, mileage, standing time, standby time,
oxygen, medication and/or other related expenses incurred by the City EMS. The
City Council shall set the rates for emergency medical services provided by the
City EMS in the annual budget.
(Ord. 2000-18, passed 6-13-00; Am. Ord. 2004-25, passed 7-27-04)
§  117.08  STANDBY SERVICE.
   (A)   All requests for standby emergency medical service shall be made to
the City EMS at least 24 hours in advance of the time such service will be
necessary. The city shall not be required to provide standby service, but may
provide such services when feasible. In the event the standby service is used
to transport a person to a hospital or other medical facility from the standby
site, each person transported shall be charged for an emergency call and any
additional services rendered.
   (B)   The City Council shall set the rates for standby service as described
in this section.
(Ord. 2000-18, passed 6-13-00; Am. Ord. 2004-25, passed 7-27-04)
§ 117.09  THEFT OF EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES.
   Any person who utilizes the emergency medical services of the city and who
fails to pay for such services within 60 days after a statement of costs for
such service has been mailed to the address of the responsible party, which is
supplied to the operator of the ambulance, or which is obtained from the
hospital where such person is delivered, shall be, upon conviction, guilty of a
class C misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2000-18, passed 6-13-00; Am. Ord. 2004-25, passed 7-27-04)
§  117.99  PENALTY.
   Except as provided in §
117.09, any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this chapter
shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $2,000. Each and every day that
a violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 78-32, passed 9-26-78; Am. Ord. 88-21, passed 9-27-88; Am. Ord. 92-02,
passed 1-23-92; Am. Ord. 2000-18, passed 6-13-00; Am. Ord. 2004-25, passed 7-
27-04)
CHAPTER 118:  TAXICABS
Section
General Provisions
   
118.01   Definitions
   
118.02   Operation by nonpermit-holders prohibited
   
118.03   Operation by minors or illegal aliens prohibited
   
118.04   Persons of disreputable character
   
118.05   Suspension and revocation of permits
Vehicles for Hire; Permit
   
118.20   Public convenience and necessity hearing
   
118.21   Taxi and limousine permit required
   
118.22   Application
   
118.23   Action of City Council
   
118.24   Issuance
   
118.25   Permits nontransferable
   
118.26   Posting of permit
   
118.27   Duration of permit; renewal
   
118.28   Revocation of permit
   
118.29   Insurance required
   
118.30   Ad valorem taxes
   
118.31   Rendering taxicabs for ad valorem taxes
   
118.32   Franchise fee
Driver's Permit
   
118.40   Permit required; exceptions
   
118.41   Applications
   
118.42   Driver permit fee
   
118.43   Denial
   
118.44   Issuance
   
118.45   Transfer
   
118.46   Expiration
   
118.47   Exhibition of permit required
   
118.48   Revocation
   
118.49   Appeal
Operating Restrictions
   
118.60   Rates to be posted
   
118.61   Receipt to be given to passenger
   
118.62   Unlawful to refuse to convey at rate posted
   
118.63   Property left in vehicles
   
118.64   Chief of Police to keep record of all articles
   
118.65   Cruising in search of passengers prohibited
   
118.66   Soliciting transportation at bus depots
   
118.67   Vehicles at taxi stands
   
118.68   Operators must be owners or employees
   
118.69   Transporting prostitutes prohibited
   
118.70   Name of company painted on vehicles
   
118.71   Most direct route
   
118.72   Owners to keep accurate records
   
118.73   Refusal to pay legal fare unlawful
   
118.74   Operation of vehicles longer than 12 hours
   
118.75   Collecting passengers
   
118.76   Maximum fares
 
   
118.98   Civil remedies
   
118.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 118.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY.  The City of Harker Heights, Texas.
   COUNCIL.  The City Council of Harker Heights, Texas.
   CRUISE or CRUISING.  The movement of unoccupied taxicabs or limousines over
the public streets of the city in search of, or soliciting passengers for hire,
except however, unoccupied taxicabs or limousines proceeding to answer a
telephone call for taxicab or limousine service from an intended passenger and
taxicabs or limousines returning by a most direct route after having discharged
a passenger or passengers, to the garage where such taxicab or limousine is
housed, or to its regularly established stand, shall not be considered
CRUISING.
   DEMAND-RESPONSE TRANSIT SERVICE. Transportation services provided on a
first-come, first-serve basis. Services are upon a shared-ride basis and are
dependent upon availability of vehicles during the time the passenger has
requested. DEMAND-RESPONSE TRANSIT SERVICES may be operated in one of two ways:
for next day service and non-routine trips, or by subscription. Subscription
demand response transit services will require a passenger needing the same trip
at the same time on the same day at least once a week. All of the provisions of
this chapter relating to limousine service are applicable to DEMAND-RESPONSE
TRANSIT SERVICE, save and except that a van may be utilized, provided the
manufacturer's rated seated capacity does not exceed 15 passengers.
   DRIVER.  Every person in actual charge of the operation of a taxicab or
limousine, whether as owner, or as agent, servant, or employee of the owner.
   LIMOUSINE.  A luxury sedan with a manufacturer's rated seating capacity of
not more than 15 passengers, used for the transportation of passengers for hire
from a location in the city to another location either inside or outside the
city, having a driver furnished as part of the service, and which operates on a
prearranged basis only whereby such prearrangement is made no less than one
hour in advance of the time transportation is to begin. Expressly excluded from
this definition are limousines used exclusively in connection with funeral
services and free shuttles offered by hotels, motels, and area attractions.
   OWNER.  Any person who has the control, direction, maintenance, or the
benefit of the collection of revenue derived from the operation of taxicabs or
limousines on or over the streets or public ways of the city, except a “driver”
as defined in this section.
   PERSON.  Includes both singular or plural, and shall mean and embrace any
individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership, or society, and where
criminal prosecution may lie the officers of any corporation shall jointly and
severally be subject to prosecution as being included with the term PERSON.
   STREET OR STREETS.  Any alley, street, avenue, boulevard, drive, or highway
commonly used for the purpose of public travel within the incorporated limits
of the city.
   TAXICAB.  Every automobile or motor-propelled vehicle other than a limousine
used for the transportation of passengers for hire over the public streets of
the city, and not over a defined or fixed route, and irrespective of whether or
not the operations extend beyond the city limits, at rates for a distance
traveled, or for wait-time or both, or at rates per hour, per day, per week, or
per month, and such vehicle is routed under the direction of such passenger or
passengers or such person or persons hiring the same.
(Ord. 94-36, passed 8-23-94)
§ 118.02  OPERATION BY NONPERMIT- HOLDERS PROHIBITED.
   No taxicab or limousine for which a permit shall have been granted shall be
operated by anyone except the permit holder or the fully authorized agent or
employee of such permit holder. No limousine shall be operated as a taxicab as
defined in §
118.01.
(Ord. 94-36, passed 8-23-94) 
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.03  OPERATION BY MINORS OR ILLEGAL ALIENS PROHIBITED.
   Every person who may drive any taxicab or limousine used in the business of
carrying passengers for hire upon the streets of the city must be over the age
of 18 years and must not be an illegal alien.
(Ord. 94-36, passed 8-23-94) 
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.04  PERSONS OF DISREPUTABLE CHARACTER.
   Any person of general disreputable character could be disqualified as a
limousine or taxicab driver.
(Ord. 94-36, passed 8-23-94)
§ 118.05  SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished
as provided in §
118.99 and the City Council may, in addition to the penalty, upon ten days'
written notice and opportunity for hearing before the Council, temporarily
suspend or revoke the permit to operate any taxicab or limousine so involved
and/or prohibit any taxicab or limousine so involved from operating in any
manner on or over the streets of the city.
(Ord. 94-36, passed 8-23-94)
VEHICLES FOR HIRE; PERMIT
§ 118.20  PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY HEARING.
   (A)   No permit to operate a taxicab or limousine shall be issued by the
City Secretary until the Council shall, after a hearing, find that the public
convenience and necessity require the proposed taxicab or limousine service for
which application for permits is made; provided, however, that such declaration
of public necessity shall not be necessary in the following instances:
      (1)   For the authorizing of the same number of taxicabs or limousines
authorized for the operation and operated by the applicant under the same name
on the date of the passage of this chapter, or the renewal of the same number
of permits annually thereafter, provided that such permits as have become
invalid for nonuser, as hereinafter provided, shall not be renewed.
      (2)   For the renewal of permits to the applicant for the number of
taxicabs or limousines which the Council shall have approved at any time prior
to the application for such renewal, after a finding of public convenience and
necessity; provided, however, such taxicabs or limousines shall have been duly
authorized and operated by such applicant during the year next prior to that
for which such renewal is sought and such permit has not become invalid for
nonuser.
   (B)   In determining whether public convenience and necessity require the
authorizing of taxicabs or limousines for which application may be made, the
Council shall take into consideration whether the demands for public
convenience and necessity require such proposed or additional taxicab or
limousine service within the city; the financial and moral responsibility and
character of the applicant, the number, kind, type, and ownership of equipment,
and the color scheme to be used by the applicant, if applicable; the increased
traffic congestion of the streets of the city which may result and whether the
safe use of the streets of the city both vehicular and pedestrian, will be
unduly endangered by the granting of such additional permit; and such other
relevant facts as the Council may deem advisable or necessary which may throw
light on the public necessity and convenience.
(Ord. 94-36, passed 8-23-94)
§ 118.21  TAXI AND LIMOUSINE PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate or cause to be
driven or operated any taxicab or limousine upon or over any street in the city
unless there has been obtained for such taxicab or limousine a permit duly
issued by the City Secretary as hereinafter provided, which is in full force
and effect.
   (B)   Any driver of any taxicab or limousine not holding a permit applicable
to the city under the provisions of this chapter may enter the city for the
limited purpose of delivering its passengers to the passenger's initial
destination within the city. A nonpermitted taxicab or limousine may not wait
for the passenger after delivery nor may it transport the passenger from place
to place within the city. In no event shall a nonpermitted taxicab or limousine
pick up a passenger within the city or transport a passenger out of the city.
This exception shall not apply to taxicab or limousine companies whose permit
to operate in this city has been revoked or denied.
(Ord. 94-36, passed 8-23-94) 
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.22  APPLICATION.
   (A)   Contents of application. Any applicant for a taxicab or limousine
permit other than for renewals as hereinafter provided shall make application
in writing accompanied by a financial statement and showing whether the
applicant has ever been convicted in any court for any offense under any city
or state or federal law and such application shall be signed and sworn to by
the applicant. Such additional information as the Council may require shall be
furnished. Such application shall be considered at the second regular meeting
of the Council following the filing of the application and all interested
parties shall be heard by the Council at such meeting. In all such hearings the
burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to establish by clear, cogent, and
convincing evidence that the public convenience and necessity require such
operation of the vehicle or vehicles for which the application has been made.
(Renewal permits will be issued upon oral application made to the City
Secretary by the holder of the permit of the previous year.) Any falsification
of answers on such application shall be cause for disapproval of an application
or immediate cancellation of any permit issued.
   (B)   Number of cabs. At the time the applicant places his application with
the City Secretary he must state the number of cabs he desires to have permits
issued for. Upon issuance, the City Council shall issue a permit by taxicab, or
by company and such franchise fees will be applicable as stated in this chapter
under §
118.32.
(Ord. 94-36, passed 8-23-94)
§ 118.23  ACTION OF CITY COUNCIL.
   The City Council shall act on a permit application within 30 days after the
date a completed application is submitted to the city. The permit is considered
approved unless it is disapproved within that period.
(Ord. 94-36, passed 8-23-94)
§ 118.24  ISSUANCE.
   (A)   If the Council finds from its investigation and hearing that public
convenience and necessity justify the operation of the vehicle or vehicles for
which a permit required by this chapter is desired, it shall instruct the City
Secretary to issue a permit to the applicant with all provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   Each taxicab or limousine permit issued by the City Secretary shall be
numbered and shall state the year for which such permit is issued, the name of
the person to whom or which it is issued, or the assumed name under which the
person shall do business, and shall state that the holder thereof has deposited
with the city an insurance policy, for the protection of the general public as
provided for in this chapter and such permit shall be signed by the City
Secretary.
(Ord. 94-36, passed 8-23-94)
§ 118.25  PERMITS NONTRANSFERABLE.
   No permit issued under the terms of this chapter shall be transferred to any
other person, and shall not be used for the operation as a taxicab or limousine
or any other vehicle except the vehicle owned and operated under the control of
the holder of such permit. Any taxicab thus operated under such permit shall
have clearly indicated on the sides and rear thereof the name under which the
holder or holders do business as indicated on the permit and permit number.
(Ord. 94-36, passed 8-23-94) 
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.26  POSTING OF PERMIT.
   The permit issued for the operation of a taxicab or limousine under the
terms of this chapter shall be posted within the taxicab or limousine in a
conspicuous place. Failure to so post such permit shall be a violation of this
chapter.
(Ord. 94-36, passed 8-23-94) 
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.27  DURATION OF PERMIT; RENEWAL.
   All taxicab or limousine permits shall be valid until January 1 of the next
ensuing year following the date they are issued. All taxicab or limousine
permits issued during any year shall expire December 31 of such year, and must
be renewed on or before January 1 of the following year in the manner
hereinbefore provided.
(Ord. 94-36, passed 8-23-94)
§ 118.28  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   The Council, on complaint filed by any person against an owner of a
taxicab or limousine charging violation of any of the terms of this chapter or
any ordinance of the city or laws of the state regulating motor vehicles, may
after giving five days' notice of the ground of such complaint to the permit
holder against whom complaint is made, hear evidence of such complaint, and
after such hearing the Council may revoke or suspend the permit of the owner if
City Council finds that a preponderance of evidence that good cause has been
shown, regardless of whether the permit holder has been charged or convicted in
a court on such charge.
   (B)   Whenever any person holding one or more permits for taxicabs or
limousines shall for a period of 60 days consecutively fail to make a
reasonable and consistent effort to operate such taxicabs or limousines, for
any reason other than an emergency, over which the permit holder or owner has
no control, the Council, upon hearing and after five days' notice to the owner
or permit holder, shall revoke all permits covering such taxicabs or limousines
not in use. The City Secretary shall keep a complete record of each taxicab or
limousine permit issued and all renewals and revocations thereof.
(Ord. 94-36, passed 8-23-94)
§ 118.29  INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Before any permit shall be issued to any owner of any taxicab or
limousine, or before any renewal or permit shall be granted, such owner shall
be required to file with the City Secretary and thereafter keep in full force
and effect, a motor vehicle liability insurance policy insuring the public
against any loss or damage that may result to any person, persons, or property
in the operation of each permitted vehicle.
      (1)   The policy shall be issued by an insurance company duly authorized
to do business in Texas and performable in Bell County, Texas, and shall name
the City of Harker Heights as a certificate holder.  The policy shall be
endorsed to provide that the issuing company will mail written notice to the
City Secretary not less than 30 days prior to any cancellation of the policy
which occurs before the expiration date thereof.
      (2)   The maximum amount of recovery in such policy of insurance shall
not, as to each and every vehicle, be less than the amounts specified in the
Texas Motor Vehicle Safety Responsibility Act, as then amended.
      (3)   The City Council shall have the right to approve: the form of the
policy; all endorsements, certificates, and other evidence of coverage; the
amount of any deductibles or self-insured retention amounts under the
insurance; and the creditworthiness and ratings of the company issuing such
insurance.
   (B)   The above-described public liability insurance shall be for the
protection of the passengers of such vehicles and for the public and need not
cover personal injuries sustained by the servants, agents, or employees of the
policy-owner. All policies of insurance shall contain a provision for
continuing liability thereon up to the full amount thereof, notwithstanding any
recovery thereon.
   (C)   Such public liability insurance shall further provide that no action
shall lie thereon against the insurance company until after a final judgement
in favor of the injured or damaged person or persons, and against the owner of
the taxicab or limousine, not pending an appeal or writ of error, is, and
remains, satisfied.
   (D)   In the event that the Council shall deter- mine, after a hearing, and
after three day's notice given a permit holder, that any insurance given by any
permit holder has become impaired, so as to afford less protection to the
public than is required by this chapter, it may require a new or additional
policy, so as to bring the protection of such insurance to its required amount,
and the permit holder shall, within five days after receiving written notice of
such requirement, provide the required new or additional policy, failing which,
the permit shall automatically terminate. In the event that any insurer may
desire to be released form any policy, he must give written notice of such
desire to the City Manager at least ten days before he desires his liability
released, and the City Manager shall thereupon, by personal delivery or by
mail, give written notice to any such permit holder and demand that such holder
furnish new insurance by the expiration of the ten-day period provided.
   (E)   In the event any policy shall be cancelled, upon the request of the
insurer, and no new policy is filed by the permit holder before the
cancellation of the original insurance, then the permit to operate taxicabs or
limousines granted to such permit holder shall be automatically revoked;
neither the city nor any officer thereof shall be held liable for the pecuniary
responsibility of solvency of any such insurer, or in any manner become liable
for any sum on account of any such claim or act or omission relating to any
such taxicab or limousine, nor shall liability of any person owning or
operating any such taxicab or limousine be in any manner limited or changed in
connection with this chapter or such permit or insurance.
(Ord. 94-36, passed 8-23-94; Am. Ord. 2006-08, passed 4-11-06) 
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.30  AD VALOREM TAXES.
   Before any permit, or renewal of permit, to operate a taxicab or limousine
shall be issued, the City Secretary shall examine the tax records and ascertain
whether or not the ad valorem taxes assessed by the city against the vehicle
and other equipment to be used in the business of the applicant have been fully
paid. If the ad valorem taxes have not been paid the City Council shall refuse
to issue the applicant such permit or renewal until all of such ad valorem
taxes have been paid.
(Ord. 94-36, passed 8-23-94)
§ 118.31  RENDERING TAXICABS FOR AD VALOREM TAXES.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every owner of every taxicab or limousine
operated within the city to render or cause to be rendered for ad valorem taxes
to the city all vehicles or other equipment used in such business and a failure
to render for and to pay such ad valorem taxes to the city before they become
delinquent shall, at the will of the Council, operate as a revocation of any
permit authorizing the operation over the public streets, alleys, and ways of
the city of any such taxicabs or limousines.
   (B)   No permit or renewal thereof authorizing the operation of any taxicabs
or limousines on the streets, alleys, and ways of the city shall ever be issued
if any delinquent taxes are due the city upon any taxicab or limousine for
which such permit or renewal is sought or if the owner thereof has failed to
render, or cause to be rendered, the same for ad valorem taxes.
(Ord. 94-36, passed 8-23-94) 
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.32  FRANCHISE FEE.
   (A)   If the applicant requests permits for six or more taxicabs or
limousines then the franchise fee shall be $150 per year for all vehicles. This
fee shall be due and payable when permits are issued and on or before February
1 of each year. Upon payment of said fee, a permit card shall be issued to each
taxicab or limousine, and said permit card shall be displayed conspicuously in
each taxicab or limousine. The permit card shall contain a number which shall
be placed or displayed on the outside of every taxicab or limousine.
   (B)   If the applicant requests permits for less than six taxicabs or
limousines, then the franchise fee shall be $25 per vehicle per year and shall
be paid to the city by the owners of the taxicab or limousine franchise. The
$25 permit fee shall be paid when issued and on or before February 1 of each
year. Upon payment of said fee a permit card shall be displayed conspicuously
in said taxicab or limousine. The permit card shall contain a number which
shall be placed on the outside of every taxicab or limousine.
(Ord. 94-36, passed 8-23-94)
DRIVER'S PERMIT
§ 118.40  PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate or cause to be
driven or operated any taxicab or limousine upon or over any street in the city
unless the driver has obtained for such taxicab or limousine a permit duly
issued by the City Secretary as hereinafter provided, which is in full force
and effect.
   (B)   Any taxicab or limousine not holding a permit from the city under the
provisions of this chapter may enter the city for the limited purpose of
delivering its passengers to the passenger's initial destination within the
city. A nonpermitted taxicab or limousine driver may not wait for the passenger
after delivery nor may they transport a passenger from place to place within
the city. In no event shall a nonpermitted taxicab or limousine driver pick up
a passenger within the city or transport a passenger out of the city. This
exception shall not apply to drivers of taxicabs or limousines whose permit to
operate vehicles for hire in this city has been revoked or denied.
(Ord. 94-36, passed 8-23-94) 
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.41  APPLICATIONS.
   Applicants for permits under this subchapter must file with the Police
Department an application in writing on a form obtained from the Department
which shall contain the following information.
   (A)   Name of the applicant.
   (B)   Address (legal and local).
   (C)   If the applicant is an employee or an agent of a company, the name and
address of the employer.
   (D)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of
any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of
the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor.
   (E)   The fingerprints of the applicant.
   (F)   A photograph of the applicant.
   (G)   The applicant's driver's license number.
(Ord. 94-36, passed 8-23-94)
§ 118.42  DRIVER PERMIT FEE.
   (A)   For each taxicab/limousine driver permit issued under this chapter,
there shall be paid by the applicant therefor in cash, in advance of the
issuance thereof, to defray the actual expense of the administration of this
chapter, a fee as set by the City Council.
   (B)   The following taxicab driver's permit fees are hereby adopted and
approved:
      (1)   Annual permits - $20
      (2)   Renewals - 10
      (3)   Duplicates - 4
(Ord. 94-36, passed 8-23-94)
§ 118.43  DENIAL.
   (A)   The Police Department may deny to a person a permit under this chapter
because of the applicant's conviction of a felony or a misdemeanor of the crime
directly involves the conduct of a taxicab or limousine business.
   (B)   In determining whether a criminal conviction directly relates to the
conduct of a taxicab or limousine business, the Police Department shall
consider:
      (1)   The nature and seriousness of the crime.
      (2)   The relationship of the crime to the purposes for a license to
drive a taxicab or limousine.
      (3)   The extent to which a license might offer an opportunity to engage
in further criminal activity of the same type as that in which the person had
previously been involved.
      (4)   The relationship of the crime to the ability, capacity, or fitness
required to perform the duties and discharge the responsibilities of the
permitted occupation.
      (5)   The extent and nature of the person's past criminal activity.
      (6)   The age of the person at the time of the commission of the crime.
      (7)   The amount of time that has elapsed since the person's last
criminal activity.
      (8)   The conduct and work activity prior to and following the criminal
activity.
      (9)   Evidence of the person's rehabilitation or rehabilitative effort
while incarcerated or following release.
      (10)    Other evidence of the person's present fitness, including letters
of recommendation from prosecution, law enforcement, and correctional officers
who prosecuted, arrested, or had custodial responsibility for the person; the
sheriff and Chief of Police in the community where the person resides; and any
other persons in contact with the convicted person.
   (C)   It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to the extent possible
to secure and provide to the Police Department the recommendations of the
prosecution, law enforcement, and correctional authorities as required under
this section; the applicant shall also furnish proof in such form as may be
required by the Police Department that he or she has maintained a record of
steady employment and has supported his or her dependents and has other-wise
maintained a record of good conduct and has paid off all outstanding court
costs, supervision fees, fines, and restitution as may have been ordered in all
criminal cases in which he or she has been convicted.
(Ord. 94-36, passed 8-23-94)
§ 118.44  ISSUANCE.
   (A)   The Police Department shall act on a permit application within 30 days
after the date a completed application is submitted. The permit is considered
approved unless it is disapproved within that period.
   (B)   Upon completion and presentation of the application, the Police
Department shall issue a permit under this chapter to the applicant unless
grounds for denial exist under §
118.43. Such permit shall contain the signature of the issuing officer and
shall show the name, the date of issuance, the expiration date of such permit,
and shall have attached a photograph of the permittee. The Police Department
shall keep a permanent record of all permits issued.
(Ord. 94-36, passed 8-23-94)
§ 118.45  TRANSFER.
   No permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be transferred
or assigned.
(Ord. 94-36, passed 8-23-94) 
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.46  EXPIRATION.
   All driver's permits issued under the provisions of this chapter shall
expire one year from the date of issuance.
(Ord. 94-36, passed 8-23-94)
§ 118.47  EXHIBITION OF PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Taxicab or limousine drivers are required to exhibit their permits at the
request of a police officer or any citizen.
(Ord. 94-36, passed 8-23-94) 
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.48  REVOCATION.
   (A)   Permits issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by
the Police Department, after notice and hearing, for any of the following
causes:
      (1)   Fraud, misinterpretation, or false statement contained in the
application for permit.
      (2)   Fraud, misinterpretation, or false statement made in the course of
carrying on his business as a taxicab or limousine driver.
      (3)   Any violation of this chapter.
      (4)   Conviction of any misdemeanor or any felony if the crime directly
relates to the conduct of a taxicab or limousine driver business.
      (5)   Conducting the business of peddling in an unlawful manner or in
such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace, or to constitute a menace
to the health, safety, and general welfare of the public.
   (B)   Notice of hearing for the revocation of a permit shall be given in
writing, setting forth specifically the grounds for complaint and the time and
place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the
permit holder at his address given in the application for permit at least five
days prior to the date set for hearing. A revocation for the reason given in
division (A)(4) of this section shall be under the same guidelines mentioned in
§
118.43 of this chapter.
(Ord. 94-36, passed 8-23-94)
§ 118.49  APPEAL.
   Any person aggrieved by the action of the Police Department with reference
to the application for or revocation of a permit under this chapter shall have
the right to appeal to the City Manager. Such appeal shall be taken by filing
with the City Manager,  within 14 days after notice of the action complained of
has been mailed to such person's address given in the application, a written
statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The City Manager
shall set a time and place for the hearing on such appeal and notice of such
hearing shall be given to the appellant in the same manner as provided in §
118.48 for notice of hearing and revocation. The decision and order of the City
Manager on such appeal shall be final and conclusive.
(Ord. 94-36, passed 8-23-94)
OPERATING RESTRICTIONS
§ 118.60  RATES TO BE POSTED.
   There shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the inside of each taxicab
or limousine and on the back of the front seat a card showing the rates charged
by the taxicab. A failure to have such card so posted at all times is a
violation of this chapter and may subject the permit to revocation at the will
of the Council.
(Ord. 94-36, passed 8-23-94) 
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.61  RECEIPT TO BE GIVEN TO PASSENGER.
   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any taxicab or limousine upon
receiving full payment of a fare to refuse to give a receipt therefor upon the
request of the passenger making such payment.
(Ord. 94-36, passed 8-23-94) 
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.62  UNLAWFUL TO REFUSE TO CONVEY AT RATE POSTED.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner or driver of any taxicab or limousine to
refuse to convey a passenger at the rate specified on the rate card displayed
as provided and set by the terms of this chapter.
(Ord. 94-36, passed 8-23-94) 
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.63  PROPERTY LEFT IN VEHICLES.
   All drivers of taxicabs or limousines shall promptly deliver to the Police
Department or to authorized agencies of their companies all property left in
such vehicles by passengers. Whoever violates the provisions of this section
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 94-36, passed 8-23-94) 
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.64  CHIEF OF POLICE TO KEEP RECORD OF ALL ARTICLES.
   When articles left in taxicabs or limousines have been delivered to the
office of the Chief of Police he shall make an entry of the fact in a book
provided for that purpose and shall keep all such articles until claimed by the
owner, or as the Council may authorize.
(Ord. 94-36, passed 8-23-94) 
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.65  CRUISING IN SEARCH OF PASSENGERS PROHIBITED.
   No driver shall cruise in search of passengers at any time and whenever a
taxicab or limousine is unoccupied, the driver shall proceed at once by the
most direct route to the garage where the vehicle is housed or to the regularly
established stand.
(Ord. 94-36, passed 8-23-94) 
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.66  SOLICITING TRANSPORTATION AT BUS DEPOTS.
   When any authorized taxicab or limousine is at any depot or bus station
within the city, it shall be unlawful for the driver or person in charge
thereof to leave the same and enter the depot or bus station or to go upon the
sidewalk or private property of any railroad company or bus line for the
purpose of soliciting the transportation of any passenger or passengers
arriving on the trains at such depot, or the buses at such station.
(Ord. 94-36, passed 8-23-94) 
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.67  VEHICLES AT TAXI STANDS.
   The drivers of taxicabs using public taxicab stands shall remain seated in
their vehicles at all times while such vehicle is at a public stand; provided,
however, such drivers may leave their vehicles when actually necessary to
assist passengers to enter or leave same, or in case of an accident, necessity,
or emergency beyond the control of such driver. Limousines shall have no right
to access to public taxi stands.
(Ord. 94-36, passed 8-23-94) 
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.68  OPERATORS MUST BE OWNERS OR EMPLOYEES.
   It shall be unlawful for any taxicab or limousine to be driven or operated
within the corporate limits of the city by any person except the owner of such
taxicab or limousine or authorized agent or employee of the owner.
(Ord. 94-36, passed 8-23-94) 
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.69  TRANSPORTING PROSTITUTES PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any driver of a taxicab or limousine knowingly to
transport any passenger to the abode of a commercialized prostitute with whom
he has made previous arrangements for meeting with his passenger, or to
knowingly transport any known criminal, narcotic peddler, or bootlegger in the
commission of a crime or the infraction of the law in any manner, or act in any
manner as a pimp for prostitutes, or a contact man for unlawful establishments
of any character.
(Ord. 94-36, passed 8-23-94) 
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.70  NAME OF COMPANY PAINTED ON VEHICLES.
   Every taxicab shall have painted on the sides and rear of such taxicab the
name of the owner or the assumed name under which the owner operates, together
with the company's telephone number and the taxicab permit number. All of the
lettering mentioned in this section shall not be less than one inch in width
and not less than four inches in height and not less than 5/16 inch stroke and
painted with paint that will weather the elements. Such lettering shall be kept
legible at all times. The lettering requirements stated herein shall not be
applicable to limousines.
(Ord. 94-36, passed 8-23-94) 
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.71  MOST DIRECT ROUTE.
   Any driver employed to carry passengers to a definite point shall take the
most direct route possible that will carry the passenger safely and
expeditiously to their destination.
(Ord. 94-36, passed 8-23-94) 
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.72  OWNERS TO KEEP ACCURATE RECORDS.
   Every owner of a taxi stand shall keep accurate records relating to calls
received and services rendered, the time of such calls for services, the name
of the driver performing the service or making the service call, the place of
such call and the time of return from such call. Every owner shall give access
to any and all records kept to the Chief of Police or any member of the police
force. Any and every refusal to give such records or furnish information kept
regarding such matters shall be a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 94-36, passed 8-23-94) 
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.73  REFUSAL TO PAY LEGAL FARE UNLAWFUL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the legal fare of any
of the vehicles mentioned in this chapter after having hired the same, and any
person who shall hire any vehicle herein defined with the intent to defraud the
person from whom it is hired shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. It shall be
unlawful for any taxicab or limousine driver to charge fares in excess of the
fares provided in this chapter; and any taxicab or limousine driver charging or
collecting any fare in excess of the fares provided herein shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(Ord. 94-36, passed 8-23-94) 
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.74  OPERATION OF VEHICLES LONGER THAN 12 HOURS.
   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any taxicab or limousine to operate
the same continuously for more than 12 hours. No owner of any taxicab or
limousine shall permit any driver of any taxicab or limousine to be in
continuous duty as a driver for a greater period than 12 hours.
(Ord. 94-36, passed 8-23-94) 
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.75  COLLECTING PASSENGERS.
   It shall be unlawful for the driver of a taxicab to pick up passengers in
the city within a 75 foot radius of any dispatch office other than his own, or
within a 75 foot radius of any designated taxicab stand other than his own.
(Ord. 94-36, passed 8-23-94) 
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.76  MAXIMUM FARES.
   (A)   No charge shall be made by the driver of any taxicab for waiting time
of five minutes or less.
   (B)   Rates shall be mutually agreed upon by the driver and passenger in
advance upon term satisfactory to them.
(Ord. 94-36, passed 8-23-94; Am. Ord. 97-29, passed 9-23-97) 
Penalty, see § 118.99
§ 118.98  CIVIL REMEDIES.
   In additional to any other remedies which may be available at law or in
equity, the city may sue in the appropriate district court for an injunction to
prohibit the violation of any regulation contained in this chapter.
(Ord. 94-36, passed 8-23-94)
§ 118.99  PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject
to a fine of not more than $2,000 and each day such violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense; the Council may in addition to the penalty
herein described revoke the permit to operate any taxicab involved. Each act
done in violation shall constitute a separate offense and upon conviction be
punishable as such.
(Ord. 94-36, passed 8-23-94)
CHAPTER 119:  WRECKERS AND TOWING BUSINESSES
Section
   
119.01   Title
   
119.02   Wrecker fees
   
119.03   Towing and impounding vehicles
   
119.99   Penalty
§ 119.01  TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the Wrecker Regulations and Towing of
Vehicles Ordinance.
(Ord. 78-35, passed 11-14-78)
§ 119.02  WRECKER FEES.
   All wrecker fees shall be as set forth in the Police Department's special
order regarding wrecker tow service.
§ 119.03  TOWING AND IMPOUNDING VEHICLES.
   The Police Department of the city or any officer thereof may, at his or her
discretion, order any vehicle parked in violation of any provision of Title VII
of this code of ordinances or any state or federal law, to be removed by a
wrecker. The fees for the towing and impoundment of any vehicle ordered moved
by the Police Department shall be paid by the owner of the vehicle.
(Ord. 78-35, passed 11-14-78) 
Penalty, see § 119.99
§ 119.99  PENALTY.
   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined not more than
$500.
(Ord. 78-35, passed 11-14-78)
CHAPTER 120:  PEDDLERS AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS
Section
   
120.01   Purpose
   
120.02   Definitions
   
120.03   Entering private premises by request only
   
120.04   Restricted hours for soliciting
   
120.05   License required
   
120.06   Application for solicitation license
   
120.07   Bond required
   
120.08   License fee
   
120.09   Exemptions
   
120.10   Interstate peddlers to register with City Secretary
   
120.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate hawkers, vendors, and peddlers, see Tex. Loc. Gov't
Code § 215.031
§ 120.01  PURPOSE.
   This entire chapter is and shall be deemed an exercise of the police power
of the State of Texas, and of the City of Harker Heights, for the public
safety, comfort, convenience, and protection of the city and citizens of said
city, and all of the provisions hereof shall be construed for the
accomplishment of that purpose.
(Ord. 70-07, passed 8-11-70)
§ 120.02  DEFINITIONS.
   The terms SOLICITOR, PEDDLER, ITINERANT MERCHANT, OR ITINERANT VENDOR shall
be defined as any person, firm, company, partnership, corporation or
association engaged in any activity mentioned in §
120.03of this chapter. 
(Ord. 70-07, passed 8-11-70)
§ 120.03  ENTERING PRIVATE PREMISES BY REQUEST ONLY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to go in and upon the premises of a
private residence in the city when there is posted on that residence a “no
solicitation” or similar sign, for the purpose of soliciting, selling, or
taking orders for or offering to sell or take orders for any goods, wares,
merchandise, services, photographs, newspapers, magazines, or subscriptions to
newspapers, or magazines.
(Ord. 70-07, passed 8-11-70) 
Penalty, see § 120.99
§ 120.04  RESTRICTED HOURS FOR SOLICITING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to go from house to house or from place
to place in the city soliciting, selling, or taking orders for or offering to
sell or take orders for any goods, wares, merchandise, services, photographs,
books, magazines, newspapers, or subscriptions to newspapers or magazines,
except during the hours from 8:00 a.m. until 30 minutes after sundown.
(Ord. 70-07, passed 8-11-70) 
Penalty, see § 120.99
§ 120.05  LICENSE REQUIRED.
   That it shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to go from house to house
or from place to place in the city soliciting, selling, or taking orders for or
offering to sell or take orders for any goods, wares, merchandise, services,
photographs, newspapers, magazines, or subscriptions to newspapers or
magazines, without having first applied for and obtained a license to do so
from the Finance Department. It shall also hereafter be unlawful to sell or
solicit in said city, as aforesaid, without carrying such license while engaged
in such soliciting or selling.
(Ord. 70-07, passed 8-11-70) 
Penalty, see § 120.99
§ 120.06  APPLICATION FOR SOLICITATION LICENSE.
   Any person desiring to go from house to house or from place to place in the
city to sell or solicit orders for goods, wares, merchandise, services,
photographs, newspapers, magazines, or subscriptions to newspapers or
magazines, shall make written application to the Finance Department for a
license to do so, which application shall show the name and address of
applicant, the name and address of the person, firm, or corporation, if any,
that he or she represents, and the kind of goods offered for sale, and whether
such applicant upon any such sale or order shall demand, accept or receive
payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery, and the period of
time such applicant wishes to sell or solicit in the city.
(Ord. 70-07, passed 8-11-70)
§ 120.07  BOND REQUIRED.
   (A)   The application mentioned in §
120.06 shall be accompanied by a bond in the penal sum of $1,000 signed by
applicant and signed, as surety, by some surety company authorized to do
business in the state, conditioned for final delivery of goods, wares,
merchandise, services, photographs, magazines and newspapers in accordance with
the terms of any order obtained prior to delivery and also conditioned to
indemnify any and all purchases or customers and for any and all defects in
material or workmanship that may exist in the article sold by the principal of
said bond, at the time of delivery, and that may be discovered by such
purchaser or customer within 30 days after delivery, and which bond shall be
for the use and benefit of all persons, firms, or corporations that may make
any purchase or give any order to the principal on said bond, or to an agent or
employee of the principal.
   (B)   Provided that in case applicant is a person, firm, company,
partnership, corporation, or association engaging in any activity mentioned in
§
120.03 through one or more agents or employees, such persons, firm, company,
partnership, corporation, or association shall be required to enter into only
one bond, in the sum of $1,000 as above required, which bond shall be made to
cover the activities of all its agents or employees.
(Ord. 70-07, passed 8-11-70)
§ 120.08  LICENSE FEE.
   (A)   The license fee for a solicitor, a peddler, an itinerant merchant, or
an itinerant vendor shall be as set forth in the city's latest fee schedule.
Provided, however, when any person, firm, company, partner-ship, corporation,
or association engages in any activity mentioned in §
120.03 through one or more agents or employees, such person, firm, company,
partnership, corporation, or association shall, in addition to said fee above
mentioned, pay a license fee in an amount set forth in the city's fee schedule
for each agent or employee so engaged, all of which license shall be valid for
one year from the date of their issuance; provided, further, that the license
shall be issued to the individual agent or employee and shall not be used by
any other agent or employee.
   (B)   The fees herein provided for shall be used for the purposes of
defraying expenses incident to the issuing of said licenses.
(Ord. 70-07, passed 8-11-70)
§ 120.09  EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to sales made dealers by
commercial travelers or sales agents in the usual course of business, nor to
sales made under authority and by order of law, nor to vendors of farm and
dairy products.
(Ord. 70-07, passed 8-11-70)
§ 120.10  INTERSTATE PEDDLERS TO REGISTER WITH CITY SECRETARY.
   (A)   The provisions of §§
120.05 through
120.08 of this chapter pertaining to licenses, license fees and bonds shall not
apply to persons engaged in interstate commerce as that term is herein defined,
provided, however, that it shall be unlawful for persons engaged in interstate
commerce to go from house to house or place to place in the city without having
first registered with the Finance Department of said city giving the following
information:
      (1)   Name, home address and local address, if any, of registrant.
      (2)   Name and address of the person, firm, or corporation, if any that
he or she represents or for whom or through whom orders are to be solicited or
cleared.
      (3)   Nature of the articles or things which are to be sold or for which
orders are to be solicited.
      (4)   Whether registrant, upon any sale or order shall demand or receive
or accept payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery.
      (5)   Period of time which registrant wishes to solicit or sell in said
city.
   (B)   The registrant at the time of the registration, as herein provided
for, shall submit for inspection of the Finance Department written proof of his
identity which may be in the form of an automobile operator's license,
identification letter or card issued to registrant by the person firm or
corporation for whom or through whom orders are to be solicited or cleared.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section the term INTERSTATE COMMERCE means
soliciting, selling, or taking orders for or offering to take orders for any
goods, wares, merchandise, photographs, newspapers or magazines which, at the
time the order is taken, are in any federal district or territory, any
commonwealth, or any state other than Texas or will be produced in any federal
district or territory, any commonwealth, or any state other than Texas and
shipped or introduced into this city in the fulfillment of such orders.
(Ord. 70-07, passed 8-11-70) 
Penalty, see § 120.99
§ 120.99  PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provisions of this chapter or
failing to observe any provision hereof shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and upon conviction shall be fined in any sum not less than $10 and not more
than $500 and each and every day or fraction of a day during which this
chapter, or any part thereof, shall be violated, shall be deemed a separate
offense and punishable as such.
(Ord. 70-07, passed 8-11-70)
CHAPTER 121:  HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX
Section
   
121.01   Definitions
   
121.02   Tax levied
   
121.03   Exemptions and refunds
   
121.04   Collection of tax and reimbursement for collection
   
121.05   Quarterly reports and payment of taxes
   
121.06   Authority of tax assessor-collector
   
121.07   Enforcement and civil penalties
   
121.08   Violations
   
121.09   Use of tax revenue
   
121.10   Delegation of management and supervision
 
   
121.99   Penalty
§ 121.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONVENTION CENTER FACILITIES or CONVENTION CENTER COMPLEX.  The meaning
assigned by Texas Tax Code § 351.001(2).
   HOTEL.  The meaning assigned by Texas Tax Code § 351.001(4).
   OCCUPANCY.  The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, by
any person of any room or rooms in a hotel if the room is one which is
ordinarily used for sleeping and if the person is not exempt under §
121.03(A) or (C) hereof.
   MUNICIPALITY.  The City of Harker Heights unless the context requires
otherwise.
   PERSON.  The meaning assigned by Texas Gov't Code § 311.005(2).
   QUARTERLY PERIOD.  A quarter of the calendar year.  The first quarter is
composed of the months of January, February and March; the second quarter is
composed of the months of April, May and June; the third quarter is composed of
the months of July, August and September; and the fourth quarter is composed of
the months of October, November and December.
   TAX ASSESSOR-COLLECTOR.  The person designated by the City Manager as the
tax assessor and collector of the City of Harker Heights.
   TOURISM.  The meaning assigned by Texas Tax Code § 351.001(5).
   TOURIST.  The meaning assigned by Texas Tax Code § 351.001(6).
   VISITOR INFORMATION CENTER or TOURISM INFORMATION CENTER.  The meaning
assigned by Texas Tax Code § 351.001(8).
(Ord. 98-46, passed 11-24-98)
§ 121.02  TAX LEVIED.
   There is hereby levied a tax of seven percent of the price paid for a room
in a hotel by any person who, under a lease, concession, permit, right of
access, license, contract, or agreement, pays for the use or possession or for
the right to the use or possession of a room that is in a hotel, costs $2 or
more each day, and is ordinarily used for sleeping.  The price of a room in a
hotel does not include the cost of food served by the hotel and the cost of
personal services performed by the hotel for the person except those services
related to the cleaning and readying of the room for possession.
((Ord. 98-46, passed 11-24-98)
§ 121.03  EXEMPTIONS AND REFUNDS.
   (A)   A person described as a permanent resident by Texas Tax Code § 156.101
is exempt from the payment of the tax imposed by this chapter.
   (B)   A governmental entity excepted under Texas Tax Code § 156.103(a)(1) or
(a)(3) from the tax imposed by 156 of that code shall pay the tax imposed by
this chapter but is entitled to a refund of the tax paid.
   (C)   A person who is described by Texas Tax Code § 156.103(d) is exempt
from the payment of the tax imposed by this chapter.
   (D)   A tax imposed by person who is described by Texas Tax Code § 156.103
(c) shall pay the tax imposed by this chapter but the state governmental entity
with whom the person is associated is entitled to a refund of the tax paid.
   (E)   To receive a refund of tax paid under this chapter, the governmental
entity entitled to the refund must file a refund claim on a form provided by
the city and containing the information required by the city.
   (F)   A governmental entity may file a refund claim with the city under this
chapter only for each calendar quarter for all reimbursements accrued during
that quarter.
(Ord. 98-46, passed 11-24-98)
§ 121.04  COLLECTION OF TAX AND REIMBURSEMENT FOR COLLECTION.
   (A)   A person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel within
the corporate limits of the city shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter,
file a tax report as herein provided, and pay the collections over to the tax
assessor-collector when due.
   (B)   The person required to collect the tax imposed by this chapter may
deduct and withhold from the taxes otherwise due to the city on the quarterly
report, as reimbursement for the cost of collecting the tax, one percent of the
amount of the tax due as shown on the report.  If taxes due under this chapter
are not paid to the city within the time required, or if the person required to
file a report fails to file the report when due, the person forfeits the claim
to reimbursement that could have been taken if the tax had been paid or the
report filed when due.
(Ord. 98-46, passed 11-24-98)
§ 121.05  QUARTERLY REPORTS AND PAYMENT OF TAXES.
   (A)   Not later than the last day of the month following each quarterly
period the person required to collect the tax imposed by this chapter shall
file a report with the tax assessor-collector showing the price paid for all
room occupancies in the preceding quarter, the amount of the tax collected on
such occupancies, and any other information the tax assessor-collector may
reasonably require.  The report shall be in a form prescribed by the tax
assessor-collector.
   (B)   The person required to collect the tax imposed by this chapter shall
pay the tax due at the time of filing the report required by this section.
(Ord. 98-46, passed 11-24-98)
§ 121.06  AUTHORITY OF TAX ASSESSOR-COLLECTOR.
   (A)   The tax assessor-collector is hereby authorized and directed to do all
such things necessary or convenient to carry out the terms of this chapter.
   (B)   The tax assessor-collector shall have the power to make such rules and
regulations as are reasonable and necessary to effectively collect the tax
levied hereby, and shall upon reasonable notice have access to books and
records necessary to enable him to determine the correctness of any report
filed as required by this chapter, and the amount of taxes due under the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 98-46, passed 11-24-98)
§ 121.07  ENFORCEMENT AND CIVIL PENALTIES.
   (A)   The City Attorney or other attorney acting for the city may bring suit
against a person who is required to collect the tax imposed by this chapter and
pay the collections over to the city, and who has failed to file a tax report
or pay the tax when due, to collect the tax not paid, or to enjoin the person
from operating a hotel in the city until the tax is paid or the report filed,
as applicable, as provided by the court's order.  In addition to the amount of
any tax owed under this chapter, the person is liable to the city for the
city's reasonable attorney's fees and a penalty equal to 15% of the total
amount of the tax owed.
   (B)   If taxes due under this chapter are not paid to the city within the
time required, the unpaid taxes shall accrue interest at the rate of ten
percent per annum beginning 60 days from the due date.
   (C)   If taxes due under this chapter are not paid to the city within the
time required, or if the person required to file a report fails to file the
report when due, the person required to collect the tax imposed by this chapter
forfeits the claim to reimbursement as provided in §
121.04(B).
   (D)   The remedies provided in this section are in addition to other
available remedies.
(Ord. 98-46, passed 11-24-98)
§ 121.08  VIOLATIONS.
   The person who is required to collect the tax imposed by this chapter
commits an offense if the person:
   (A)   Fails to collect the tax imposed by this chapter;
   (B)   Fails to file a report as required by this chapter;
   (C)   Files a false report with the tax assessor-collector; or
   (D)   Fails to pay the tax to the tax assessor-collector as required by this
chapter.
(Ord. 98-46, passed 11-24-98) 
Penalty, see § 121.99
§ 121.09  USE OF TAX REVENUE.
   (A)   Revenue from the tax imposed by this chapter may be used only to
promote tourism and the convention and hotel industry, and that use is limited
to the following:
      (1)   The acquisition of sites for and the construction, improvement,
enlarging, equipping, repairing, operation, and maintenance of convention
center facilities or visitor information centers, or both;
      (2)   The furnishing of facilities, personnel, and materials for the
registration of convention delegates or registrants;
      (3)   Advertising and conducting solicitations and promotional programs
to attract tourists and convention delegates or registrants to the city or its
vicinity;
      (4)   The encouragement, promotion, improvement, and application of the
arts, including instrumental and vocal music, dance, drama, folk art, creative
writing, architecture, design and allied fields, painting, sculpture,
photography, graphic and craft arts, motion pictures, radio, television, tape
and sound recording, and other arts related to the presentation, performance,
execution, and exhibition of these major art forms; and
      (5)   Historical restoration and preservation projects or activities or
advertising and conducting solicitations and promotional programs to encourage
tourists and convention delegates to visit preserved historic sites or museums:
         (a)   At or in the immediate vicinity of convention center facilities
or visitor information centers; or
         (b)   Located elsewhere in the city or its vicinity that would be
frequented by tourists and convention delegates.
   (B)   Revenue derived from the tax imposed by this chapter shall be expended
in a manner directly enhancing and promoting tourism and the convention and
hotel industry as permitted by division (A).  That revenue may not be used for
the general revenue purposes or general governmental operations of the city.
   (C)   Hotel occupancy tax revenue spent for a purpose authorized by this
section may be spent for day-to-day operations, supplies, salaries, office
rental, travel expenses, and other administrative costs only if those
administrative costs are incurred directly in the promotion and servicing
expenditures authorized under division (A).  If the city or other public or
private entity that conducts an activity authorized under this section conducts
other activities that are not authorized under this section, the portion of the
total administrative costs of the entity for which hotel occupancy tax revenue
may be used may not exceed the portion of those administrative costs actually
incurred in conducting the authorized activities.
   (D)   Hotel occupancy tax revenue may not be spent for travel for a person
to attend an event or conduct an activity the primary purpose of which is not
directly related to the promotion of tourism and the convention and hotel
industry or the performance of the person's job in an efficient and
professional manner.
   (E)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit any private entity, person, or
organization from making subgrants by contract to any other person, entity, or
private organization for expenditures under subdivision (A)(4).  A subgrantee
shall:
      (1)   At least annually make periodic reports to the City Council of its
expenditures from the tax imposed by this chapter; and
      (2)   Make records of these expenditures available for review to the City
Council or other person.
(Ord. 98-46, passed 11-24-98)
§ 121.10  DELEGATION OF MANAGEMENT AND SUPERVISION.
   (A)   The City Council may by contract delegate to a person, including
another governmental entity or a private organization, the management or
supervision of programs and activities funded with revenue from the tax imposed
by this chapter.  The City Council may not delegate to any person the
management or supervision of the city's convention and visitors programs and
activities funded with revenue from the tax imposed by this chapter other than
by contract as provided by this section.
   (B)   The City Council in writing shall approve in advance the annual budget
of the person to whom it delegates the management or supervision of programs
and activities funded with revenue from the tax imposed by this chapter.  The
approval by the City Council of the annual budget of the person creates a
fiduciary duty in the person with respect to the revenue provided from the tax
imposed by this chapter.
   (C)   The person to whom the City Council delegates the management or
supervision of programs and activities funded with revenue from the tax imposed
by this chapter must maintain such revenue in a separate account established
for that purpose and may not commingle that revenue with any other money.
   (D)   A person with whom the City Council contracts under this section shall
make reports to the City Council upon request, and no less often than
quarterly, listing the expenditures made by the person with the revenue
provided from the tax imposed by this chapter.  In addition, the person shall
maintain complete and accurate financial records of each expenditure of hotel
occupancy tax revenue made by the person and, on request of the City Council or
other person, shall make the records available for inspection and review to the
City Council or other person.
(Ord. 98-46, passed 11-24-98)
§ 121.99  PENALTY.
   An offense under §
121.08 of this chapter is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed
$500.
(Ord. 98-46, passed 11-24-98)
CHAPTER 122:  RETAIL ELECTRICAL PROVIDERS
Section
   
122.01   Definitions
   
122.02   Registration and fees
   
122.03   Annual re-registration and fees
   
122.04   Suspension or revocation
 
   
122.99   Penalty
§ 122.01  DEFINITIONS.
   In this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context  indicates otherwise.
   CERTIFICATE OF RETAIL ELECTRICAL PROVIDER.   That person, firm, corporation,
entity or partnership otherwise certified by the state in accordance with the
Tex. Utility Code Ch. § 39.352, as amended.
   COMMERCIAL CUSTOMER.   The separately metered  end-use, non-residential
customer who purchases and ultimately consumes electricity.
   PUBLIC UTILITY COMMISSION.   The Texas Public Utility Commission.
   RETAIL CUSTOMER.   The separately metered end-use customer who purchases and
ultimately consumes electricity.
   RETAIL ELECTRICAL PROVIDER.   A person, firm, corporation, entity or
partnership that sells electric energy to retail customers in the state. A
RETAIL ELECTRICAL PROVIDER may not own or generate assets.
(Ord. 2001-34, passed 11-13-01)
§ 122.02  REGISTRATION AND FEES.
   All retail electrical providers providing commercial or residential
electrical service within the city shall register with the City Manager as a
condition of providing such service. Each retail electrical provider shall pay
a one-time administrative fee for the registration in the amount established by
the then-current fee schedule adopted by the city.
(Ord. 2001-34, passed 11-13-01)
§ 122.03  ANNUAL RE-REGISTRATION AND FEES.
   All previously registered retail electrical providers providing commercial
or residential electrical service within the city shall on or before each
anniversary date of the initial registration, re-register with the City
Manager. The city shall assess an administrative fee for the annual re-
registration in the amount established by the then-current fee schedule adopted
by the city, and such fees shall be assessed on an annual basis. Re-
registration shall be accomplished by submitting such fees, together with the
applicant's request for registration renewal and certification of the number of
customers served.
(Ord. 2001-34, passed 11-13-01)
§ 122.04  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   (A)   The City Manager may establish such reasonable regulations governing
the registration including the formation or promulgation of an application
form.
   (B)   The City Manager shall adopt such reasonable regulations to require
retail electric providers to provide such financial and/or operational data as
is necessary to provide sufficient data to administer the regulations adopted
hereunder and as provided for under state law.
   (C)   The City Manager may suspend or revoke the retail electrical
provider's registration and operation within the municipality for significant
violations during the registration and of the rules promulgated under the
authority provided herein.
   (D)   The City Manager may contract with an outside consulting firm to
perform the services herein and provided for by this section.
(Ord. 2001-34, passed 11-13-01)
§ 122.99  PENALTY.
   A person, firm, corporation, entity or partnership that violates a provision
of this chapter is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day
during which the violation is committed, continued, or permitted. Each offense,
upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500 per offense.
(Ord. 2001-34, passed 11-13-01)
CHAPTER 123:  REGISTRATION OF CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTORS
Section
   
123.01   Definitions
   
123.02   Certificate of registration required
   
123.03   Exemptions
   
123.04   Contractor types
   
123.05   Application for registration
   
123.06   Issuance or refusal
   
123.07   Restrictions imposed
   
123.08   Effect
   
123.09   Expiration
   
123.10   Renewal
   
123.11   Fees
   
123.12   Updates
   
123.13   Transfer prohibited
   
123.14   Display
   
123.15   Administrative disciplinary action
   
123.16   Surrender and return of registration
   
123.17   Appeal
 
   
123.99   Penalty
§ 123.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONSTRUCTION OPERATION.  The act of erecting, remodeling, altering,
repairing, extending, or demolishing any house, building, or other structure
affixed to land, as well as any required preparatory work such as site
clearance, earth moving, and laying of a foundation.
   REGISTRANT.  The holder of a valid certificate of registration issued under
this chapter.
(Ord. 2009-26, passed 8-11-09)
§ 123.02  CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   A person may not perform a construction operation within the city limits
unless the person holds a valid certificate of registration issued under this
chapter authorizing the person to perform such construction operations.
(Ord. 2009-26, passed 8-11-09)  Penalty, see §
123.99
§ 123.03  EXEMPTIONS.
   This chapter does not apply to:
   (A)   A construction operation performed by a person on property owned or
occupied by that person;
   (B)   A construction operation for which the city does not require a
building permit;
   (C)   Improvements to solely replace or repair a home's component parts
including a roof;
   (D)   A person who has been issued a license by this state or an agency of
this state to practice a trade or profession related to or affiliated with
construction, if the work being done by the entity or individual is solely for
the purpose for which the license was issued;
   (E)   The sale or delivery of materials for use in a construction operation;
   (F)   Architectural or engineering services; or
   (G)   The installation of non-electrical portable signs and/or banners.
(Ord. 2009-26, passed 8-11-09)
§ 123.04  CONTRACTOR TYPES.
   (A)   The following contractor types are recognized under this chapter:
      (1)   General contractor.  A person responsible to oversee the project,
ensure that all required permits and fees for a total project are obtained, and
to ensure that all required inspections are performed for compliance of the
adopted construction codes.
      (2)   Residential general contractor.  A person responsible to oversee
and ensure that all required permits for an approved project are obtained, and
to ensure that all required inspections are performed for compliance with the
adopted construction codes for construction of one or two family dwellings, or
townhouses, or to perform interior remodel projects on such structures if the
project is valued over $20,000.
      (3)   Electrical contractor.  A person that possesses a valid license
issued by the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation (TDLR) to contract
and perform electrical work.
      (4)   Plumbing contractor.  A person that possesses or employs a
responsible master plumber licensed by the Texas State Board of Plumbing
Examiners (TSBPE) to contract or perform plumbing work.
      (5)   Mechanical contractor.  A person lawfully licensed by the Texas
Department of Licensing and Regulation (TDLR) to contract and perform
mechanical work.
      (6)   Fire sprinkler contractor.  A person lawfully licensed by the State
Fire Marshal's office as possessing a person with a responsible managing
employee (RME) license.
      (7)   Sign contractor.  A person that installs, repairs, or makes changes
to any type of sign.
      (8)   Lawn irrigator contractor.  A person that installs, repairs, or
modifies lawn irrigation systems, or that is required to hold a valid
irrigator's license issued by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality
(TCEQ).
      (9)   Whole house water softener contractor. A person who is required to
possess, or employing a person who is required to possesses, a valid water
treatment specialist class 3 license issued by the Texas Commission on
Environmental Quality (TCEQ).
      (10)   Swimming pool contractor.  A person who contracts to install,
repair or modify swimming pools, whirlpools, or hot tubs.
      (11)   Contractor types not defined.  A person performing construction
operations of a type not listed above shall be considered a general contractor.
   (B)   A person or company may be issued more than one type of registration,
as he or she may be qualified.
(Ord. 2009-26, passed 8-11-09)
§ 123.05  APPLICATION FOR REGISTRATION.
   (A)   An application for a certificate of registration shall be filed with
the Building Official on a form provided by the Building Official, together
with the required fee.  A separate registration form and filing fee shall be
submitted for each entity under which the applicant intends to perform
construction operations in the city.
   (B)   An applicant shall appoint an individual as its designated primary
agent.  The agent shall be the owner if the applicant is a sole proprietorship,
an officer if the applicant is corporation, a manager (or member having
authority as a manager) if the applicant is a limited liability company, or a
managing partner if the applicant is a general or limited partnership.  The
agent must be at least 18 years age and citizen of the United States or a
lawfully admitted alien on a temporary visa whose status of admission permits
the individual to work in the United States.
   (C)   The application shall disclose:
      (1)   The applicant's full legal name;
      (2)   The applicant's form of business;
      (3)   All assumed names under which the applicant does business;
      (4)   The address of the applicant's fixed physical primary place of
business, and the phone number at that location;
      (5)   The residence address and home phone number of the applicant's
designated primary agent;
      (6)   The name and address of each of applicant's affiliates or
subsidiaries;
      (7)   Each contractor type for which applicant seeks to register;
      (8)   The name and address of each person authorized to apply for city
building permits or certificates of occupancy on the applicant's behalf;
      (9)   The name and address of each person employed by the applicant who
holds a state-issued license for any of the contractor types listed in this
chapter; and
      (10)   Such additional information as may be requested by the Building
Official for the purpose of reviewing and completing the application.
   (D)   The applicant shall provide proof that the applicant holds all state
licenses, permits, certifications, endorsements, registrations, or approvals
required for the type of contractor for which applicant seeks to register.  In
addition, if the applicant is required to register with the Secretary of State
it must provide proof that it is in good standing with that office.
   (E)   If an incomplete application is submitted, the Building Official will
provide the applicant an Opportunity to submit complete information.  If the
applicant fails to submit a completed application within 15 days of the date of
notice of a deficiency, the application will be denied and all fees paid will
be forfeited.
(Ord. 2009-26, passed 8-11-09)
§ 123.06  ISSUANCE OR REFUSAL.
   (A)   Registrations shall be issued to each applicant complying with all
applicable state laws and city ordinances, and registrations shall be refused
for any applicant failing to comply with any such laws and ordinances.  Nothing
in this chapter shall be interpreted as granting or attempting to grant to any
city inspector or employee any discretionary authority to issue a registration
or to refuse to issue a registration.
   (B)   An original or renewal registration shall be issued or refused not
more than ten days after the Building Official receives a complete application
and the required fee, and the Building Official will within such time notify
the applicant in writing of such determination.  If the registration is
refused, the notice shall set forth the reasons for the refusal and shall
include a notice of any right to appeal the determination.
(Ord. 2009-26, passed 8-11-09)
§ 123.07  RESTRICTIONS IMPOSED.
   (A)   Issuance of a certificate of registration is conditioned that the
registrant shall faithfully observe all laws and regulations pertaining to the
registrant's construction operations.
   (B)   The registration issued under this chapter shall show on its face any
restrictions placed thereon by reason of the types of construction operations
to be performed.  The registrant shall comply with all such restrictions.
(Ord. 2009-26, passed 8-11-09)
§ 123.08  EFFECT.
   A certificate of registration issued under this chapter does not substitute
for or excuse the registrant from any other license, permit, certification,
endorsement, registration, approval or fee otherwise required by law.
(Ord. 2009-26, passed 8-11-09)
§ 123.09  EXPIRATION.
   A certificate of registration shall expire one year from date of issue.
(Ord. 2009-26, passed 8-11-09)
§ 123.10  RENEWAL.
   An application for renewal of a certificate of registration must be filed
with the Building Official on a form provided by the Building Official.  An
application for renewal must be submitted to the Building Official with the
required fee not later than 15 days prior to the end of the applicable
registration period.  If a certificate lapses due to the registrant's failure
to timely apply for renewal, the registrant will be required to make
application for a new original certificate of registration to comply with this
chapter.
(Ord. 2009-26, passed 8-11-09)
§ 123.11  FEES.
   Fees for original and renewal applications shall be in accordance with the
fee schedule established by the City Council with the exception of plumbing
contractors who are exempt from registration fees as provided by state law.
(Ord. 2009-26, passed 8-11-09)
§ 123.12  UPDATES.
   (A)   A registrant shall notify the Building Official in writing within 30
days following the effective dateof any change in the information submitted as
part of the registrant's most recent application for original or renewal
certificate of registration.  No fee shall be required to update a certificate
of registration.
   (B)   The following events shall require a new application for an original
certificate of registration, and may not be submitted by an update to an
existing certificate of registration:
      (1)   A change in the registrant's form of business organization; and
      (2)   A change to enable the registrant to perform construction
operations as a contractor type not authorized by the registrant's most recent
certificate of registration.
(Ord. 2009-26, passed 8-11-09)
§ 123.13  TRANSFER PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for a registrant to transfer a certificate of
registration, or to allow the use of such certificate directly or indirectly by
any other person for the purpose of obtaining a permit to perform any
construction operation within the territorial limits of the city.
(Ord. 2009-26, passed 8-11-09)  Penalty, see § 123.99
§ 123.14  DISPLAY.
   A registrant or its designated primary agent shall display the registrant's
valid certificate of registration upon the demand of the Building Official.
(Ord. 2009-26, passed 8-11-09)
§ 123.15  ADMINISTRATIVE DISCIPLINARY ACTION.
   (A)   The Building Official may take disciplinary action against a
registrant or the registrant's designated primary agent as set forth in this
section.
   (B)   The Building Official may suspend a certificate of registration for a
period of not more than one year after determining that the registrant or the
registrant's designated primary agent has done any of the following:
      (1)   Taken out a permit in the name of a person authorized to do the
work, and thereafter permitted a person not authorized by this code to do the
work;
      (2)   Tampered with, diverted from, or in any way interfered with the
proper action, connection, or registration of any public utility service;
      (3)   Employed any person not licensed as required by law to perform
construction operations;
      (4)   Permitted an unlawful or fraudulent use of a registration issued
under this chapter;
      (5)   Performed any work that is in violation of this chapter and then
failed or refused to make corrections necessary for the work to conform to this
chapter, or has failed to pay any re-inspection fees or penalties; or
      (6)   Performed any work in violation of any restrictions imposed on the
registrant's certificate of registration;
      (7)   Provided false or materially misleading information as part of an
application for an original or renewal certificate of registration under this
chapter;
      (8)   Violated or attempted to violate any provision of this chapter;
      (9)   Failed to pay an administrative penalty assessed under this
chapter; or
      (10)   Conspired with another to violate or attempt to violate a
provision of this chapter.
   (C)   The Building Official may revoke a certificate of registration after
determining that two or more new grounds for suspension have occurred within
two years following any prior disciplinary action under this chapter against a
registrant or its designated primary agent.  In the event of such revocation,
the registrant shall be ineligible for issuance of a new certificate for a
period of three years.
   (D)   The Building Official may impose an administrative penalty on a person
who violates this chapter.  The penalty shall not exceed $500 per violation. 
Such penalty may be assessed in addition to any other disciplinary action,
penalty or fine authorized by this chapter.
(Ord. 2009-26, passed 8-11-09)
§ 123.16  SURRENDER AND RETURN OF REGISTRATION.
   Any registration which has been suspended under this chapter shall be
surrendered to and be retained by the Building Official.  At the end of the
period of suspension, in the absence of further violations, the surrendered
registration shall be returned to the registrant and shall be valid under the
provisions of this code.  If the period of suspension extends beyond the normal
expiration date of the registration, the registrant shall pay all registration
fees without proration in order to receive a valid registration to continue
construction operations following the suspension period.
(Ord. 2009-26, passed 8-11-09)
§ 123.17  APPEAL.
   (A)   A person aggrieved by a decision to refuse an application for an
original or renewal certificate of registration, or by an administrative
disciplinary action under this chapter, shall have the right to appeal as
provided in this section.
   (B)   The initial appeal shall be to the City Manager.
      (1)   The appellant shall initiate such appeal by filing a written notice
with the Building Official and the City Secretary, briefly describing the
decision being appealed, and setting forth the address, fax and phone numbers
at which the appellant wishes to receive communications related to the appeal. 
The person seeking the appeal must file the notice within ten days of the date
of the notice of the decision from which the appeal is sought.
      (2)   Within five days after the filing of the notice of appeal, the
Building Official shall file with the City Secretary a sworn, written complaint
setting out the charges.
      (3)   Upon receipt of the Building Official's complaint, the City
Secretary shall set a hearing at a specified time and place not more than 21
days following receipt of the notice of appeal, and shall cause a copy of the
complaint and notice of setting for the hearing to be served upon the appellant
by certified mail, return receipt requested, no less than ten days before the
date appointed in the notice of setting.
      (4)   The Building Official and the City Attorney shall be entitled to
present evidence and argument at such hearing.
      (5)   The appellant may appear in person, or by counsel, at the time and
place named in the notice of setting and may make a defense to the charges.  If
the appellant fails or refuses to appear, the City Manager may proceed to hear
and determine the charges.
      (6)   The hearing shall be recorded by an audio recording device.
      (7)   When the City Manager has completed such hearing and made a
decision, he or she shall cause one copy of the decision to be filed with the
Building Official and one copy to be forwarded to the appellant by certified
mail.
   (C)   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the City Manager under this
chapter shall have a right to petition for review by the City Council.
      (1)   The appellant shall initiate such appeal by filing a written notice
with the City Secretary.  The notice must be filed within ten days of the date
of the City Manager's decision.
      (2)   The City Secretary shall set the matter for review by the City
Council at a specified time and place not more than 14 days following receipt
of the notice of appeal, and shall cause a copy of the complaint and notice of
setting for the hearing to be served upon the appellant by certified mail,
return receipt requested, no less than seven days before the date appointed in
the notice of setting.
      (3)   The City Manager shall furnish the City Council with all reports,
memoranda, recordings and other evidence received at the hearing, as well as a
summary of the evidence and his findings.
      (4)   The City Council deliberation shall be conducted in accordance with
the Texas Open Meetings Act.
      (5)   The City Council shall determine the appeal based upon the
substantial evidence received by the City Manager and may by majority vote
affirm, modify or reverse such decision.  Oral argument may be granted either
on a party's request or by the City Council's own initiative.  When the City
Council has made a decision, it shall cause one copy of the decision to be
filed with the Building Official and one copy to be forwarded to the appellant
by certified mail.
(Ord. 2009-26, passed 8-11-09)
§ 123.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   It shall be an offense for any person to perform or cause to be
performed a construction operation within the city limits unless the person
holds a valid a certificate of registration issued under this chapter
authorizing the person to perform such construction operations.
   (B)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of
an offense and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed
$500.  A knowing or intentional violation of this chapter shall be punishable
upon conviction by a fine of not less than $500 nor more than $2,000 and the
costs of prosecution for each violation.
(Ord. 2009-26, passed 8-11-09)
CHAPTER 124:  CREDIT ACCESS BUSINESSES REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
124.01   Short title and purpose
   
124.02   Definitions
   
124.03   Registration required
   
124.04   Registration application
   
124.05   Issuance, display and presentment of certificate
   
124.06   Expiration and renewal of certificate of registration
   
124.07    Non-transferability
   
124.08   Maintenance of records
   
124.09   Restriction on extension of consumer credit
   
124.10   Requirement of consumer understanding
   
124.11   Referral to consumer credit counseling
   
124.12   Notice of military lending act
   
124.13   Existing businesses
Enforcement
   
124.20   Administrative disciplinary action
   
124.21   Surrender and return of registration
   
124.22   Appeal
   
124.23   Authority of City Attorney
   
124.24   Defenses
 
   
124.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 124.01  SHORT TITLE AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   This chapter may be known and cited as "Credit Access Businesses
Regulation."
   (B)   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the welfare of the citizens
of the city by monitoring credit access businesses in an effort to reduce
abusive and predatory lending practices. To this end, this chapter establishes
a registration program for credit access businesses, imposes restrictions on
extensions of consumer credit made by credit access businesses, and imposes
recordkeeping requirements on credit access businesses.
(Ord. 2016-09, passed 4-26-16)
§ 124.02  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION. A certificate of registration issued by the
Director under this chapter to the owner or operator of a credit access
business.
   CONSUMER. An individual who is solicited to purchase or who purchases the
services of a credit access business.
   CONSUMER'S LANGUAGE OF  PREFERENCE. The language the consumer understands
best.
   CREDIT ACCESS BUSINESS. Has the  same meaning given that term in Tex.
Finance Code § 393.601.
   DEFERRED PRESENTMENT  TRANSACTION. The same meaning given the term in Tex.
Finance Code § 393.601.
   DIRECTOR. The Planning and Development Director or his designee.
   EXTENSION OF CONSUMER CREDIT. The meaning given that term in Tex. Finance
Code § 393.001.
   MOTOR VEHICLE TITLE LOAN. The meaning given that term in Tex. Finance Code §
393.601.
   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, organization, partnership, association,
financial institution, or any other legal entity.
   REGISTRANT. A person issued a certificate of registration for a credit
access business under this chapter and includes all owners and operators of the
credit access business identified in the registration application filed under
this chapter.
   STATE LICENSE. A license to operate a credit access business issued by the
Texas Consumer Credit Commissioner under Tex. Finance Code Ch. 393, Subchapter
G.
(Ord. 2016-09, passed 4-26-16)
§ 124.03  REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   A person commits an offense if the person acts, operates, or conducts
businesses as a credit access business without a valid certificate of
registration. A certificate of registration is required for each physically
separate credit access business.
   (B)   A certificate of registration does not authorize any activity
otherwise prohibited by law, nor does it excuse the registrant from obtaining
any other license, permit, certification, endorsement, registration, approval
or fee otherwise required by law.
(Ord. 2016-09, passed 4-26-16)
§ 124.04  REGISTRATION APPLICATION.
   (A)   To obtain a certificate of registration for a credit access business,
a person must submit an application to the Director on a form provided for that
purpose. The application must contain the following:
      (1)   The name, street address, mailing address, facsimile number, and
telephone number of the applicant;
      (2)   The business or trade name, street address, mailing address,
facsimile number, and telephone number of the credit access business;
      (3)   The names, street addresses, mailing addresses, and telephone
numbers of all owners of the credit access business, and the nature and extent
of each person's interest in the credit access business;
      (4)   A copy of a current, valid state license held by the credit access
business pursuant to Tex. Finance Code, Ch. 393, Subchapter G;
      (5)   A copy of a current, valid certificate of occupancy showing that
the credit access business is in compliance with this code; and
      (6)   A non-refundable application fee for the amount established in the
city fee schedule.
   (B)   An applicant or registrant shall notify the Director within 45 days
after any material change in the information contained in the application for a
certificate of registration, including but not limited to any change of address
and any change in the status of the state license held by the applicant or
registrant.
(Ord. 2016-09, passed 4-26-16)
§ 124.05  ISSUANCE, DISPLAY AND PRESENTMENT OF CERTIFICATE.
   (A)   The Director shall issue to the applicant a certificate of
registration within ten calendar days after receiving a completed application
under §
124.04.
   (B)   A certificate of registration issued under this section must be
conspicuously displayed to the public in the credit access business. The
certificate of registration must be presented upon request to the Director or
any peace officer or examination.
(Ord. 2016-09, passed 4-26-16)
§ 124.06  EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.
   (A)   A certificate of registration expires on the earliest of:
      (1)   One year after the date of issuance; or
      (2)   The date of revocation, suspension, surrender, expiration without
renewal, or other termination of the registrant’s state license.
   (B)   A certificate of registration may be renewed by making application in
accordance with §
124.04. A registrant shall apply for renewal at least 30 days before the
expiration of the registration.
(Ord. 2016-09, passed 4-26-16)
§ 124.07  NON-TRANSFERABILITY.
   A certificate of registration for a credit access business is not
transferable.
(Ord. 2016-09, passed 4-26-16)
§ 124.08  MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS.
   (A)   A credit access business shall maintain a complete set of records of
all extensions of consumer credit arranged or obtained by the credit access
business, which must include the following information:
      (1)   The name and address of the consumer;
      (2)   The principal amount of cash actually advanced;
      (3)   The length of the extension of consumer credit, including the
number of installments and renewals;
      (4)   The fees charged by the credit access business to arrange or obtain
an extension of consumer credit; and
      (5)   The documentation used to establish a consumer's income under §
124.09.
   (B)   A credit access business shall maintain a copy of each written
agreement between the credit access business and a consumer evidencing an
extension of a consumer credit (including, but not limited to, any refinancing
or renewal granted to the consumer).
   (C)   A credit access business shall maintain copies of all quarterly
reports filed with the Texas Consumer Credit Commissioner under Tex. Finance
Code § 393.627.
   (D)   The records required to be maintained by a credit access business
under this section must be retained for at least three years. If requested by
the Director, the credit access business must submit a Quarterly Report to the
Director providing records maintained under this section.
(Ord. 2016-09, passed 4-26-16)
§ 124.09  RESTRICTION ON EXTENSION OF CONSUMER CREDIT.
   (A)   The cash advanced under an extension of consumer credit that a credit
access business obtains for a consumer or assists a consumer in obtaining in
the form of a deferred presentment transaction may not exceed 20% of the
consumer's gross monthly income.
   (B)   The cash advanced under an extension of consumer credit that a credit
access business obtains for a consumer or assists a consumer in obtaining in
the form of a motor vehicle title loan may not exceed the lesser of:
      (1)   Three percent of the consumer's gross annual income; or
      (2)   Seventy  percent of the retail value of the motor vehicle.
   (C)   A credit access business shall use a paycheck or other documentation
establishing income to determine a consumer's income.
   (D)   An extension of consumer credit that a credit access business obtains
for a consumer or assists a consumer in obtaining and that provides for
repayment in installments may not be payable in more than four installments.
Proceeds from each installment must be used to repay at least 25% of the
principal amount of the extension of consumer credit. An extension of consumer
credit that provides for repayment in installments may not be refinanced or
renewed.
   (E)   An extension of consumer credit that a credit access business obtains
for a consumer or assists a consumer in obtaining and that provides for a
single lump sum repayment may not be refinanced or renewed more than three
times. Proceeds from each refinancing or renewal must be used to repay at least
25% of the principal amount of the original extension of consumer credit.
   (F)   For purposes of this section, an extension of consumer credit that is
made to a consumer within seven days after a previous extension of consumer
credit has been paid by the consumer will constitute a refinancing or renewal.
(Ord. 2016-09, passed 4-26-16)
§ 124.10  REQUIREMENT OF CONSUMER UNDERSTANDING.
   (A)   Every agreement between the credit access business and a consumer
evidencing an extension of consumer credit (including but not limited to any
refinancing or renewal granted to the consumer), must be written in the
consumer's language of preference. Every credit access business location must
maintain on its premises, to be available for use by consumers, agreements in
the English and Spanish languages.
   (B)   If the consumer cannot read, then before the consumer signs any
agreement between the credit access business and the consumer evidencing an
extension of consumer credit (including, but not limited to, any refinancing or
renewal granted to the consumer), the agreement and every disclosure and notice
required by law in connection with such agreement must be read aloud to the
consumer by an employee of the business in the consumer's language of
preference.
(Ord. 2016-09, passed 4-26-16)
§ 124.11  REFERRAL TO CONSUMER CREDIT COUNSELING.
   A credit access business shall provide a form, to be prescribed by the
Director, to each consumer seeking assistance in obtaining an extension of
consumer credit which references non-profit agencies that provide financial
education and training programs and agencies with cash assistance programs. The
form will also contain information regarding extensions of consumer credit, and
must include the information required by §
124.08(A)(1) through (5) specific to the loan agreement with the consumer. If
the Director has prescribed a form in the consumer's language of preference,
the form must be provided in the consumer's language of preference.
(Ord. 2016-09, passed 4-26-16)
§ 124.12  NOTICE OF MILITARY LENDING ACT.
   (A)   A credit access business shall display a written notice of the
Military Lending Act in a conspicuous manner clearly visible to consumers upon
entering the business premises.
   (B)   The notice required by this section shall consist of a sign that sets
forth language identical to the following in black text over a white
background:
   "ATTENTION ALL ACTIVE DUTY MILITARY PERSONNEL AND THEIR DEPENDENTS
   IN ACCORDANCE WITH 10 U.S. CODE § 987 AND THE MILITARY LENDING ACT, A
CREDITOR MAY NOT IMPOSE AN ANNUAL PERCENTAGE RATE OF INTEREST GREATER THAN 36
PERCENT WITH RESPECT TO THE CONSUMER CREDIT EXTENDED TO A COVERED MILITARY
MEMBER.
   FEDERAL LAW PROVIDES IMPORTANT PROTECTIONS TO REGULAR OR RESERVE MEMBERS OF
THE ARMY, NAVY, MARINE CORPS, AIR FORCE, OR COAST GUARD, SERVING ON ACTIVE DUTY
UNDER A CALL OR ORDER THAT DOES NOT SPECIFY A PERIOD OF 30 DAYS OR FEWER, AND
THEIR DEPENDENTS. MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES AND THEIR DEPENDENTS MAY BE ABLE
TO OBTAIN FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FROM ARMY EMERGENCY RELIEF, NAVY AND MARINE
CORPS RELIEF SOCIETY, THE AIR FORCE AID SOCIETY, OR COAST GUARD MUTUAL AID.
MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES AND THEIR DEPENDENTS MAY
   REQUEST FREE LEGAL ADVICE REGARDING AN APPLICATION FOR CREDIT FROM A SERVICE
LEGAL ASSISTANCE OFFICE OR FINANCIAL COUNSELING FROM A CONSUMER CREDIT
COUNSELOR.
   A CREDITOR OR ASSIGNEE WHO KNOWINGLY VIOLATES 10 U.S.C. 987 AS IMPLEMENTED
BY THIS PART SHALL BE FINED AS PROVIDED IN TITLE 18, UNITED STATES CODE, OR
IMPRISONED FOR NOT MORE THAN ONE YEAR, OR BOTH.
   COMPLAINTS MAY BE FILED WITH THE CONSUMER AFFAIRS DEPARTMENT ON FT HOOD."
   (C)   The title "Attention All Active Duty Military Personnel and their
Dependents" shall appear in block letters at least one inch height. All other
letters shall appear in block letters at least one-half inch height.
(Ord. 2016-09, passed 4-26-16)
§ 124.13  EXISTING BUSINESSES.
   Any credit access business lawfully operating within the city prior the
effective date of this chapter shall fully comply with the provisions hereof
not later than August 1, 2016, and is hereby granted a temporary license to
continue operation under the former law until that date.
(Ord. 2016-09, passed 4-26-16)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 124.20  ADMINISTRATIVE DISCIPLINARY ACTION.
   (A)   The Director may take disciplinary action against a registrant as set
forth in this section.
   (B)   The Director may suspend a certificate of registration for a period of
not more than one year after determining that the registrant has:
      (1)   Violated or attempted to violate any provision of this chapter;
      (2)   Permitted an unlawful or fraudulent use of a registration issued
under this chapter, or tampered with a registration issued under this chapter;
or
      (3)   Provided false or materially misleading information as part of an
application for an original or renewal certificate of registration under this
chapter.
   (C)   The Director may revoke a certificate of registration after
determining that two or more new grounds for suspension have occurred within
two years following any prior disciplinary action under this chapter against a
registrant or its designated primary agent. In the event of such revocation,
the registrant shall be ineligible for issuance of a new certificate for a
period of three years.
(Ord. 2016-09, passed 4-26-16)
§ 124.21  SURRENDER AND RETURN OF REGISTRATION.
   Any registration which has been suspended under this chapter shall be
surrendered upon demand to the Director. At the end of the period of
suspension, in the absence of further violations, the surrendered registration
shall be returned to the registrant and shall be valid under the provisions of
this code. If the period of suspension extends beyond the normal expiration
date of the registration, the registrant shall pay all registration fees
without proration in order to receive a valid registration
(Ord. 2016-09, passed 4-26-16)
§ 124.22  APPEAL.
   (A)   A person aggrieved by a decision to refuse an application for an
original or renewal certificate of registration, or by an administrative
disciplinary action under this chapter, shall have the right to appeal as
provided in this section. Any decision to deny renewal of a certificate of
registration, or to impose an administrative disciplinary action, will be
stayed pending resolution of such appeal.
   (B)   The initial appeal shall be to the City Manager, who shall have the
power to administer oaths and to compel the attendance of witnesses by
subpoena.
      (1)   The appellant shall initiate such appeal by filing a written notice
with the Director and the City Secretary, briefly describing the decision being
appealed, and setting forth the address, fax and phone numbers at which the
appellant wishes to receive communications related to the appeal. The person
seeking the appeal must file the notice within ten days of the date of the
notice of the decision from which the appeal is sought.
      (2)   Within five days after the filing of the notice of appeal, the
Director shall file with the City Secretary a sworn, written complaint setting
out the charges.
      (3)   Upon receipt of the Director's complaint, the City Secretary shall
set a hearing at a specified time and place not more than 14 days following
receipt of the notice of appeal, and shall cause a copy of the complaint and
notice of setting for the hearing to be served upon the appellant by certified
mail, return receipt requested, no less than ten days before the date appointed
in the notice of setting.
      (4)   The Director shall be entitled to present evidence and argument at
such hearing.
      (5)   The appellant may appear in person, or by counsel, at the time and
place named in the notice of setting and may make a defense to the charges. If
the appellant fails or refuses to appear, the City Manager may proceed to hear
and determine the charges.
      (6)   The hearing shall be recorded by an audio recording device.
      (7)   When the City Manager has completed such hearing and made a
decision, he or she shall cause one copy of the decision to be filed with the
Director and one copy to be forwarded to the appellant by certified mail.
   (C)   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the City Manager under this
chapter shall have a right to petition for review by the City Council.
      (1)   The appellant shall initiate such appeal by filing a written notice
with the City Secretary. The notice must be filed within five days of the date
of the City Manager's decision.
      (2)   The City Secretary shall set the matter for review by the City
Council at a specified time and place not more than 21 days following receipt
of the notice of appeal, and shall cause a copy of the complaint and notice of
setting for the hearing to be served upon the appellant by certified mail,
return receipt requested, no less than five days before the date appointed in
the notice of setting.
      (3)   The City Manager shall furnish the City Council with all reports,
memoranda, recordings and other evidence received at the hearing, as well as a
summary of the evidence and his findings.
      (4)   The City Council deliberation shall be conducted in accordance with
the Texas Open Meetings Act.
      (5)   The City Council shall determine the appeal based upon the
substantial evidence received by the City Manager and may by majority vote
affirm, modify or reverse such decision. Oral argument may be granted either on
a party's request or by the City Council's own initiative. When the City
Council has made a decision, it shall cause one copy of the decision to be
filed with the Director and one copy to be forwarded to the appellant by
certified mail.
(Ord. 2016-09, passed 4-26-16)
§ 124.23  AUTHORITY OF CITY ATTORNEY.
   The City Attorney may without further authorization of the City Council
undertake the enforcement of this chapter by all legal means appropriate or
necessary, including but not limited to: enforcement in municipal court; filing
of appropriate civil actions in courts of appropriate jurisdiction; and to
defend the city from suit if suit is taken to appeal any action of the city.
(Ord. 2016-09, passed 4-26-16)
§ 124.24  DEFENSES.
   It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this chapter that at the
time of the alleged offense the person was not required to be licensed by the
state as a credit access business under Tex. Finance Code Ch. 393, Subchapter
G.
(Ord. 2016-09, passed 4-26-16)
§ 124.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   A person who violates a provision of this chapter, or who fails to
perform an act required of the person by this chapter, commits an offense. A
person commits a separate offense for each and every violation relating to an
extension of consumer credit, and for each day during which a violation is
committed, permitted, or continued.
   (B)   An offense under this chapter is punishable by a fine of not more than
$500. A culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an offense
under this chapter and need not be proved.
   (C)   The penalties provided for in this section are in addition to any
other remedies that the city may have under city ordinances and state law.
(Ord. 2016-09, passed 4-26-16)
CHAPTER 125:  ESTABLISHMENTS NOT LICENSED BY THE TEXAS ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE
COMMISSION
Section
General Provisions
   
125.01   Short title and purpose
   
125.02   Definitions
   
125.03   Applicability
   
125.04   Notice
   
125.05   Administrative rules
Permits
   
125.15   Permit required
   
125.16   Qualifications
   
125.17   Permit application
   
125.18   Permit approval or denial
   
125.19   Permit not transferable
   
125.20   Permit not a right
   
125.21   Permit expiration; renewal
   
125.22   Requirement to supplement information
   
125.23   Permit suspension
   
125.24   Permit revocation
   
125.25   Appeal
Regulations for Operation of a BYOB Establishment
   
125.35   Public place
   
125.36   Permit posting required
   
125.37   Manager required on premises
   
125.38   Security plan implementation
   
125.39   Minimum age for admittance and alcohol consumption
   
125.40   Doors to remain unlocked
   
125.41   Consent to inspection; immediate access required
   
125.42   Hours of operation
   
125.43   Alcoholic beverage consumption areas
   
125.44   Parking area restrictions
   
125.45   Sale of alcoholic beverages prohibited
   
125.46   Restriction on consumption and purchase of alcohol by permit holder
and employees
   
125.47   Insurance requirement
   
125.48   Compliance with other laws
   
125.49   Crime prevention and reporting
Enforcement
   
125.60   Criminal penalty
   
125.61   Civil remedies
   
125.62   Cumulative remedies
   
125.63   Authority of City Attorney
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 125.01  SHORT TITLE AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   This chapter may be known and cited as "BYOB Businesses Regulation."
   (B)   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the welfare of the citizens
of the City of Harker Heights by monitoring and regulating BYOB businesses. To
this end, this chapter establishes a permit program for BYOB businesses,
imposes regulations of business operations of BYOB businesses, and imposes
civil and criminal penalties for violations of this chapter by BYOB businesses.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 4-14-20)
§ 125.02  DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   It is a common practice for an establishment not licensed or permitted
by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission to sell or serve alcoholic beverages
to allow its patrons to bring their own alcoholic beverages onto the premises
for consumption. This practice is often referred to as "BYOB," an acronym for
"bring your own bottle."
   (B)   In this chapter:
      ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Has the meaning assigned by the Texas Alcoholic
Beverage Code.
      BYOB PERMIT. A permit, issued pursuant to this chapter, to operate a BYOB
venue.
      BYOB VENUE. An establishment to which this chapter applies, as prescribed
by §
125.03.
      DEPARTMENT. The Planning and Development Department of the City of Harker
Heights.
      DIRECTOR. The Director of the Planning and Development Department.
      PREMISES. The grounds and all buildings, vehicles, and appurtenances
pertaining to the grounds, including any adjacent premises if they are directly
or indirectly under the control of the same person.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 4-14-20)
§ 125.03  APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B), this chapter applies to an
establishment that:
      (1)   Is not licensed or permitted by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage
Commission to sell or serve alcoholic beverages; and
      (2)   Allows patrons to bring alcoholic beverages onto the premises for
possession and consumption.
   (B)   This chapter docs not apply to:
      (1)   A residence;
      (2)   An establishment operated by a governmental entity;
      (3)   A private club, as defined by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code;
      (4)   A fraternal or veteran's organization, as defined by the Texas
Alcoholic Beverage Code;
      (5)   A college and university use;
      (6)   A religious assembly use;
      (7)   A restaurant; or
      (8)   A theater use.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 4-14-20)
§ 125.04  NOTICE.
   (A)   Mailed notice is presumed received on the fifth day after it is
mailed.
   (B)   Notice to a permit holder may be delivered to the manager at the BYOB
venue and is effective on delivery.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 4-14-20)
§ 125.05  ADMINISTRATIVE RULES.
   The Director shall adopt administrative rules to implement, administer, and
enforce this chapter.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 4-14-20)
PERMITS
§ 125.15  PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   A person shall obtain a BYOB permit issued by the Department before
the person may operate a BYOB venue.
   (B)   A person must obtain a separate BYOB permit for each BYOB venue
location.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 4-14-20)
§ 125.16  QUALIFICATIONS.
   (A)   A person may not apply for or hold a permit under this chapter unless
the person is at least 18 years of age.
   (B)   A person may not hold a BYOB permit under this chapter or manage a
BYOB venue if the person has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor that
directly relates to the duties and responsibilities for operating a BYOB venue,
and the conviction makes the person unfit to hold a permit or manage a BYOB
venue.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 4-14-20)
§ 125.17  PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   A person who seeks a permit to operate a BYOB venue must submit an
application to the Director on a form provided by the Director. The application
must include:
      (1)   The names, addresses, and birth dates of all persons who have an
ownership interest in, or who will manage, the proposed BYOB venue;
      (2)   Authorization for the city to conduct a criminal background check
on each person described in division (A)(1);
      (3)   The name of the BYOB venue and its physical address;
      (4)   A registration certificate for the establishment from the Secretary
of State, if registration is required by law;
      (5)   Proof that the applicant has all other permits and approvals
required to operate the establishment, including appropriate zoning;
      (6)   A security plan that meets or exceeds the minimum standards
established by administrative rule, as determined by the Police Chief;
      (7)   Scale drawings of the site, including:
         (a)   All site improvements;
         (b)   The floor plan of each building; and
         (c)   A designation of the areas where the consumption of alcohol is
to be allowed;
      (8)   Information required by administrative rule;
      (9)   Proof that the applicant has a commercial general liability
insurance policy providing minimum premises/operations coverage of $500,000 per
occurrence and $1,000,000 in the aggregate on an occurrence basis; and
      (10)   Other information reasonably required by the Director.
   (B)   An applicant shall pay the non-refundable permit fee established by
ordinance.
   (C)   A BYOB permit is void if the applicant obtains the BYOB permit by
knowingly providing false information on the application.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 4-14-20)
§ 125.18  PERMIT APPROVAL OR DENIAL.
   (A)   The Director shall approve a BYOB permit application if the Director
determines that the applicant and the proposed BYOB venue meet the requirements
of § 125.16 (Qualifications) and §
125.17 (Permit Application), and are not disqualified by divisions (B) and (C)
of this section.
   (B)   The Director shall deny a BYOB permit application if the Director
determines that:
      (1)   The applicant is under the age of 18 years;
      (2)   The BYOB venue as proposed would not comply with this chapter; or
      (3)   The applicant had a BYOB permit required by this chapter revoked
within the preceding l2-month period.
   (C)   The Director may deny a BYOB permit application if the Director
determines if that:
      (1)   The applicant provided incorrect or incomplete information on the
application; or
      (2)   The person has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor that
directly relates to the duties and responsibilities for operating a BYOB venue,
and the conviction makes the person unfit to hold a permit.
   (D)   If the Director does not approve or deny an application within 45 days
of the date it is filed, the application is denied.
   (E)   The Director shall give written notice of a denial of an application
to the applicant.
   (F)   An applicant may appeal to the Board of Adjustment a denial of a BYOB
permit application in accordance with §
125.25 (Appeal).
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 4-14-20; Am. Ord. 2020-13, passed 4-28-20)
§ 125.19  PERMIT NOT TRANSFERABLE.
   A BYOB permit issued under this chapter is not transferable to another
person or venue.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 4-14-20)
§ 125.20  PERMIT NOT A RIGHT.
   A BYOB permit issued under this chapter is a grant of a privilege and is not
a property right.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 4-14-20)
§ 125.21  PERMIT EXPIRATION; RENEWAL.
   A BYOB permit issued under this chapter expires one year after the date it
is issued. A BYOB permit holder shall file an application for BYOB permit
renewal not sooner than the ninetieth day and not later than the forty-fifth
day before the BYOB permit expires. An application that is not filed within the
described time period is a new application.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 4-14-20)
§ 125.22  REQUIREMENT TO SUPPLEMENT INFORMATION.
   While a BYOB permit application is pending or a BYOB permit is in effect, an
applicant or permit holder shall immediately supplement the information
provided to the Director in the BYOB permit application if the information is
or becomes inaccurate, incomplete, or misleading.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 4-14-20)
§ 125.23  PERMIT SUSPENSION.
   (A)   The Director may suspend a BYOB permit issued under this chapter
without prior notice or healing if the Director determines that:
      (1)   The BYOB permit holder, the manager, or an employee of the BYOB
venue has violated a requirement of this chapter;
      (2)   The BYOB venue does not comply with this chapter; or
      (3)   The BYOB permit holder does not qualify for a permit under this
chapter.
   (B)   If the Director suspends a BYOB permit:
      (1)   The Director shall give written notice to the BYOB permit holder
that:
         (a)   The BYOB permit is immediately suspended on receipt of the
notice; and
         (b)   The BYOB permit holder may file a written request for a hearing
not later than the tenth day after the date of receipt of notice of suspension;
and
      (2)   The BYOB permit holder shall immediately close the BYOB venue.
      (3)   Any BYOB permit which has been suspended under this chapter shall
be surrendered upon demand to the Director. At the end of the period of
suspension, in the absence of further violations, the surrendered BYOB permit
shall be returned to the BYOB permit holder and shall be valid under the
provisions of this code. If the period of suspension extends beyond the normal
expiration date of the BYOB permit, the BYOB permit holder shall pay all BYOB
permit fees without proration in order to receive a valid BYOB permit.
   (C)   Suspension of a BYOB permit is effective on receipt of notice.
   (D)   A BYOB permit holder may file with the Director a written request for
a hearing on a BYOB permit suspension. The request must be filed not later than
the tenth day after the date of receipt of notice of suspension.
   (E)   If a BYOB permit holder timely files a hearing request:
      (1)   The Director shall hold a hearing on the permit suspension not
later than the fourteenth day after the date the hearing request is filed. At
such hearing, the BYOB permit holder may present information to the Director
addressing the Director's suspension of a BYOB permit and reasons, if any, that
the BYOB permit holder believes the suspension is not warranted; and
      (2)   A suspension is stayed pending the outcome of the hearing.
   (F)   If a hearing request is not timely filed, a suspension continues in
effect.
   (G)   After hearing, the Director shall give written notice to the BYOB
permit holder as to whether suspension is continued in effect after a hearing
under division (E).
   (H)   The Director may reinstate a permit if the reason for suspension no
longer exists.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 4-14-20)
§ 125.24  PERMIT REVOCATION.
   (A)   The Director may revoke a BYOB permit issued under this chapter if the
Director determines that:
      (1)   The permit holder, the manager, or an employee of the BYOB venue
has engaged in serious or repeated violations of this chapter;
      (2)   The BYOB venue does not comply with this chapter; or
      (3)   The permit holder does not qualify for a permit under this chapter.
   (B)   Before revoking a BYOB permit, the Director shall provide the BYOB
permit holder with written notice of the pending permit revocation. The written
notice shall include:
      (1)   The reason the BYOB permit is subject to revocation;
      (2)   The date on which the BYOB permit is scheduled to be revoked; and
      (3)   A statement that the BYOB permit will be revoked on the scheduled
date unless the BYOB permit holder files a written request for a hearing with
the Director not later than the tenth day after the date the notice is
received.
   (C)   A BYOB permit revocation becomes effective on expiration of the time
period prescribed by the notice if the BYOB permit holder does not file a
written request for hearing with the Director not later than the tenth day
after the notice is received.
   (D)   If a BYOB permit holder timely files a hearing request:
      (1)   The Director shall hold a hearing on the BYOB permit revocation not
later than the fourteenth day after the date the hearing request is filed. At
such hearing, the BYOB permit holder may present information to the Director
addressing the Director's intent to revoke the BYOB permit and reasons, if any,
that the BYOB permit holder believes the revocation is not warranted; and
      (2)   A revocation is stayed pending the outcome of the hearing.
   (E)   The Director shall give written notice to the BYOB permit holder of a
decision regarding the revocation of the BYOB permit or a revocation that
becomes effective under division (C).
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 4-14-20)
§ 125.25  APPEAL.
   (A)   An applicant or a permit holder may appeal to the Board of Adjustment
a permit application denial, a permit suspension, or a permit revocation. To
stay a suspension or revocation under this chapter, appeal to the Board of
Adjustment must be made within ten days after the applicant/BYOB permit holder
receives written notice of the decision that it is appealing.
   (B)   If the permit holder timely files a notice of appeal pursuant to
division (A), a suspension, or revocation is stayed.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 4-14-20)
REGULATIONS FOR OPERATION OF A BYOB ESTABLISHMENT
§ 125.35  PUBLIC PLACE.
   A BYOB venue is a public place.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 4-14-20)
§ 125.36  PERMIT POSTING REQUIRED.
   A BYOB permit holder shall post the BYOB permit required by this chapter in
a prominent public location at the BYOB venue.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 4-14-20)
§ 125.37  MANAGER REQUIRED ON PREMISES.
   A BYOB permit holder shall ensure that a qualified manager is continuously
on the BYOB venue premises during the hours of operation. A BYOB permit holder
may serve as the manager.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 4-14-20)
§ 125.38  SECURITY PLAN IMPLEMENTATION.
   (A)   A person may not operate a BYOB venue without an approved security
plan.
   (B)   A BYOB permit holder and a BYOB venue manager shall provide security
for the BYOB venue in accordance with the security plan.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 4-14-20)
§ 125.39  MINIMUM AGE FOR ADMITTANCE AND ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION.
   (A)   A BYOB permit holder, a manager, or an employee of a BYOB venue may
not allow a person under the age of 18 years on the premises.
   (B)   A BYOB permit holder, a manager, or an employee of a BYOB venue may
not allow a person under the age of 21 years to consume alcohol on the
premises.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 4-14-20)
§ 125.40  DOORS TO REMAIN UNLOCKED.
   During the hours of operation, a person may not lock or obstruct:
   (A)   An exterior entrance door that is designated or available for use by
patrons; or
   (B)   An interior door that provides access to a portion of the premises
that is designated or available for use by patrons.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 4-14-20)
§ 125.41  CONSENT TO INSPECTION; IMMEDIATE ACCESS REQUIRED.
   (A)   By accepting a BYOB permit under this chapter, the permit holder
consents that the Director, the Director's representative, law enforcement
personnel, code enforcement personnel, and other on-duty governmental personnel
may enter the premises during the hours of operation to conduct an
investigation or inspect the premises to determine compliance with this
chapter.
   (B)   A BYOB permit holder, a manager, and an employee of a BYOB venue shall
provide the Director, the Director's representative, law enforcement personnel,
code enforcement personnel, and other on-duty governmental personnel with
immediate access to all portions of the premises.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 4-14-20)
§ 125.42  HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   A BYOB permit holder, a manager, or an employee of a BYOB venue shall
close a BYOB venue between 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. each day except Sunday, and
between 2:00 a.m. and noon on Sunday. A patron who is on the premises at 2:00
a.m. may remain until not later than 2:15 a.m.
   (B)   A person may not consume an alcoholic beverage on the premises of a
BYOB venue between 2:15 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. each day except Sunday, or between
2:15 a.m. and noon on Sunday.
   (C)   A BYOB permit holder, a manager, or an employee of a BYOB venue may
not allow a member of the public on its premises, including a parking area,
between 2:30 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. each day except Sunday, or between 2:30 a.m.
and noon on Sunday. This prohibition does not apply to a person who is
providing a product or service directly to the BYOB venue.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 4-14-20)
§ 125.43  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONSUMPTION AREAS.
   (A)   A permit holder shall designate, subject to the approval of the
Director, the portions of the premises on which the consumption of alcoholic
beverages is permitted. A designated area:
      (1)   Must be located and designed to minimize adverse effects on
adjacent property;
      (2)   May include the interior of a building or a deck, patio, or garden;
and
      (3)   Must exclude parking areas.
   (B)   A person may not consume, and a permit holder, a manager, or an
employee of a BYOB venue may not allow the consumption of an alcoholic beverage
outside of a designated area.
   (C)   The BYOB permit holder shall indicate the portions of the premises on
which the consumption of alcoholic beverages is permitted on the floor plan
provided with the BYOB permit application. If the BYOB permit holder desires to
change or modify the area where alcoholic beverages may be consumed, it must
first provide a revised floor plan to the Director.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 4-14-20)
§ 125.44  PARKING AREA RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   A BYOB permit holder, a manager, or an employee of a BYOB venue may
not allow persons to congregate in a parking area.
   (B)   A BYOB permit holder, a manager, or an employee of a BYOB venue may
not allow a person to consume an alcoholic beverage in a parking area.
   (C)   A BYOB permit holder shall post signs in each parking area stating
that the consumption of an alcoholic beverage is prohibited.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 4-14-20)
§ 125.45  SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED.
   A person may not sell an alcoholic beverage at a BYOB venue.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 4-14-20)
§ 125.46  RESTRICTION ON CONSUMPTION AND PURCHASE OF ALCOHOL BY PERMIT HOLDER
AND EMPLOYEES.
   A BYOB permit holder, manager, or employee of a BYOB venue may not:
   (A)   Consume an alcoholic beverage while on duty;
   (B)   Purchase or otherwise acquire an alcoholic beverage for a patron; or
   (C)   Give an alcoholic beverage to a patron.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 4-14-20)
§ 125.47  INSURANCE REQUIREMENT.
   A BYOB permit holder, a manager, or owner shall maintain a commercial
general liability insurance policy providing minimum premises/operations
coverage of $500,000 per occurrence and $1,000,000 in the aggregate on an
occurrence basis. The policy must be provided by an insurer licensed by the
Texas Department of Insurance, and must be endorsed to name as additional
insured, the city. Prior to opening for business, the BYOB permit holder,
manager, or owner shall deliver a certificate of insurance and copies of all
endorsements for additional insured to the Director, and thereafter at least
ten days prior to the expiration of such policies. The permit holder, manager,
or owner shall prominently display a sign at the facility stating that the
owner or operator has purchased liability insurance to cover activities at the
facility.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 4-14-20; Am. Ord. 2020-17, passed 5-12-20)
§ 125.48  COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS.
   A BYOB permit holder, a manager, and an employee of a BYOB venue shall
comply with the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code and all applicable criminal,
zoning, health, and safety laws relating to the operation of the BYOB venue.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 4-14-20)
§ 125.49  CRIME PREVENTION AND REPORTING.
   The BYOB permit holder, the manager, and the employees of a BYOB venue
shall:
   (A)   Take reasonable measures to prevent criminal activity on the premises;
and
   (B)   Immediately report to law enforcement personnel all suspected criminal
activity on the premises or the surrounding areas that they observe or of which
they otherwise become aware.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 4-14-20)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 125.60  CRIMINAL PENALTY.
   (A)   A person commits a Class C misdemeanor if the person:
      (1)   Operates a BYOB venue without a permit required by this chapter; or
      (2)   Violates a provision of this chapter, other than §
125.45 (Sale of Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited) or §
125.48 (Compliance with Other Laws).
   (B)   Proof of a culpable mental state is not required to prove an offense
under this chapter, except for §
125.42(B) (Hours of Operation).
   (C)   Each day that a violation occurs or continues is a separate offense.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 4-14-20)
§ 125.61  CIVIL REMEDIES.
   (A)   The City Council has determined that this chapter is necessary to
protect health, life, and property and to preserve the good government, order,
and security of the city and its inhabitants.
   (B)   A person who continues to violate this chapter after being notified of
the offense in writing by an authorized city representative is subject to a
civil penalty not to exceed $1,000 for each day or part of a day the violation
occurs.
   (C)   The city may file suit to enforce this chapter to collect a civil
penalty.
   (D)   The city may seek to enjoin violations of this chapter.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 4-14-20)
§ 125.62  CUMULATIVE REMEDIES.
   The remedies authorized under this subchapter are cumulative. If the city
files a civil or criminal action, it is not precluded from pursuing any other
action or remedy.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 4-14-20)
§ 125.63  AUTHORITY OF CITY ATTORNEY.
   The City Attorney may, without further authorization of the City Council,
undertake the enforcement of this chapter by all legal means appropriate or
necessary, including but not limited to: enforcement in municipal court, filing
of appropriate criminal or civil actions in courts of appropriate jurisdiction,
and to defend the city from suit if suit is taken to appeal any action of the
city.
(Ord. 2020-10, passed 4-14-20)
TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY
      
131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
CHAPTER 130:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY
Section
General Provisions
   
130.01   Disturbing religious worship
   
130.02   Curfew in parks
   
130.03   Loitering
   
130.04   Solicitation on highway prohibited
Curfew for Minors
   
130.20   Findings and purpose
   
130.21   Definitions
   
130.22   Offenses
   
130.23   Exceptions and defenses
   
130.24   Enforcement procedure
   
130.25   Periodic review
Firearms and Fireworks
   
130.40   Title
   
130.41   Findings; purpose
   
130.42   Enforcement
   
130.43   Definitions
   
130.44   Discharging firearm unlawful
   
130.45   Exceptions
   
130.46   Indoor shooting range
   
130.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Reward for information leading to arrest of persons committing arson, see §
91.01
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 130.01  DISTURBING RELIGIOUS WORSHIP.
   No person shall by loud or vociferous talking or swearing, or by any other
noise, or in any other manner willfully disturb any congregation, or part of a
congregation assembled for religious worship and conducting themselves in a
lawful manner, nor shall any person willfully disturb in any manner any
congregation assembled for the purpose of conducting or participating in a
Sunday School or transacting any business relating to or in the interest of
religious worship or of a Sunday School, and conducting them-selves in a lawful
manner.
('60 Code, Ch. 20, Art. 85) 
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.02  CURFEW IN PARKS.
   (A)   There is established a curfew for all public parks within the city
limits from 11:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m.  During this period no one may use the
public parks of the city for any purpose except as provided in division (B) of
this section.
   (B)   An exception may be obtained to this curfew by an application in
writing to the Parks and Recreation Director. Such application must be
presented at least in time for consideration at a regular meeting of the City
Council but in no event can it be presented to the Parks and Recreation
Director less than 14 days prior to the date the exception is desired. The
application must state the name of the organization, the reason for the
exception, and must contain a certificate to the effect that no harmful drugs
will be used by any members of this organization during this period.
(Ord. 70-8, passed 9-8-70; Am. Ord. 2002-24, passed 10-8-02) 
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.03  LOITERING.
   (A)   A person commits a violation if he or she loiters or prowls in a
place, at a time, or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under
circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property in the
vicinity.  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining
whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon
appearance of a police officer, refuses to identify himself or herself, or
manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or herself or any object.  Unless
flight by the person or other circumstances makes it impractical, a police
officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford
the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm which would other-wise be
warranted, by requesting the person to identify himself or herself and to
explain his or her presence or conduct.  No person shall be convicted of an
offense under this section if the police officer did not comply with the
preceding sentence, or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the
person was true and, if it had been believed by the police officer at the time,
would have dispelled the alarm.  Any police officer may arrest any person
suspected of being a loiterer or prowler without a warrant if it reasonably
appears that the delay in arresting the suspect caused by obtaining a warrant
would result in the suspect's escape.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, after first being warned by a
police officer, or where a “no loitering” sign or signs have been posted, to
loiter, stand, sit, or lie in or upon any public or quasi-public sidewalk,
street, curb, cross-walk, walkway area, mall or that portion of private
property utilized for public use, so as to hinder or obstruct unreasonably the
free passage of pedestrians or vehicles thereon.  It shall be unlawful for any
person to block, obstruct, or prevent free access to the entrance to any
building open to the public.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, PUBLIC PLACEhas the following
definition unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning:  an area generally visible to public view, including streets,
sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots, automobiles
(whether moving or not), and buildings open to the general public, including
those which serve food or drink or provide entertainment, and the doorways and
entrances to buildings or dwellings and the grounds enclosing them.
§ 130.04  SOLICITATION OH HIGHWAY PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a person to be or go upon any street to
solicit employment, business, contributions, or sales of any kind from an
occupant of a vehicle.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to:
      (1)   Services rendered in connection with emergency repairs, towing, or
other emergency services requested by the operator or passenger of a vehicle;
or
      (2)   A person entitled to solicit charitable contributions pursuant to
and in compliance with the Sean McKinnis Charitable Solicitation Act, §
552.0071 of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended.
   (C)   As used herein, the terms VEHICLE and S TREET shall have the meanings
set forth in Chapter 541 (Texas Transportation Code), as amended.
   (D)   Neither any provision of this chapter nor the issuance of a permit
under this chapter shall be construed to authorize any act in violation of any
other applicable law or rule.
(Ord. 2003-04, passed 4-8-03; Am. Ord. 2005-32, passed 9-27-05)
Penalty, see § 130.99
CURFEW FOR MINORS
§ 130.20  FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   The City Council has determined that there is a significant amount of
juvenile violence and crime committed by persons under the age of 17 in the
city; and that due to their lack of maturity and experience persons under the
age of 17 are particularly susceptible during curfew hours to participating in
gang-related and other unlawful activities, and to being victims of adult
perpetrators of crime; and the city has an obligation to provide for the
protection of persons under the age of 17 from each other and from other
persons, for the enforcement of parental control of and responsibility for
their children, for the protection of the general public, and for the reduction
of the incidence of juvenile criminal activities; and the City Council has
determined that a curfew for those under 17 years-of-age will serve the
interest of public health, safety, and general welfare, and will help to attain
the foregoing objectives and to diminish the undesirable impacts of such
conduct on the citizens of the city.
(Ord. 2007-16, passed 5-1-07; Am. Ord. 2010-09, passed 3-23-10; Am. Ord. 2013-
09, passed 3-26-13; Am. Ord. 2016-07, passed 3-22-16; Am. Ord. 2019-09, passed
4-8-19)
§ 130.21  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CURFEW HOURS. 
      (1)   11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday
until 6:00 a.m. on the following day; and
      (2)   12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Saturday or Sunday.
   DIRECT ROUTE.   The shortest path of travel through a public place to reach
a final destination without any detour or stop along the way.
   EMERGENCY.  A sudden or unexpected occurrence of a serious and urgent
situation which requires immediate action to preserve life or property,
including without limitation fire, natural disaster, an automobile accident, or
seeking immediate medical treatment for any person.
   INTERSTATE TRANSPORTATION.  Transportation between states of the United
States or between a state of the United States and a foreign country, to which
any travel through the city is merely incidental.
   INTRASTATE TRANSPORTATION.  Transportation between locations within the
State of Texas, to which any travel through the city is merely incidental.
   MINOR.  Any person under 17 years-of-age.
   PARENT.  A person who is the natural or adoptive parent, a court appointed
guardian, or other person 21 years-of-age or older who has been authorized by a
parent, by a court order, or by law to have the care and physical control of a
minor.
   PUBLIC PLACE.  Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access, including without limitation public rights-of-way and
thoroughfares, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, apartment
houses, office buildings, transportation facilities, restaurants, and shops.
(Ord. 2007-16, passed 5-1-07; Am. Ord. 2010-09, passed 3-23-10; Am. Ord. 2013-
09, passed 3-26-13; Am. Ord. 2016-07, passed 3-22-16 ; Am. Ord. 2019-19, passed
4-9-19)
§ 130.22  OFFENSES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any minor to intentionally or knowingly
remain, walk, run, stand, drive, or ride about in or upon any public place in
the city during curfew hours.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a parent of a minor to knowingly allow or
permit the minor to be, remain, walk, run, stand, drive, or ride about in or
upon any public place in the city during curfew hours.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, or employee of any
privately-owned place of business operated for a profit, and to which the
public is invited, to knowingly allow a minor to remain upon the premises of
the place of business during curfew hours.
(Ord. 2007-16, passed 5-1-07; Am. Ord. 2010-09, passed 3-23-10; Am. Ord. 2013-
09, passed 3-26-13; Am. Ord. 2016-07, passed 3-22-16; Am. Ord. 2019-19, passed
4-9-19)   Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.23  EXCEPTIONS AND DEFENSES.
   (A)   No officer shall detain a minor where an exception to the application
of this subchapter is apparent. It is a defense to prosecution under §
130.22 of this subchapter that, at the time of the act that otherwise would
constitute an offense:
      (1)   The minor was accompanied by a parent;
      (2)   The minor was responding appropriately to an emergency;
      (3)   The minor was attending a school, religious, government-sponsored
activity, or an organized activity properly supervised by an adult and
authorized by a parent, or going to or coming home from one of the
aforementioned functions or activities by a direct route;
      (4)   The minor was engaged in a lawful employment activity or labor
organization meeting, or going to or coming home from said lawful employment or
labor organization meeting by a direct route;
      (5)   The minor was in an aircraft or motor vehicle involved in
intrastate or interstate transportation, or was awaiting imminent
transportation by such means;
      (6)   The minor was married or had been married or had disabilities of
minority removed in accordance with the Texas Family Code;
      (7)   The minor was lawfully exercising his or her First Amendment rights
protected by the Constitution of Texas or of the United States;
      (8)   The minor was on the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or
abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor, if the neighbor did not
complain to the Police Department about the minor's presence; or
      (9)   In a prosecution under §
130.22(C) of this subchapter the owner, operator, or employee of the place of
business promptly notified the Police Department that the minor was present on
the premises of the business during curfew hours and the minor refused to
leave.
   (B)   It shall not be a defense to the application of this subchapter that a
parent gave the minor the permission to violate this subchapter.
(Ord. 2007-16, passed 5-1-07; Am. Ord. 2010-09, passed 3-23-10; Am. Ord. 2013-
09, passed 3-26-13; Am. Ord. 2016-07, passed 3-22-16)
§ 130.24  ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Before taking any enforcement action under this subchapter, a police
officer shall ask the apparent minor offender's age and reason for being in the
public place.  The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under
this subchapter unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has
occurred and that no defense under §
130.23 is applicable.  Additionally, the officer shall not issue a citation to,
or make an arrest of, a minor under this subchapter unless the officer
determines that a notice meeting the requirements of this section has
previously been mailed to the minor's parent.
   (B)   If a minor is found in violation of this subchapter, the Police
Department shall mail a notice to the parent of the minor informing the parent
of the violation and warning said parent that a violation of this subchapter
can result in the prosecution of the minor and the parent.
   (C)   If a minor is found in violation of this subchapter at a commercial
establishment, the Police Department shall mail a notice to the operator
thereof informing the operator of the violation and warning said operator that
a violation of this subchapter can result in the prosecution of the operator.
   (D)   When required by the Texas Family Code, the municipal court shall
waive its original jurisdiction over a minor who violates this subchapter, and
shall refer the minor to the juvenile court.
(Ord. 2007-16, passed 5-1-07; Am. Ord. 2010-09, passed 3-23-10; Am. Ord. 2013-
09, passed 3-26-13; Am. Ord. 2016-07, passed 3-22-16 ; Am. Ord. 2019-19, passed
4-9-19)
§ 130.25  PERIODIC REVIEW.
   This subchapter shall be reviewed every third year after passage, as
required by Tex. Loc. Gov't Code § 370.002, as amended.  Such review shall be
conducted following a public hearing upon the need to continue the subchapter,
and the City Council shall have the option to continue, abolish or modify the
subchapter based upon its review of the subchapter's effects on the community
and on the problems the subchapter is intended to remedy.
(Ord. 2007-16, passed 5-1-07; Am. Ord. 2010-09, passed 3-23-10; Am. Ord. 2013-
09, passed 3-26-13; Am. Ord. 2016-07, passed 3-22-16 ; Am. Ord. 2019-19, passed
4-9-19)
FIREARMS AND FIREWORKS
§ 130.40  TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known, and may be cited as “the Discharging of
Firearms or Fireworks Subchapter of the City of Harker Heights.”
(Ord. 89-05, passed 4-25-89)
§ 130.41  FINDINGS; PURPOSE.
   (A)   The City Council finds that the discharge of any fireworks within the
city limits is potentially harmful and detrimental to the health, welfare, and
safety of its inhabitants, and that the effective elimination of discharging
fireworks within the city limits is essential to the furtherance of the health,
welfare, and safety of the city’s inhabitants and to the conduct of the normal
pursuit of life, commerce, and industrial activity.  It is the intent and
purpose of this subchapter to prevent the discharge of fireworks within the
city limits.
   (B)   The City Council finds that the unregulated discharge of firearms
within the city limits is potentially harmful and detrimental to the health,
welfare, and safety of its inhabitants, and that the effective control and
regulation of such discharges is essential to the furtherance of the health,
welfare, and safety of the city’s inhabitants and to the conduct of the normal
pursuit of life, commerce, and industrial activity.  It is the intent and
purpose of this subchapter to restrict and limit the discharging of firearms
within the city limits.
(Ord. 89-05, passed 4-25-89; Am. Ord. 2013-21, passed 8-13-13)
§ 130.42  ENFORCEMENT.
   This subchapter shall be enforced by any police officer or code enforcement
officer of the city, provided however, any person may file a complaint.
(Ord. 89-05, passed 4-25-89)
§ 130.43  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FIREARM.  Any device designed, made, or adapted to expel a projectile
through a barrel by using the energy generated by an explosion or burning
substance or any device readily convertible to that use.
   FIREWORKS.  Any composition or device designed to produce a visible or
audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation.
(Ord. 89-05, passed 4-25-89)
§ 130.44  DISCHARGING FIREARM UNLAWFUL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly discharge a firearm or
fireworks within the city limits, and it is hereby declared unlawful and is
prohibited.
(Ord. 89-05, passed 4-25-89)  Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.45  EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of ths subchapter shall not apply to:
   (A)   Certified licensed peace officers when required by law in the
performance of their duties.
   (B)   Model rockets and model rocket motors designed, sold, and used for the
purpose of propelling recoverable aeromodels.
   (C)   The use in emergency situations of pyrotechnics signal devices or
distress signals for aviation or highway use.
   (D)   The use of fusee and railway torpedoes by railroads.
   (E)   If otherwise allowed by law, discharging of firearms on property of
ten acres or more for the purpose of hunting in accordance with a hunting
permit as provided in Chapter 101 of this code, provided that such discharge
does not occur within 100 yards of an occupied residence not owned or
controlled by the property owner or his agent, and provided further that the
discharge does not expel the projectile beyond the boundaries of such property.
   (F)   If otherwise allowed by law, discharging of firearms is permitted for
the purpose of protecting livestock or crops, or for the control of vermin,
provided that such discharge does not occur within one hundred yards of an
occupied residence not owned or controlled by the property owner or his or her 
agent, and provided further that the discharge does not expel the projectile
beyond the boundaries of such property. On properties smaller than ten acres in
size, weapons utilized for these purposes shall be limited to firearms using
shot loads.
   (G)   The otherwise-lawful discharge of firearms within indoor shooting
range facilities that have been permitted by the City Council.
   (H)   The use or discharge of a firearm to the extent such use or discharge
is justified under Chapter 9 of the Texas Penal Code.
   (I)   If otherwise allowed by law, discharging of firearms on properties 25
acres or larger in size for the purpose of target practice, provided that such
discharge does not occur within 100 yards of an occupied residence not owned or
controlled by the property owner or his or her agent, and provided further that
the discharge does not expel the projectile beyond the boundaries of such
property.
   (J)   The discharge of firearms or other weapons in the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the city or in an area annexed by the city after September 1,
1981, if the firearm or other weapon is:
      (1)   A shotgun, air rifle or pistol, BB gun, or bow and arrow
discharged:
         (a)   On a tract of land of ten acres or more and more than 150 feet
from a residence or occupied building located on another property; and
         (b)   In a manner not reasonably expected to cause a projectile to
cross the boundary of the tract; or
      (2)   A center fire or rim fire rifle or pistol of any caliber
discharged:
         (a)   On a tract of land of 50 acres or more and more than 300 feet
from a residence or occupied building located on another property; and
         (b)   In a manner not reasonably expected to cause a projectile to
cross the boundary of the tract.
   (K)   The discharge of a firearm by a certified peace officer lawfully
acting within the course and scope of his or her official duties, or by anyone
receiving training or evaluation by a certified peace officer at the city’s
outdoor range.
(Ord. 89-05, passed 4-25-89; Am. Ord. 96-37, passed 7-23-96; Am. Ord. 2003-01,
passed 3-25-03; Am. Ord. 2003-08, passed 8-26-03; Am. Ord. 2004-27, passed 8-
10-04; Am. Ord. 2004-42, passed 9-14-04; Am. Ord. 2005-24, passed 8-9-05; Am.
Ord. 2013-21, passed 8-13-13)
§ 130.46  INDOOR SHOOTING RANGE.
   In addition to any other requirements imposed by this code or other law, any
person who owns or operates an indoor sport shooting range located in the city
must comply with the requirements of this section.
   (A)   The owner must validly hold all federal, state and local permits,
licenses and approvals required for the lawful ownership and operation of the
facility.
   (B)   The facility structure and systems must be designed and constructed to
meet or exceed all applicable standards and practices set forth in the most
recent edition of the National Rifle Association Range Source Book, and in such
a manner that no projectile discharged from a firearm within the structure may
escape from the area within the structure where shooting is permitted.
   (C)   The building structure and systems must meet or exceed all applicable
federal, state and local rules and regulations.
   (D)   One or more signs clearly indicating the maximum permissible
ammunition calibers and projectile velocities, and prohibiting the use of
ammunition exceeding such maximums, shall be conspicuously posted so as to be
readily visible to persons in the designated shooting area.
   (E)   The facility must be designed, maintained and operated in such a
manner that the discharge of any firearm within the designated shooting area
will not produce a noise level exceeding 75 dB in any other area within the
structure as measured with a precision sound level meter using the impulse mode
and an “A” weighting network.
   (F)   The facility must be designed, maintained and operated in such a
manner that discharge of any firearm within the facility structure may not
produce a sound that is plainly audible to a person or ordinary sensibilities
on any property not subject to the ownership or control of the owner of the
facility.
   (G)   The owner or operator shall maintain a commercial general liability
insurance policy providing minimum premises/operations coverage of $500,000 per
occurrence and $1,000,000 in the aggregate on an occurrence basis.  The policy
must by provided by an insurer licensed by the Texas Department of Insurance,
and must be endorsed to name as additional insured the city, its elected and
appointed officials, and employees acting within the scope of their duties. 
Prior to opening for business the facility owner or operator shall deliver a
certificate of insurance and copies of all endorsements for additional insured
to the Building Official, and thereafter at least ten days prior to the
expiration of such policies.  The facility owner shall prominently display a
sign at the facility stating that the owner or operator has purchased liability
insurance to cover activities at the facility.
(Ord. 2013-21, passed 8-13-13)
§ 130.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no
penalty is otherwise provided shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500. 
Any corporation or association who violates any provision of this chapter for
which no other penalty is otherwise provided shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding $2,000.
   (B)   Any person who violates §
130.03 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction shall be
fined not more than $500 for each and every such offense.
   (C)   (1)   Any minor violating any provision of §§
130.20 through
130.24 shall be guilty of a Class “C” misdemeanor as defined in the Texas Penal
Code and shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of Tex. Family
Code, Title 3, and Texas Code of Criminal Procedure.
      (2)   Any parent who violates §
130.22(B) or any person who violates §
130.22(C) of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, which shall be
punishable by a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $500.
      (3)   In assessing punishment for either a parent or a minor, the
Municipal Court Judge may consider a community service or Teen Court program.
(Ord. 93-24, passed 9-28-93)
CHAPTER 131:  OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section
General Provisions
   
131.01   Tearing up pavement
   
131.02   Injuring trees
Graffiti
   
131.20   Definitions
   
131.21   Graffiti declared a nuisance
   
131.22   Graffiti removal required
   
131.23   Abatement by city
   
131.24   Abatement by owner
   
131.25   Assessment of expenses; lien
   
131.26   Responsibility of parent or guardian
   
131.27   Possession of aerosol paint by minor
   
131.28   Notices
   
131.29   Enforcement
   
131.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 131.01  TEARING UP PAVEMENT.
   No person shall injure or tear up any pavement, side or crosswalk, drain,
sewer, or any part thereof, in any street, pavement or sidewalk, without due
authority, nor shall any person hinder or obstruct the making or repairing of
any side or crosswalk or pavement, which is being made under resolution of the
City Council, nor hinder or obstruct any person employed to make or repair any
public improvement, ordered by the City Council.
('60 Code, Ch. 11, Art. 47) 
Penalty, see § 131.99
§ 131.02  INJURING TREES.
   No person shall injure or destroy any ornamental or shade tree, shrub,
plant, monument, lamppost, fence, railing or awning, in or upon any public
ground, street, alley, public square, or other public place, or upon any
private premises.
('60 Code, Ch. 11, Art. 48) 
Penalty, see § 131.99
GRAFFITI
§ 131.20  DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this subchapter,
shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning.
      BUSINESS DAYS.  Normal working business days (i.e., Monday through Friday
of each calendar week, exclusive of days when the city hall is closed).
      GRAFFITI.  Markings (including inscriptions, slogans, drawings, or
paintings) made on tangible property with paint, an indelible marker, or an
etching or engraving device, and without the effective consent of the owner of
such property.
      HEARING OFFICER.  The City Manager.
      OFFICIAL.  The City Building Official.
      OWNER.  A person who owns, occupies, or has the right to control tangible
property.
   (B)   The terms AEROSOL PAINT, ETCHING OR ENGRAVING DEVICE, and INDELIBLE
MARKER shall have the meanings set forth in Texas Penal Code § 28.08.
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 7-12-11)
§ 131.21  GRAFFITI DECLARED A NUISANCE.
   Graffiti that is visible from any public property or right-of-way, or from
any private property other than the property on which the graffiti exists, is
declared a public nuisance.
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 7-12-11)
§ 131.22  GRAFFITI REMOVAL REQUIRED.
   It shall be the duty of the owner to remove or cause all graffiti to be
removed from the owner's property unless the graffiti is located on
transportation infrastructure and the removal of the graffiti would create a
hazard for the person performing the removal.
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 7-12-11)
§ 131.23  ABATEMENT BY CITY.
   (A)   Offer authorized. Whenever graffiti is found to exist, the city may
offer to remove the graffiti from the owner's property free of charge.
   (B)   Owner's election. An offer under this section will be made to the
owner in the manner specified in this subchapter for giving notices. The owner
may accept the offer only by filing unconditional written acceptance with the
Official on the form prescribed by the Official within three business days from
the date of the offer. Failure of the owner to accept the offer shall
constitute an irrevocable refusal of the offer.
   (C)   Effect of owner's election. If the owner accepts the offer, the city
may enter upon the property as allowed by law and do or cause to be done any
work necessary to bring the property into compliance with this subchapter. If
the owner does not accept the offer, the owner shall be given the notice
prescribed by §
131.24(A).
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 7-12-11)
§ 131.24  ABATEMENT BY OWNER.
   (A)   Notice to comply. If the owner does not accept an offer under §
131.23, the Official will give the owner notice to comply with §
131.22 not later than 15 days from the date of the notice. The notice shall
contain a statement explaining the owner's right to request a hearing for the
purpose of determining whether the conditions constitute a public nuisance
under this subchapter.
   (B)   Abatement.  Unless the Official receives a timely request for a
hearing from the owner, the city may enter upon the property as allowed by law
and do or cause to be done any work necessary to bring the property into
compliance with this subchapter.
   (C)   Hearing.
      (1)   If, within 15 days after the date the owner received the notice to
comply, the owner files with the Official a written request for a hearing, the
Official will schedule a hearing before the Hearing Officer. The hearing will
be held within five business days after the date the request is filed unless
the parties agree to a certain date beyond the five days. The owner's request
for hearing must contain an address and a phone number where notice of hearing
can be given. At the hearing, the owner and the city may present any evidence
relevant to the proceedings, in accordance with reasonable rules adopted by the
Hearing Officer.
      (2)   The determination of the Hearing Officer after the hearing shall be
final and not appealable. If, after the hearing, the Hearing Officer finds that
conditions constituting a nuisance hereunder exist, the Hearing Officer shall
issue a written abatement order. The order will required the owner to comply
with §
131.22 within two business days from the date of the order, and if the owner
fails to do so the city may thereafter enter upon the property and do or cause
to be done any work necessary to bring such premises into compliance with this
subchapter.
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 7-12-11)
§ 131.25  ASSESSMENT OF EXPENSES; LIEN.
   (A)   Reimbursement required. The owner of the property shall reimburse the
city on demand for all expenses incurred by the city in bringing a property
into compliance with this subchapter (including the cost of delivering, posting
or publishing notice, and the city's administrative expenses as set forth in
the city's then-current fee schedule). The expenses authorized by this section
shall bear interest at the rate of 10% or such rate allowed by law from the
date the city incurs the expenses.
   (B)   Lien authorized. To obtain a lien for recovery of expenses authorized
by this section, the Official shall file a statement of expenses with the
County Clerk of this county. The statement of expenses shall contain the name
of the property owner, if known, the legal description of the property, and the
amount of expenses incurred in bringing a property into compliance with this
subchapter. The statement of expenses or a certified copy thereof shall be
prima facie proof of the amount expended by the city. The statement of expenses
will constitute a privileged lien on the property when filed in the real
property records of this county, subordinate only to any previously recorded
lien, and the rights of a purchaser or lender for value who acquires an
interest in the property subject to the lien before the statement of expenses
is filed.
   (C)   Prosecution not affected. The procedures set out herein are civil in
nature and shall in no way restrict or prohibit the prosecution of criminal
charges under the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 7-12-11)
§ 131.26  RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENT OR GUARDIAN.
   A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he or she
intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or with criminal negligence permits the
minor to create graffiti on tangible property in the city.
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 7-12-11)
§ 131.27  POSSESSION OF AEROSOL PAINT BY MINOR.
   (A)   Possessing aerosol paint. It shall be unlawful for a minor to possess
aerosol paint of any sort or character.
   (B)   Affirmative defense. It shall be an affirmative defense to a violation
of division (A) of this section that, at the time of possession, the minor:
      (1)   Was accompanied or supervised by a parent or guardian, a teacher in
connection with a bona fide school project, or a supervisor during the minor's
regular employment;
      (2)   Possessed the aerosol paint on the property on which he or she
lives; or
      (3)   Possessed the aerosol paint in the immediate course of an organized
event sponsored or supervised by the city, a school, a church or some other
officially recognized entity.
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 7-12-11)
§ 131.28  NOTICES.
   (A)   Generally. Notices permitted or required by this subchapter will be
given by:
      (1)   Personal delivery in writing to the owner, in which case the date
the owner receives the notice is the date of the notice; or
      (2)   Sending a notice letter by certified mail, addressed to the owner
at the owner's address as contained in the records of the appraisal district in
which the property is located, in which case the date of the notice is deemed
to be three days after the date of mailing.
   (B)   Alternative methods authorized. If the notice cannot be made in the
manner specified by division (A) of this section, the notice shall be given by:
      (1)   Publication at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in
the county or the city, in which case the date of the notice is the date of
publication;
      (2)   Posting the notice on or near the front door on the property to
which the notice relates, in which case the date of the notice is the date the
notice was posted; or
      (3)   Posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the
ground on the property to which the notice relates, in which case the date of
the notice is the date the notice was posted.
   (C)   Non-acceptance of mail. The validity of a notice given by mail is not
affected if the United States Postal Service returns the notice as “refused” or
“unclaimed.”
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 7-12-11)
§ 131.29  ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Generally. A person who violates any of the provisions of this
subchapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall
be fined an amount not to exceed $500 for each offense.
   (B)   Notice to comply. Unless a timely request for hearing is filed under §
131.24(C)(1), an owner commits an offense by failing to comply with §
131.22 within 15 days after the date of a notice to comply under §
131.24(A).
   (C)   Abatement order. An owner commits an offense by failing to comply with
an abatement order issued under §
131.24(C)(2).
   (D)   Affirmative defense. It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under
this subchapter that notice was not given to the property owner in compliance
with this subchapter.
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 7-12-11)
§ 131.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city an act is
prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a
misdemeanor, or whenever in this code or ordinance the doing of any act is
required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no
specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of
this code or any such ordinance shall be punished by:
      (1)   A fine not to exceed $2,000 in all cases arising under municipal
ordinances that govern fire safety, zoning, and public health and sanitation
other than vegetation and litter violations;
      (2)   A fine not to exceed $2,000, if a motor vehicle is used in illegal
dumping or an offense under the law or city ordinance violated for illegal
dumping;
      (3)   A fine not to exceed $500 in all other cases, provided, however,
that no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same
or a similar offense under the laws of the state.
   (B)   Each day any violation of this code or any ordinance shall continue
shall constitute a separate offense. In the event that any such violation is
designated as a nuisance under the provisions of this code, such nuisance may
be summarily abated by the City Manager or the Operation Manager or designated
representative.
Statutory reference:
   Municipal penalties, see Tex. Loc. Gov't Code § 54.001
TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
151.   SIGN REGULATIONS
      
152.   MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS
      
153.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
      
154.   SUBDIVISIONS
         
APPENDIX A:  PAVEMENT DESIGN PROCEDURE
         
APPENDIX B:  RAINFALL INTENSITY CURVE
      
155.   ZONING CODE
      
156.   EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION
      
157.   BROADCASTING AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS
      
158.   STORM WATER DRAINAGE POLICY
      
159.   WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS
      
160.   UNSAFE, SUBSTANDARD AND DANGEROUS STRUCTURES
      
161.   MOBILITY 2030
CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
150.01   General requirements
   
150.02   Adoption of various standard codes
   
150.03   Conflicting provisions
   
150.04   Inspection notices
   
150.05   Definitions
Fences and Screening
   
150.30   Scope
   
150.31   Quality control
   
150.32   Material
   
150.33   Placement
   
150.34   Fence height
   
150.35   Screening
   
150.36   Standards for screening
   
150.37   Maintenance
   
150.38   Additional screening or fencing
   
150.39   Screening requirements
 
   
150.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.01  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct,
enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building
or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or
replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of
which is regulated by the technical codes referenced in §
150.02 herein, or to cause any such work to be done, or any person who performs
activities on any premises which are regulated by the Standard Fire Prevention
Code, shall comply with all applicable provisions of the various adopted
technical codes referenced in §
150.02 herein, as they may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 99-01, passed 1-12-99) 
Penalty, see § 150.99
§ 150.02  ADOPTION OF VARIOUS STANDARD CODES.
   The following codes are hereby adopted by reference as though they were
fully copied herein, with deletions, alterations and additions as indicated:
   (A)   TheInternational Building Code, 2015 Edition, as promulgated by the
International Code Council, Inc., and all subsequently published annual
revisions, except for the following, which shall amend and change said code
only to the extent referenced:
      (1)   In Section 101.1 “Title.” Insert “The City of Harker Heights.”
      (2)   Section 105.1 “Required.” Amend to read:  “Any owner or authorized
agent who intends to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or
change the occupancy of a building or structure; or to erect, install, enlarge,
alter, repair, remove, convert, or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or
plumbing systems; the installation of which is regulated by this code, or to
install accessory structures, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first
make application to the Building Official for a permit, shall comply with
applicable state and local rules and regulations concerning licensing and
registration, and obtain the required permit.”
      (3)   Section 105.2 “Work Exempt From Permit.”
         (a)   Delete Items 1, 2, 3 and 6.
         (b)   Change Item 4 to read “2 feet.”
      (4)   Section 109.4 “Work Commencing Before Permit Issuance.” Revise to
read: “Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical,
gas, mechanical, or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits
shall be  subject to a penalty to 100% of the permit fee in addition to the
required permit fees.”
      (5)   Section 110.6.1 “Re-inspection.” Add new section to read as
follows: “Where any work or installation does not pass any inspection, the
necessary corrections shall be made to achieve compliance with this code. The
work or installation shall then be re-submitted to the code official for re-
inspection. A fee shall be paid the city for each re-inspection.”
      (6)   SECTION 113 “BOARD OF APPEALS.”  Revise to read: “Building
Standards Commission”, and replace in its entirety with the following:
      (7)   “Section 113.1 ‘General.’ The ZBA (Zoning Board of Adjustments) is
designated to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations
made by the Building Official or Fire Code Official relative to the application
and interpretation of the applicable code. The ZBA shall be appointed as
codified by
Chapter 155 of the Code of Harker Heights. The Board shall render all decisions
and findings in writing to the appellant, with a duplicate copy to the code
official.”
      (8)   Section 113.2 “Limitations of Authority.”  Amend to read: “An
application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent ofthis
code or the rules adopted hereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the
provisions of this code do not fully apply, or an equivalent method of
construction or protection is proposed. The Board shall have no authority to
waive requirements of this code.”
      (9)   SECTION 202 “DEFINITIONS.” Add the following:
      “ALL WEATHER DRIVING SURFACE - A driving surface that is capable of
supporting the imposed loads of fire apparatus and consisting of material that
is impervious to damage from wet conditions and does not produce dust during
dry weather conditions. Accepted materials shall consist of concrete or asphalt
correctly applied.
      AS DEVELOPED - The change of use of a parcel of land from a vacant,
unimproved tract to one which is prepared for occupancy by buildings or
structures.
      MOBILE FOOD VENDOR - A mobile food unit which is wheeled, or otherwise
designed to be readily transported from place to place, whether towed or self-
propelled, and which is not designed to be permanently connected to domestic
water, sanitary systems, or electricity.
      MOBILE HOME PARK - For purposes of enforcement of these code provisions,
a mobile home park shall be considered as commercial property.
      THE ROUTE THAT A FIRE HOSE WOULD BE LAID - The routing of fire hose from
either a public or approved on-site fire hydrant to the fire apparatus along
the length of the public roadway and/or approved private fire lanes.
      TEMPORARY - Any length of time not to exceed ninety (90) days without
conditional use approval.”
      (10)   Section 406.7.2 “Canopies.” Amend the height requirement to 14
feet, 0 inches (4,267.2 mm).
      (11)   Section 501.2  “Address Identification.”  Amend to read: “New and
existing buildings shall be provided with approved address numbers or letters. 
One- and two-family dwellings must be a minimum of 4 inches (102 mm) high an a
minimum of 0.5 inches (12.7 mm) wide; all other buildings must be 6 inches
(152.4 mm) high and a minimum of 0.5 inches (12.7 mm) wide.  They shall be
installed on a contrasting background, be plainly visible from the street or
road fronting the property.  Where access is by means of a private road and the
building address cannot be seen from the public way, a monument, pole or other
approved sign or means shall be used to identify the structure.  On all multi-
family buildings above two-family dwellings shall be a placard mounted on the
street side of the building, visible from the roadway, stating the person or
company that manages the property and a 24-hour phone number.  The placard
minimum is 12 inches by 10 inches, with letters and numbers being 1 inch in
height, and of contrasting colors to the placard and the structure.”
      (12)   Section 903.1.2 “Special Construction Requirements.” Add new
section to read as follows: “Other provisions of this code notwithstanding,
automatic sprinkler systems complying with Chapter 9 of this code shall be
installed in all buildings in excess of two stories, thirty-five (35) feet in
height.
         Exceptions: one and two family dwellings”
      (13)   In Section 903.2.8 “Group R." Add exceptions:
         “Exception:  Construction of one (1) apartment building containing up
to four (4) units on a single lot, constructed with a two (2) hour fire
separation (with no penetrations) from slab to the underside of the roof
between dwelling units, shall not be required to install a fire sprinkler
system.
         Exceptions: one and two family dwellings.”   
      (14)   Section 1101.2 “Design.” Amend to read as follows: “Buildings and
facilities shall be designed and constructed to be accessible in accordance
with the Texas Accessibility Standards (TAS) of the Architectural Barriers law,
Government Code Chapter 469, as applicable.
         Exceptions: Buildings regulated under state law and built in
accordance with state-certified plans, including any variance or waivers
granted by the state, shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements
of this chapter.”
      (15)   Sections 1102 through 1110. Delete in their entirety.
      (16)   Section 1511.3.1 “Roof Cover.” Delete #2
      (17)   Section 1511.4 “Roof Recovering.”  Amend to read as follows: “No
building hereafter constructed, altered, or re-roofed, shall have a second roof
structure placed over an existing roof structure without the removal of the
entire first roof.”
      (18)   Section 1612.3 “Establishment of Flood Hazard Areas.” Insert “The
City of Harker Heights” and “September 26, 2008,” respectively.
      (19)   Section 1807.2 “Retaining Walls.”  Amend to read: “Retaining walls
two (2) feet and over must be permitted and engineered. Walls used to separate
elevations between properties shall be placed on the property line or not
closer than six (6) feet to the property line, allowing room to provide a
drainage swale that will prevent runoff waters from inundating the adjacent
properties. Retaining walls must be constructed of a material that is
classified as permanent, i.e., concrete or decorative concrete block; the use
of heavy timber is not permitted within ten (10) feet of any property line.
Retaining walls shall be designed in accordance with Sections 1808.2.1 through
1807.2.3.  Retaining wall drawings and engineered plans must be site specific.”
      (20)   Table 2308.7.5 through Table 2308.7.2(6) of this code are amended
by deleting in their entirety all columns that refer to 2 by 4s.
      (21)   Appendices C, E, F, G, J, K and L are adopted.
      (22)   Appendices A, B, D, H, I and M are not adopted.
   (B)   The International Plumbing Code, 2015 Edition, as promulgated by the
International Code Council, Inc., and all subsequently published annual
revisions, except for the following, which shall amend and change said code
only to the extent referenced:
      (1)   Section 101.1 “Title.” Insert “The City of Harker Heights, Texas.”
      (2)   Section 106.6.2 “Fee Schedule.” Insert “As determined in the annual
budget document.”
      (3)   Section 106.6.3 “Fee Refunds.” Insert  “50%” on Items 2 and 3.
      (4)   Section 107.4.3 “Re-inspection and Testing.” Amend to read: “Where
any work or an installation does not pass any initial inspection, the necessary
corrections shall be made to achieve compliance with this code. The work or
installation shall then be re-submitted to the code official for re-inspection.
A fee shall be paid to the city for each re-inspection.”
      (5)   Section 108.4 “Violation Penalties.” Amend to read: “Refer to
Section 150.99 of the Code of Harker Heights, Texas.”
      (6)   Section 108.5 “Stop Work Orders.”  Revise the last sentence to
read: “Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after
having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable
as provided in Section 150.99 of the Code of Harker Heights, Texas.”
      (7)   SECTION 109 “MEANS OF APPEAL.”  Replace the text with the
following: “See Section 113 of the International Building Code.”
      (8)   Section 304.4.1 “Sewer Depth.” Insert “twelve (12) inches (30.48
cm)” in both locations.
      (9)   Section 311.1 “Toilet Facilities for Workers General.” Add the
following sentences: “Toilet facilities shall be placed not more than 300 feet
(91.2 m) apart. Several builders may share the same facility, provided there is
a letter on file signed by all parties.”
      (10)   Section 312.2 “Drainage and Vent Water Test.” Change to read: “A
water test shall be applied to the drainage system, either in its entirety or
in sections. If applied to the entire system, all openings in the piping shall
be tightly closed, except the highest opening, and the system shall be filled
with water to the point of overflow. If the system is tested in sections, each
opening shall be tightly plugged, except the highest openings of the section
under test, and each section shall be filled with water, but no section shall
be tested with less than a 5-foot (1,524-mm) head of water. In testing
successive sections, at least the upper 10 feet (3,048 mm) of the next
preceding section shall be tested so that no joint or pipe in the building,
except the uppermost 10 feet (3,048 mm) of the system, shall have been
submitted to a test of less than a 5-foot (1,524-mm) head of water. This
pressure shall be held for not less than 15 minutes. The system shall then be
tight at all points.’
      (11)   Section 312.3 “Drainage and Vent Air Test.” Add exemption to read:
“An air test for plastic pipe not exceeding 5 psi for a period not less than 15
minutes shall be allowed for soil testing in wet weather.”
      (12)   Section 312.10 “Inspection and testing of backflow prevention
assemblies.” Replace the text with the following: “Inspection and testing shall
comply with Chapter 54 of the Code of Harker Heights.”
      (13)   Section 504.7.2 “Pan Drain Termination.” Delete last sentence and
add following sentence: “An approved warning and water service shutoff device
shall be required.”
      (14)   Section 603.2 “Separation of Water Service and Building Sewer.”
Delete first sentence and change to read: “The building sewer shall be
horizontally separated by not less than 5 feet (1,524 mm) of undisturbed or
compacted earth. The required separation distance shall not apply where a water
service pipe crosses a sewer pipe, provided the water service is sleeved to a
point not less than 5 feet (1,524 mm) horizontally from the sewer pipe
centerline on both sides of such crossing. The sleeve shall be of pipe
materials listed in Table 605.3,702.2 or 702.3. The required separation shall
not apply where the bottom of the water service pipe, located within 5 feet
(1,524 mm) of the sewer, is not less than 12 inches (305 mm) above the highest
point of the building sewer.”
      (15)   SECTION 603 “WATER SERVICE.” Add new subsection 603.3 entitled
“Water Service Metering,” to read as follows: “Each building to which domestic
water service is supplied shall be separately metered. Each tenant space of a
multi-occupancy building shall have separate valves. Upon request for a meter
set, the water service tap shall be identified and exposed by the owner or his
agent. Adjacent grade at that time shall be as close to finished grade as
possible. Should finished grade later prove to vary considerably from that
which was anticipated upon the setting of the meter, it shall be the owner’s
sole responsibility to alter the grade of the water service tap, the meter,
meter vault and yard line to accommodate the grade change.”
      (16)   Section 608.14 “Location of Backflow Preventers.” Add: “No
backflow devices are to be located below grade.”
      (17)   Section 705.11.2 “Solvent Cementing.”  Delete exception.
      (18)   SECTION 712 “SUMPS AND EJECTORS.”  Add new subsection 712.5, to
read as follows: “All portions of any equipment associated with a sewer sump or
ejector shall be installed out-of-doors, and not within any building intended
for human habitation.”
      (19)   Section 802.1.4 “Swimming Pools.”  Amend as follows: “Wastewater
from swimming pools, backwater from filters shall discharge to the nearest
public roadway or approved drainage reserves by means of adequate piping.”
      (20)   Section 903.1 “Roof Extensions.” Insert: “6 inches (15.24 cm).”
      (21)   Section 904.1 “Required Vent Extension."  Add the following
sentence:  "Every building in which plumbing is installed shall have at least
one vent, the size of which is not less than 3 inches (76 mm).”
      (22)   Section 918.1 “Air Admittance Valves General.” Add subsection
918.1.1 to read: “The use of air admittance valves must have prior approval by
the Building Official.”
      (23)   Section 1003.3.3 “Grease Trap and Grease Interceptor Not
Required.” Add the following exception: “An interceptor may be required for an
individual dwelling unit or private living quarters, if there is reasonable
cause to believe that injurious or illegal materials are being discharged to
the public sewer in quantities reasonably calculated to cause damage to sewage
treatment plants and/or processes.  Nothing in subsection 1003.1.1 above shall
be construed to relieve a multi-occupant facility, whether housing or
otherwise, from installing a trap or interceptor, when it can be reasonably
shown that the cumulative discharge of relatively small amounts of potentially
injurious materials by individual tenants is sufficient to endanger the public
sewer system. The responsibility for installation and maintenance of an
interceptor in these circumstances is upon the owner or his agent.”
      (24)   Appendices B, C, D, and E are adopted.
      (25)   Appendix A is not adopted.
   (C)   The International Mechanical Code, 2015 Edition, as promulgated by the
International Code Council, Inc., and all subsequently published annual
revisions, except for the following, which shall amend and change said code
only to the extent referenced:
      (1)   Section 101.1 “Title.” Insert “The City of Harker Heights, Texas.”
      (2)   Section 106.5.2 “Fee Schedule.” Insert “As determined in the annual
budget document.”
      (3)   Section 106.5.3 "Fee Refunds.” Insert “50%” on Items 2 and 3.
      (4)   Section 107.3.3 "Re-inspection and Testing." Change to read as
follows: “Where any work or installation does not pass any inspection, the
necessary corrections shall be made so as to achieve compliance with this code.
The work or installation shall then be re-submitted to the code official for
re-inspection. A fee shall be paid the city for each re-inspection.”
      (5)   Section 108.4 "Violation Penalties."  Amend to read: "Refer to
Section 150.99 of the Code of Harker Heights, Texas."
      (6)   Section 108.5 “Stop Work Orders.”  Revise the last sentence to
read:  “Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after
having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable
as provided in Section 150.99 of the Code of Harker Heights, Texas.”
      (7)   SECTION 109 “MEANS OF APPEAL.”  Replace the text with the
following: “See Section 113 of the International Building Code.”
      (8)   Section 304.3 “Elevation of Ignition Source.” Delete exception.
      (9)   Section 504.5 “Dryer Exhaust Duct Power Ventilators.” Add to end of
section: “The ventilator shall be accessible for inspection, service, repair,
and replacement without removing any permanent construction or ducts not
connected to the ventilator.”
      (10)   Appendix A is adopted.
      (11)   Appendix B is not adopted.
   (D)   The International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 Edition, as promulgated by the
International Code  Council, Inc., and all subsequently published annual
revisions issued, except for the following, which shall amend and change said
code only to the extent referenced:
      (1)   Section 101.1 “Title.” Insert “The City of Harker Heights.”
      (2)   Section 106.6.2 “Fee Schedule.” Insert “As determined in the annual
budget document.”
      (3)   Section 106.6.3 "Fee Refunds." Insert “50%” on Items 2 and 3.
      (4)   Section 107.3.3 “Re-inspection and Testing.” Amend to read: “Where
any work or installation does not pass any inspection, the necessary
corrections shall be made so as to achieve compliance with this code. The work
or installation shall then be re-submitted to the code official for re-
inspection. A fee shall be paid to the city for each re-inspection.”
      (5)   Section 108.4 “Violation Penalties.”  Amend to read: "Refer to
Section
150.99 of the Code of Harker Heights, Texas."
      (6)   Section 108.5 "Stop Work Orders."  Revise the last sentence to
read: “Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after
having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable
as provided in Section
150.99 of the Code of Harker Heights, Texas.”
      (7)   SECTION 109 “MEANS OF APPEAL.” Replace the text with the following:
“See Section 113 of the International Building Code.”
      (8)   Section 406.4.2 “Test Duration.”  Amend to read: “Test duration
shall be not less than 15 minutes. For larger piping systems the code official
may require a longer test duration, not to exceed 24 hours.”
      (9)   Add Section 406.4.3 “Test Gauges. Gauges used for testing shall be
as follows:
         1.   Tests requiring a pressure of 10 psi or less shall utilize a
testing gauge having increments of 0.10 psi (0.69 kPa) or less.
         2.   Tests requiring a pressure higher than 10 psi (69 kPa) but less
than or equal to 100 psi (690 kPa) shall use a testing gauge having increments
of 1 psi (6.9 kPa) or less.
         3.   Tests requiring a pressure higher than 100 psi (690 kPa) shall
use a testing gauge having increments of 2 psi (14 kPa) or less."
      (10)   Appendices A, B, C, and D are adopted.
   (E)   The International Energy Conservation Code, 2015 Edition, as
promulgated by the International Code Council Inc., and all subsequently
published annual revisions issued, except for the following, which shall amend
and change said code only to the extent referenced:
      (1)   Section C 101.1 “Title.” Insert “The City of Harker Heights.”
      (2)   Section C 104.6 “Re-inspection and Testing.” Amend to read: “Where
any work or installation does not pass an inspection, the necessary
corrections shall be made so as to achieve compliance with this code. The work
or installation shall then be resubmitted to the code official for re-
inspection. A fee shall be paid to the city for each re-inspection.
      (3)   SECTION R 109 “BOARD OF APPEALS.” Replace the text with the
following:  “See Section 113 of the International Building Code.”
   (F)   The International Residential Code for One and Two Family Dwellings,
2015 Edition, as promulgated by the International Code Council, Inc., and all
subsequently published annual revisions, except for the following, which shall
amend and change said code only to the extent referenced:
      (1)   Section R101.1 “Title.” Insert “The City of Harker Heights.”
      (2)   Section R105.1 “Required.” Amend to read: “Any owner or authorized
agent who intends to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or
change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge,
alter, repair, remove, convert, or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or
plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by this code, or to
install accessory structures, or to cause any such work to he done, shall first
make application to the Building Official for a permit. Any owner or authorized
agent shall also comply with applicable state and local rules and regulations
concerning licensing and registration, and obtain the required permit.”
      (3)   Section R105.2 “Work Exempt from Permit.” Remove exemptions 1, 2,
4, 5 and 10, and change number 3 to read: “Retaining walls that are not over 2
feet (609.6 mm) in height.”
      (4)   Section R109.4.1 “Re-inspection.” Add new section to read as
follows: “Where any work or installation does not pass any inspection, the
necessary corrections shall be made to achieve compliance with this code. The
work or installation shall then be re-submitted to the Building Official for
re-inspection. A fee shall be paid the city for each re-inspection.”
      (5)   SECTION R112 “BOARD OF APPEALS.” Replace the text with the
following: “Refer to Section 113 of the International Building Code.”
      (6)   Section R113.4 “Violation Penalties.”  Add the following sentence:
“Refer to Section 150.99 of the Code of Harker Heights.”
      (7)   Table 301.2(1). Insert the following criteria:
         Snow load 5 pounds/foot
         Wind 115 (3-sec gust)/75 fastest mile
         Seismic Design Category B
         Weathering Moderate
         Frostline depth 4 inches
         Termite Moderate to heavy
         Decay Slight to moderate
         Winter Design Temperature 26° F
         Flood Hazards Local Code
      (8)   Section R306.5 “Toilet Facilities for Workers.” Add to read as
follows: “Toilet facilities shall be provided for construction workers, and
such facilities shall be maintained in a sanitary condition. Construction
worker toilet facilities of the non-sewer type shall conform to ANSI Z4.3. The
path of travel to required facilities shall not exceed a distance of 300 feet
(91.2 m).”
      (9)   Section R313.2 “Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems.” Delete this
section.
      (10)   Section 313.2.1 “Design and Installation.” Amend to read:
“Automatic residential fire sprinkler systems when installed shall be designed
and installed in accordance with Section P2904 or NFPA 13D.”
      (11)   Section R404.6 “Retaining Walls.” Add new section to read as
follows; “Retaining walls two (2) feet and over must be permitted and
engineered.  Walls used to separate elevations between properties shall be
placed on the property line or not closer than six (6) feet to the property
line, allowing room to provide a drainage swale that will prevent runoff waters
from inundating the adjacent properties. Retaining walls must be constructed of
a material that is classified as permanent, i.e., concrete or decorative
concrete block; the use of heavy timber is not permitted within ten (10) feet
of any property line. Retaining wall drawings and engineered plans must be site
specific.”
      (12)   SECTION R801 “GENERAL.” Add Section R801.4 “Roof Framing.” to read
as follows: “Roof framing materials, two inch (2") by four inch (4"), referred
to in the span tables of this chapter, shall not be permitted in habitable
structures except when used in engineered trusses.”
      (13)   Section 908.3.1 “Roof Re-cover.” Delete this section.
      (14)   Section 908.3.1.1. Delete this section.
      (15)   Section 908.4 “Roof Re-covering.” Delete this section.
      (16)   Section 908.7 “Secondary Roofing.” Add section to read as follows:
“No building hereafter constructed, altered, or re-roofed, shall have a second
roof structure placed over an existing roof structure without the removal of
the entire first roof.”
      (17)   Section P2501.3 “Metering.” Add new section: “Each building to
which domestic water service is supplied shall be separately metered. Upon
request for a meter set, the water service tap shall be identified and exposed
by the owner or his agent. Adjacent grade at that time shall be as close to
finished grade as possible. Should finished grade later prove to vary from that
which was anticipated upon the setting of the meter, it shall be the owner’s
sole responsibility to alter the grade of the water service tap, the meter,
meter vault and yard line to accommodate the grade change.:
      (18)   Section P2501.4 “Sewer Connection.”  Add new section: “Each
building which contains plumbing fixtures designed to waste to the sanitary
drainage system shall have a separate connection at the public sewer. Each
household unit of a townhouse or two family dwelling shall have a separate
connection to the public sewer, and shall not share any portion of the DWV
system. A common collector line may receive the discharge from each household
unit in the case of two family dwellings under common ownership and
management.”
      (19)   Section P2902.4.3 “Hose Connection.”  Add the following: “All hose
bibs installed on the exterior of the building shall be protected with a back
flow preventer that is an integral part of the hose bib.”
      (20)   Table 3005.4.2. Add footnote “c”.  Amend to read as follows:
“Building sewers shall not be less than 3 inches (7.62 cm) in diameter.”
      (21)   Section P3007.1.1 “Location of Sumps and Ejectors.” Add to read as
follows: “All portions of any equipment associated with a sewer sump or ejector
shall be installed out-of-doors, and not within any building intended for human
habitation.”
      (22)   Section P3102.1 “Required Vent Extension.” Add the following:
“Every building in which plumbing is installed shall have at least one stack,
the size of which not less than 3 inches (7.62 cm). Such stack shall run
undiminished in size, and as directly as possible from the building drain
through to the open air or a vent header that extends to the open air. Where
possible, the 3-inch (7.62-cm) vent should serve the water closet farthest from
where the building sewer exits the building.”
      (23)   Section P3114.1 “General.” Add the following: “Air admittance
valves may only be installed with prior written authorization of the Building
Official.”
      (24)   Section E3601.6.2 “Service Disconnect Locations.” Amend to read:
“The service disconnecting means shall be installed at a readily accessible
location outside of the building, and as close to the meter base as possible.
Each occupant shall have clear access to the service disconnecting means
serving the dwelling unit in which they reside.”
      (25)   Section AI101.1 of Appendix I “Private Sewage Disposal.” Amend to
read: “All private sewage disposal systems shall conform to the requirements of
the Texas Department of Health and the Texas Commission on Environmental
Quality, as administered by the Bell County Health Department.”
      (26)   Appendices A, B, C, D, G, H, I, J, K, M, N, O, P, and V are
adopted.
      (27)   Appendices E, F, L, R, S, and T are not adopted.
   (G)   The International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 Edition, as
promulgated by the International Code Council, Inc., and all subsequently
published annual revisions, except for the following, which shall amend and
change said code only to the extent referenced:
      (1)   Section 101.1 “Title.” Insert “The City of Harker Heights.”
      (2)   Section 103.5 “Fees.” Amend to read:  “The fees for activities and
services and/or permits required by this department shall be paid as required,
in accordance with the schedule as established in the annual budget document.”
      (3)   SECTION 111 “MEANS OF APPEAL.”  Replace the text with the
following: “See Section 113 of the International Building Code.”
      (4)   Section 302.4 “Weed.” Insert: “12 inches (304.8 mm).”
      (5)   Section 302.8 “Motor Vehicles.” Amend to read: “Except as provided
in other regulations, no inoperative and not displaying a current registration
and inspection certificate, motor vehicle shall be parked, kept or stored on
any premises visible from any public property, and no vehicle shall at any time
be in a state of disassembly, disrepair, or in the process of being stripped or
dismantled. Painting of vehicles is prohibited unless conducted inside an
approved spray booth.”
      (6)   Section 304.14 “Insect Screens.”  Amend to read: “Every door,
window and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms,
food preparation areas, food service areas, or anywhere products to be included
or utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured,
packaged, or stored, shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of
less than sixteen (16) mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm), and every swinging
door shall have a self-closing device in good working condition.”
      (7)   Section 602.3 “Heat Supply.” Amend to read: “Every owner and
operator of any building who rents, leases, or sublets one or more dwelling
unit, rooming unit, dormitory or guestroom on terms, either expressed or
implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat to maintain
a temperature of not less than 65° F (18° C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms,
and toilet rooms.”
      (8)   Section 602.4 “Occupiable Work Spaces.” Amend to read: “Indoor work
spaces that may be occupied shall be supplied with heat to maintain a
temperature of not less than 65° F (18° C) during the period that the space is
occupied.”
      Exceptions: remain as written.
      (9)   Annex A is hereby adopted.
   (H)   The International Existing Building Code, 2015 Edition, as promulgated
by the International Code Council, Inc., and all subsequently published annual
revisions, except for the following, which shall amend and change said code
only to the extent referenced:
      (1)   Section 101.1 “Title.” Insert “The City of Harker Heights”
      (2)   Section 105.1.1 “Annual Permit” and Section 105.1.2 “Annual Permit
Records.” Delete in their entirety.
      (3)   Section 105.2 “Work Exempt from Permit.” Delete number 1.
      (4)   Section 109.4.1 Add new section “Re-inspection.” Amend to read:
“Where any work or an installation does not pass any initial inspection, the
necessary corrections shall be made to achieve compliance with this code. The
work or installation shall then be re-submitted to the code official for re-
inspection, A fee shall be paid to the city for each re-inspection.”
      (5)   SECTION 112 “BOARD OF APPEALS.”  Replace the text with the
following: “Refer to Section 113 of the 2015 International Building Code”
      (6)   Section 706.3 “Recovering verses Replacement.” Delete all but the
following: “New roof coverings shall not be installed without first removing
all existing layers of roof coverings down to the roof deck.”
      (7)   Section 706.4 “Roof Recovering.”  Delete this section.
   (I)   The International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2015 Edition, as
promulgated by the International Code Council Inc., and all subsequently
published annual revisions issued, except for the following, which shall amend
and change said code only to the extent referenced:
      (1)   Section C 101.1 “Title.” Insert “The City of Harker Heights.”
      (2)   SECTION 103 “DEPARTMENT OF BUILDING SAFETY.” Delete this section.
      (3)   Section C 104.6 “Re-inspection and Testing.” Amend to read: “Where
any work or installation does not pass an inspection, the necessary corrections
shall be made so as to aclneve compliance with this code. The work or
installation shall then be resubmitted to the code official for re-inspection.
A fee shall be paid to the city for each re-inspection.”
      (4)   Section R 101.1 “Title.” Insert “The City of Harker Heights.”
      (5)   Section R 106.16 “Re-inspection and Testing.” Amend to read: “Where
any work or installation does not pass an inspection, the necessary corrections
shall be made so as to achieve compliance with this code. The work or
installation shall then be resubmitted to the code official for re-inspection,
A fee shall be paid to the city for each re-inspection.”
      (6)   SECTION R 109 “MEANS OF APPEALS.” Replace the text with the
following: “See Section 113 of the International Building Code.”
   (J)   The International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, as promulgated by the
International Code Council, Inc., and all subsequently published annual
revisions issued, except for the following, which shall amend and change said
code only to the extent referenced:
      (1)   Section 101.1 “Title.” Amend to read: “These regulations shall be
known as the Fire Code of The City of  Harker Heights, hereinafter referred to
as ‘this code’.”
      (2)   Section 103.2 “Appointment.” Amend to read: “The Fire Code Official
shall be the Fire Chief or his designee.”
      (3)   Section 102.1 “Construction and Design Provisions.” Amend #3 to
read: “Existing structures, facilities and conditions when required in Chapter
11 or in other sections of this code.”
      (4)   SECTION 104 “GENERAL AUTHORITY AND RESPONSIBILITIES.” Section 104.1
“General.” Amend to read: “The Fire Code Official or any peace officer licensed
by the city is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this code. The
Fire Code Official shall have the authority to render interpretations of this
code, and to adopt policies, procedures, rules and regulations in order to
clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies,
procedures, rules and regulations shall be in compliance with the intent and
purpose of this code and shall not have the effect of waiving requirements
specifically provided for in this code.”
      (5)   Section 105.3.3 “Occupancy Prohibited Before Approval.” Amend to
read: “The building or structure shall not be occupied prior to the Fire Code
Official issuing a permit when required and conducting associated inspections
indicating the applicable provisions of this code have been met.”
      (6)   Section 104.3.2 “Photographic Documentation.” Amend to read:
“Members of the Fire Department making such examinations or inspections shall
have the right, with proper credentials, and be authorized to take a reasonable
number of photographs or videotapes for evidence and for records for use by the
Fire Department to study hazards and scientific control for fire safety.”
      (7)   Section 105.3.1 “Expiration.” Amended by adding an exception to
read: “Exception:  Construction permits attached to, or in association with,
the master commercial permit shall not be subject to the provisions of Section
105.3.1 and shall follow the expiration period of the master commercial permit
if applicable.”
      (8)   Section 105.4.2.2 “Occupancy Classification Letter.”
         (a)   Add section to read: “Two copies of a completed ‘Occupancy
Classification Letter’ (a.k.a. ‘Commodities Letter’) or other approved fire
protection report shall be submitted to the city for buildings or portions
thereof that are to be used for any of the following purposes:
            1.    Warehousing or storage
            2.   Retail including rack display of products
            3.    Hazardous material storage and/or use
            4.    Manufacturing
         (b)   The Occupancy Classification Letter is required to be submitted:
            1.   With the building permit submittal documents when seeking a
building permit;
            2.   To the HHFD Fire Inspector during a Certificate of Occupancy
inspection; and
            3.   At any other time when required by the Fire Code Official.
         (c)   The Occupancy Classification Letter is to be prepared by the
owner and/or tenant of the building/space in question, or a registered design
professional. It is to be signed and dated. If the Occupancy Classification
Letter is prepared by a registered design professional, the letter is to be on
company letterhead and countersigned by the owner and/or tenant. The Occupancy
Classification Letter is to be kept on site at all times. Prior to a change in
1) the type or amount of hazardous material(s) used or stored, 2) the type or
amount of storage or storage height or method, or 3) the manufacturing process,
a revised Occupancy Classification Letter is to be submitted to the Fire Chief
or his designee for review.”
      (9)   Section 105.6 “Required Operational Permits.” Amend to read: “The
Fire Code Official is authorized to issue operational permits for the
operations set forth in Sections 105.6.1 through 105.6.51.”
      (10)   Section 105.6 “Required Operational Permits.” Amended by adding
Section 105.6.49
(“Food Booths”), Section 105.6.50 (“Mobile Food Establishments”) and Section
105.6.51 (“Portable Outdoor Gas-fired Heating Appliances”) as follows:
         (a)   Section 105.6.49 “Food Booths.”  An operational permit is
required for the operation of a food booth. For permit to operate a food booth,
see Section 320.
         (b)   Section 105.6.50 “Mobile Food Vendor.” An operational permit is
required for the operation and maintenance of a mobile food vendor. Small,
lightweight vendor push carts, as determined by the Fire Code Official, are not
covered under this section. For permit to operate a mobile food vendor, see
Section 321.
         (c)   Section 105.6.51 “Portable Outdoor Gas-fired Heating
Appliances.” An operational permit is required for the operation and
maintenance of a portable outdoor gas-fired heating appliance. For permit to
use portable outdoor gas-fired heating appliances, see Section 322.
      (11)   Section 105.7.12 “LP Gas.” Amend to read: “A construction permit
is required for installation of or modification to an LP-gas system that
contains 120 gallons or more. Maintenance performed in accordance with this
code is not considered to be a modification and does not require a permit.”
      (12)   Section 105.7.19 “Electronic Access Control Systems.” Add section
to read: “Construction permits are required for the installation or
modification of an electronic access control system, as specified in Section
503 and Section 1010. A separate construction permit is required for the
installation or modification of a fire alarm system that may be connected to
the access control system. Maintenance performed in accordance with this code
is not considered a modification and docs not require a permit.”
      (13)   Section 108.1 “Appeals.” Replace the text with the following:
“Refer to Section 113 of the International Building Code.”
      (14)   Section 109.4 “Violation Penalties.”  Amend to read: “Persons who
shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in
violation of the approved construction documents, or directive of the Fire Code
Official, or of a permit or certificate under provisions of this code, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in
Section 10.99 of the Code of Harker Heights. Each day that a violation
continues after notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense,”
      (15)   Section 110.1.1.1 “Removal of Occupants.” Add section to read: “A
member of the Fire Department or any peace officer licensed by the City of
Harker Heights is authorized to require the removal of occupants at a location
when actual occupancy exceeds the permitted or posted occupant load. A person
commits an offense if they refuse to obey an order to vacate.”
      (16)   Section 111.4 “Failure to Comply.” Amend to read: “Any person who
shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with
a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to
remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable as provided in Section
150.99 of the Code of Harker Heights, Texas."
      (17)   SECTION 202 “GENERAL DEFINITIONS.” Amend to read:
      “ALL WEATHER DRIVING SURFACE - A driving surface that is capable of
supporting the imposed loads of fire apparatus and consisting of material that
is impervious to damage from wet conditions and does not produce dust during
dry weather conditions. Accepted materials shall consist of concrete or asphalt
correctly applied.
      AMBULATORY CARE FACILITY - Buildings or portions thereof used to provide
medical, surgical, psychiatric, nursing, or similar care on a less than 24-hour
basis to persons who are rendered incapable of self-preservation by the
services provided. This group may include but not be limited to the following:
colonic centers, dialysis centers, pain management centers, psychiatric
centers, sedation dentistry, and surgery centers.
      AS DEVELOPED - The change of use of a parcel of land from a vacant,
unimproved tract to one which is prepared for occupancy by buildings or
structures, or which becomes occupied by buildings, structures.
      DAQ - A measurement of Delivered Audio Quality (DAQ) for Public Safety,
where DAQ 3.4 is defined as “speech understandable with repetition only rarely
required, and with some noise and/or distortion.”
      FIRE LANE - Any area appurtenant to entrances or exits of a building
deemed necessary by the Fire Chief or his designee to remain free and clear of
parked vehicles for access to such building in case of fire or other emergency
and designated by him as such, and may include sidewalks, driveways, portions
of parking lots, or any other area adjacent to or near building entrances or
exits, or any fire hydrant.
      FIRE MARSHAL - The Fire Code Official responsible for investigations of
fires, inspection of facilities, and code enforcement.
      FIRE WATCH - A temporary measure intended to ensure continuous and
systematic surveillance of a building or portion thereof by one or more
qualified individuals or standby personnel when required by the Fire Marshal
for the purposes of identifying and controlling hazards, detecting early signs
of unwanted fire, raising an alarm of fire and notifying the Fire Department.
Qualified individuals are defined as State Certified Fire Inspectors, Texas
Certified Firefighters, State Licensed Peace Officers, individuals employed by
a private security firm or, if approved by the Fire Marshal, other designated
individuals whose sole duty when assigned a fire watch is to perform constant
patrols of the premises and keep watch for signs of unwanted fire. A written
log must be maintained and personnel must have at least one approved means of
notifying the Fire Department of fire or other emergencies.
      FOSTER CARE FAMILY HOME - A single independent residential occupancy that
is the primary residence of the caregiver and licensed by the state to provide
twenty-four (24) hour care for six or fewer children (including those related
to the caregiver) up to the age of eighteen (18) years.
      HIGH-PILED COMBUSTIBLE STORAGE - Storage of combustible materials in
closely packed piles or combustible materials on pallets, in racks or on
shelves where the top of storage is greater than 12 feet (3,658 mm) in height.
When required by the Fire Code Official, high-piled combustible storage also
includes certain high-hazard commodities, such as rubber tires, Group A
plastics, flammable liquids, idle pallets and similar commodities, where the
top of storage is greater than 6 feet (1,829 mm) in height. When a specific
product cannot be identified, a fire protection system and life safety features
shall be installed as for Class IV commodities, to the maximum pile height.
      HIGH-RISE BUILDING. A building with an occupied floor located more than
55 feet (16,764 mm) above the lowest level of Fire Department vehicle access.
      MOBILE FOOD VENDOR - A mobile food operation using any heat-producing
equipment to cook, fry, or warm products for consumption from a unit which is
wheeled, or otherwise designed to be readily transported from place to place,
whether towed or self- propelled, and which is not designed to be permanently
connected to domestic water, sanitary sewer systems, or electricity.
      MOBILE HOME PARK - For purposes of enforcement of these code provisions,
a mobile home park shall be considered as commercial property.
      PARK OR PARKING - The stopping or standing of a vehicle, whether occupied
or not, otherwise than when temporarily and actually engaged in loading or
unloading merchandise or passengers, or in obedience to traffic regulations,
signs, or signals or an involuntary stopping of a vehicle by reason of a cause
beyond the control of the operator of the vehicle.
      RESIDENTIAL GROUP R-3 - Occupancies where the occupants are primarily
permanent in nature and not classified as Group R-l, R-2, R-4 or I, including:
      Foster care family homes
      ...{'{'}remainder of text unchanged{'}'}...
      REPAIR GARAGE - A building, structure or portion thereof used for
servicing or repairing motor vehicles. This occupancy shall also include
garages involved in minor repair, modification and servicing of motor vehicles
for items such as lube changes, inspections, windshield repair or replacement,
shocks, minor part replacement and other such minor repairs.
      ROUTE THAT A FIRE HOSE WOULD BE LAID - The routing of fire hose from
either a public or approved on-site fire hydrant to the fire apparatus along
the length of the public roadway and/or approved private fire lanes.
      SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY - Real properly designed and used for the
purpose of renting or leasing individual storage spaces to customers for the
purpose of storing and removing personal properly on a self-service basis.
      STANDBY PERSONNEL - Qualified fire service personnel, approved by the
Fire Chief. When utilized, the number required shall be as directed by the Fire
Chief. Charges for utilization shall be as normally calculated by the
jurisdiction.
      (18)   Section 307 “OPEN BURNING; RECREATIONAL FIRES AND PORTABLE OUTDOOR
FIREPLACES.”  Amend to read:
         (a)   “Section 307.1 ‘General.’ A person shall not kindle or maintain
or authorize to be kindled or maintained any open burning unless conducted and
approved in accordance with this section.
         (b)   Section 307.1.1 ‘Prohibited Open Burning.’ Open burning that is
offensive or objectionable because of smoke emissions or when atmospheric
conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous shall be
prohibited.
         Exception: Proscribed burning for the purpose of reducing  the impact
of wildfire when authorized by the Fire Code Official.
         (c)   Section 307.2 ‘Permit Required.’ A permit shall be obtained from
the Fire Code Official in accordance with Section 105.6 prior to kindling a
fire for recognized agricultural or range or wildlife management practices,
property development, prevention or control of disease or pests, or open
burning. Application for such approval shall only be presented by and permits
issued to the owner of the land upon which the fire is to be kindled. The Fire
Department shall develop and adopt rules setting forth guidelines for
permissible controlled burning within the jurisdiction. Said guidelines shall
not be less restrictive than those promulgated by the Texas Commission on
Environmental Quality.
            Examples of state or local law, or regulations referenced elsewhere
in this section may include but not be limited to the following:
            1.   Texas Commission on Environmental Quality guidelines and/or
restrictions.
            2.   State, county, or local temporary or permanent bans on open
burning.
            3.   Local written policies as established by the Fire Code
Official.
         (d)   Section 307.2.1 ‘Trench Burns.’ Trench burns shall be conducted
with air curtain incinerators in trenches and in accordance with Section 307.2.
         (e)   Section 307.3 ‘Extinguishment Authority.’ The Fire Code Official
is authorized to order the extinguishment by the permit holder, another person
responsible or the Fire Department of open burning that has not been permitted,
is in violation of permit requirements, or that creates or adds to a hazardous
or objectionable situation.
         (f)   Section 307.4 ‘Location.’ The location for open burning shall
not be less than 300 feet (91,440 mm) from any structure or the property line
of the property owner, and provisions shall be made to prevent the fire from
spreading to within 300 feet (91,440 mm) of any structure or the property line
of the property owner.
         (g)   Section 307.5 ‘Recreational Fires.’ Allowed without a permit in
approved containers at one and two family dwellings, subject to the regulations
contained herein.
            •   Fires shall be limited to a maximum of three feet in diameter
and two feet in height, must be contained in a non-combustible chimney, outdoor
fireplace, fire pit, or other method approved by the Fire Code Official.
            •   All openings in the container or fire pit must be covered with
wire mesh or other screening materials that will prevent the passage of sparks
or embers.
            •   No such fire or container used for open burning may be used on
any porch, deck, balcony, or other portion of a building. Within any room,
space, or under any building overhang.
         (h)   Section 307.5.1 ‘Portable Outdoor Fireplaces.’ Portable outdoor
fireplaces, non-combustible chimneys, outdoor fire pits, or other approved
methods shall be used in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions and
shall not be operated within 15 feet (4,572 mm) of a structure of combustible
material.
         (i)   Section 307.6 ‘Permanent Outdoor Fireplace.’ A permanently
installed outdoor fireplace for recreational fire purposes shall not be
installed within 15 feet (4,572 mm) of a structure or combustible material.
Conditions which could cause a fire to spread within 15 feet (4,572 mm) of a
structure shall be eliminated prior to ignition.
         Exception: A permanently installed outdoor fireplace constructed in
accordance with the International Building Code.
         (j)   Section 307.7 ‘Attendance.’ Open burning; recreational fires and
use of outdoor fireplaces shall be constantly attended until the fire is
extinguished. A minimum of one portable fire extinguisher complying with
Section 906 with a minimum 4-A rating or other approved on-site fire-
extinguishing equipment, such as dirt, sand, water barrel, garden hose or water
truck, shall be available for immediate utilization.”
      (19)   Section 308.1.2 “Throwing or Placing Sources of Ignition.” Amend
to read: “No person shall drop, throw or place, or cause to be dropped, thrown
or placed, a lighted match, cigar, cigarette, matches, or other flaming or
glowing substance or object from a structure or vehicle onto any surface or
article where it can cause an unwanted fire.”
      (20)   Section 308.1.4 “Open-Flame Cooking Devices.” Amend to read:
“Open-flame cooking devices, charcoal grills and other similar devices used for
cooking shall not be located or used on combustible balconies, decks, or within
10 feet (3,048 mm) of combustible construction.
      Exceptions:
         1.   One- and two-family dwellings, except that LP-gas containers are
limited to a water capacity not greater than 50 pounds (22.68 kg) [nominal 20-
pound (9.08-kg) LP-gas capacity] with an aggregate LP-gas capacity not to
exceed 80 lbs. (4 containers).
         2.   Where buildings, balconies and decks are protected by an approved
automatic sprinkler system, except that LP-gas containers are limited to a
water capacity not greater than 50 pounds (22.68 kg) [nominal 20-pound (9.08-
kg) LP-gas capacity], with an aggregate LP-gas capacity not to exceed 40 lbs.
(2 containers).
         3.   LP-gas cooking devices having LP-gas container with a water
capacity not greater than 2½ pounds [nominal 1-pound (0.454-kg) LP-gas
capacity]. {'{'}No change.{'}'}”
      (21)   Section 308.1.6.2 “Portable Fuels Open-Flame Devices.” Amend
exception #3 to read: “Torches or flame-producing devices in accordance with
Section 308.1.3.”
      (22)   Section 308.1.6.3 “Sky Lanterns.”  Amend to read: “Unmanned free-
floating devices containing an open flame or other heat source, such as but not
limited to sky lanterns or Chinese lanterns shall be prohibited.”
      (23)   Section 311.5 “Placards.” Amend to read: “The Fire Code Official
is authorized to require marking of any vacant or abandoned buildings or
structures determined to be unsafe pursuant to Section 110 of this code
relating to structural or interior hazards, as required by Sections 311.5.1
through 311.5.5.”
      (24)   Section 314.4 “Vehicles.” Amend to read: “Liquid- or gas-fueled
vehicles, boats or other motor craft shall not be located indoors except as
follows:
         1.   Batteries are disconnected.
         2.   Fuel in fuel tanks does not exceed one-quarter tank or 5 gallons
(whichever is less), or for large diesel vehicles the minimum amount required
to position vehicle.
         3.   Fuel tanks and fill openings are closed and seated to prevent
tampering.
         4.   Vehicles, boats or other motor craft equipment are not fueled or
defueled within the building,”
      (25)   SECTION 319 - “PARADE FLOATS.” Add sections to read:
         (a)   “Section 319.1 ‘Fire Protection.’ Motorized parade floats and
towing apparatus shall be provided with a minimum 2A-10BC-rated portable fire
extinguisher readily accessible to the operator. All fire extinguishers shall
have a current (within a year) inspection sticker from a licensed extinguisher
company or provide proof (such as a store receipt) that the extinguisher was
purchased sometime within the last 12 months. Open flame displays, roman
candles, and fireworks are prohibited on floats and towed vehicles.
         (b)   Section 319.2 ‘Decorative Materials.’ Whenever possible the
decorative material on parade floats shall be of a non-combustible, fireproof
or fire-resistant material.
         (c)   Section 319.3 ‘Exhaust Pipes.’ Motorized float exhaust pipes
must be extended past the exterior of the float and be clear of all decorative
material.
         (d)   Section 319.4 ‘Escape Hatch.’ Motorized floats shall be equipped
with a quick escape hatch from interior driver compartments.
         (e)   Section 319.5 ‘Generators.’ Where used, generators shall be
securely mounted on the
vehicle with not less than 12 inches of clearance separating it from any
combustible material. Any generator in a confined space (e.g., pick-up camper
shell) shall not have any occupants inside the same space.
         (f)   Section 319.6 ‘Electrical System.’ Where used for lighting,
motorized decorations or other applications on a float, electrical wiring must
be of a type approved for the use for which it is being employed, shall have
sufficient capacity, shall be secured to prevent damage, shall have all
connections secured via approved devices (or electrical boxes) and shall be
properly fused. No bare wires or exposed electrical connections are permitted.”
      (26)   SECTION 320 - “FOOD BOOTHS.” Add sections to read:
         (a)   “Section 320.1 ‘Permits.’ For permit to operate a food booth,
see Section 105.6.47. It shall be unlawful to operate a food booth without a
permit.
         (b)   Section 320.2 ‘Fire Protection.’ One 2A-10BC fire extinguisher
shall be required for all food booths. Booths containing deep-fat fryers shall
also have a Class K portable fire extinguisher for up to four fryers having a
maximum cooking medium capacity of 80 pounds each. For every additional group
of four fryers having a maximum cooking capacity of 80 pounds each, an
additional Class K extinguisher will be required. For individual fryers
exceeding 6 square feet in surface area, Class K extinguishers will be
installed in accordance with manufacturers’ recommendations. All fire
extinguishers shall have a current (within a year) inspection sticker from a
licensed extinguisher company or provide proof (such as a store receipt) that
the extinguisher was purchased sometime within the last 12 months.
         (c)   Section 320.3 ‘Location.’ Food booths utilized for cooking shall
have a minimum of 10 feet clearance on two sides. Booths shall not be placed in
fire lanes unless otherwise approved by the Fire Code Official. Booths shall
not be placed within 10 feet of amusement rides or devices.
         (d)   Section 320.4 ‘Cooking Equipment Location.’ Barbeque pits shall
not be located within 10 feet of combustible materials. Barbeque pits shall not
be located under the food booth canopy.
         (e)   Section 320.5 ‘Acceptable Cooking Sources.’ The following are
the only approved cooking sources for food booths:
            1.   Wood or charcoal
            2.   Propane
            3.   Natural gas
            4.    Electricity
         (f)   Section 320.6 ‘Generators.’ Fuel tanks shall be of adequate
capacity to permit uninterrupted operation during normal operating hours.
Generators shall be isolated from contact with the public. Storage of gasoline
is not allowed in or near generators or food booths.
         (g)   Section 320.7 ‘Decorations.’ All decorative material shall be at
least six feet away from any open flame, cooking element, or heat source or be
flame-resistant.
         (h)   Section 320.8 ‘Escape Route.’ All concession stands shall have a
minimum of a 36-inch aisle for emergency escape.
         (i)   Section 320.9 ‘Propane.’ All equipment used in conjunction with
propane tanks must be UL-listed for the purposes in which they will be used.
Tanks shall be secured to prevent falling. Tanks shall only be white or
aluminum in color. Only one spare tank will be allowed in a food booth. Emptied
propane tanks are to be removed from the site immediately after use. Regulators
shall be attached to the tanks as close as possible. Leaks can be detected
using a soap and water solution. Tank shutoff valves and/or additional shutoff
valves shall be accessible and away from the cooking appliance(s). Propane
tanks shall not be within five feet of an ignition source. Propane tanks shall
not be located within 10 feet of a building door or window.
         (j)   Section 320.10 ‘Area.’ A food booth shall consist of an area 10
feet by 10 feet. Extended food booths that exceed 10 feet by 10 feet space and
are used for cooking will be charged additional fees. These fees will be
charged in one hundred square foot increments and any portion thereof.’
      (27)   SECTION 321 - “MOBILE FOOD VENDORS.”  Add new sections to read:
         (a)   “Section 321.1 ‘Permits.’ It shall be unlawful to operate mobile
food unit without a permit as required by Section 105.6.50. Annual mobile food
vendor permits must be displayed in a visible location in or on the mobile food
unit.
         (b)   Section 321.1.2 ‘Location.’ Mobile food units left on site for
more than 24 hours at carnivals, fairs, festivals, or other public events will
be subject to food booth permit requirements, inspections, and fees as set
forth in Section 320 and Section 105.6.49 of this code, in addition to any fees
associated with the annual mobile food vendor permits.
         (c)   Section 321.2 ‘Commercial Kitchen Hoods.’  Mobile food vendors
shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 6, Section 609 Commercial Kitchen
Hoods, Section 904.2.2, and other specific sections of this code.
         (d)   Section 321.3 ‘Fire Extinguishers.’ Fire extinguishers are
required in mobile food units in accordance with Sections 321.3.1 through
321.3.4.
            1.   Section 321.3.1. All mobile food vendors shall have at minimum
one (2A-10BC) portable fire extinguisher mounted in a conspicuous place within
the kitchen area as close to the primary exit point as practical.
            2.   Section 321.3.2. Mobile food vendors with portable generators
shall have a (3A-40BC) portable fire extinguisher in addition to the other fire
extinguishers.
            3.   Section 321.3.3. All portable fire extinguishers shall be
serviced, inspected, and tagged annually by a licensed extinguisher company.
         (e)   Section 321.3.4. In addition to any other required fire
extinguisher, all mobile food vendors who deep fat fry shall have a Class K
portable fire extinguisher for up to four fryers having a maximum cooking
medium capacity of 80 pounds each. For every additional group of four fryers
having a maximum cooking capacity of 80 pounds each, an additional Class K
extinguisher will be required. For individual fryers exceeding six square feet
in surface area, Class K extinguishers will be installed in accordance with
manufacturers’ recommendations.
         (f)   Section 321.4 ‘Use of LPG.’ Liquefied petroleum gas usage shall
comply with Sections 321.4.1 through 321.4.5.
            1.   Section 321.4.1. LP gas containers shall be located and
secured on the exterior of the mobile food unit, open to atmosphere or if
containers are kept in compartment, said compartment must be separate from the
interior food preparation area. Access must be from the exterior of the unit
and compartment floor and exterior door must be vented to the atmosphere.
            2.   Section 321.4.2. The fuel containers must have a ¼-turn
shutoff valve located outside the confines of the unit, or which is readily
accessible and marked with a sign consisting of three-inch red letters on a
white background, which states ‘FUEL SHUTOFF’. This valve must be placed where
it can be readily seen and reached without endangering the person(s) attempting
to turn off the fuel source in the event of fire.
            3.   Section 321.4.3. All mobile units with propane shall post a
‘NO SMOKING’ sign next to or directly above the propane bottle and visible to
the public. Such sign shall be posted with a minimum of four-inch red lettering
on white background.
            4.   Section 321.4.4. Any hose used to pipe LP gas to a device
shall be listed by UL, FM, or other approved agency and listed specifically for
LP gas service. All couplings, fittings, and any other devices shall meet the
requirements for LP gas service as outlined in the International Fuel Gas Code,
NFPA 58 and 54, or be deemed unapproved and removed from service.
            5.   Section 321.4.5. LPG tanks located outside the mobile food
unit shall be a minimum of five feet from the primary means of egress.
         (g)   Section 321.5 ‘Baffles and Closures.’
            1.   Section 321.5.1. All deep-fat fryers shall have a steel baffle
between the fryer and surface flames of an adjacent appliance or shall maintain
a 16-inch separation distance. The baffle, if installed, shall be eight inches
in height.
            2.   Section 321.5.2. A positive closing lid shall be required on
the fryer with latching mechanisms that secure it in the open and closed
positions.
         (h)   Section 321.6 ‘Emergency Egress.’ Emergency egress shall comply
with Sections 321.6.1 through Section 321.6.2.2.
            1.   Section 321.6.1. Mobile food units shall have a clear,
unobstructed height over the aisle-way portion of the unit of at least 74
inches from floor to ceiling, and a minimum of 30 inches of unobstructed
horizontal aisle space.
            2.   Section 321.6.2. Should travel distance from any portion of
the interior exceed 15 feet, the mobile food unit shall have a minimum of two
exits located remote from each other and so arranged as to provide a means of
unobstructed travel to the outside of the vehicle.
               a.    Section 321.6.2.1. A secondary means of egress shall be
located remote of the main exit door, with an unobstructed minimum passage of
24" X 24" to the outside. The bottom of this secondary means of egress shall
not be more than four feet above the vehicle floor or a readily accessible
horizontal surface capable of supporting a weight of 300 pounds minimum opening
to the outside.
               b.    Section 321.6.2.2. The latch mechanism of any exit
facility shall be operable by hand, and shall not require the use of a key or
special knowledge for operation from the inside. The secondary exit shall be
labeled with the word ‘EXIT' with two-inch-minimum red letters on contrasting
white background.
         (i)   Section 321.7 ‘Generators.’ Units using electrical power for
cooling or heating must provide a shutoff or means of disconnect located
outside the confines of the unit, which is readily accessible and marked with a
sign consisting of three-inch red letters on a white background, which states
‘ELECTRICAL SHUTOFF’. This shutoff must be placed where it can be readily seen
and reached without endangering the person(s) attempting to shut off the power
source in the event of a fire or short circuit.
            1.   Section 321.7.1 ‘Generators.’ Fuel tanks shall be of adequate
capacity to permit uninterrupted operation during normal operating hours.
Generators shall be isolated from contact with the public. Storage of gasoline
is not allowed in or near generators.
            2.   Section 321.7.2 ‘Refueling.’ Refueling of generators shall be
performed in a location not less than 20 feet from the mobile food unit. Fuel
shall be stored in a UL- or FM-approved flammable liquid safety container in an
approved location. Generators shall be grounded in an approved method.
Generators shall not be refueled while actively vending or in areas occupied by
the public.
         (j)   Section 321.8 ‘External Power Cords.’ External power cords must
be of a type approved for the use for which it is being employed, shall have
sufficient capacity, shall have all connections secured via approved devices
(or electrical boxes) and shall be properly fused. External power cords must
have protective coverings that will protect them from damage by vehicle or foot
traffic.”
      (28)   SECTION 322 - “PORTABLE OUTDOOR GAS-FIRED HEATING APPLIANCES.” Add
section to read:
         “Section 322.1 ‘General Requirements.’
            1.   It shall be unlawful to operate portable outdoor gas-fired
heating appliances without a permit as required by Section 105.6.51.
            2.   Portable outdoor gas-fired heating appliances must comply with
Section 603.4 of this code.
            3.   One 2A-10BC fire extinguisher installed in accordance with
NFPA 10 and Section 906 of this code must be provided for every 3,000 square
feet of area where portable outdoor gas-fired heating appliances are used. The
maximum travel distance to a fire extinguisher is not to exceed 75 feet.”
      (29)   Section 401.9 “False Alarms and Nuisance Alarms.” Add section to
read: “False alarms and nuisance alarms shall not be given, signaled or
transmitted or caused or permitted to be given, signaled or transmitted in any
manner.”
      (30)   Section 403.2.5 “Sitting or Standing in Aisles Prohibited.” Add
new section to read: “The operator of premises used as a place of assembly
shall prevent the sitting or standing in aisles, passageways, or stairways
while the premises are occupied.”
      (31)   Section 403.2.6 “Flame-Retardant Requirements.” Add new sections
to read:
         (a)   “Section 403.2.6.1. Combustible scenery of cloth, film,
vegetation (dry), and similar materials shall meet the requirements of NFPA
701, ‘Standard Methods of Fire Tests for Flame Propagation of Textiles and
Films.’
         (b)   Section 403.2.6.2. Foamed plastics shall be permitted to be used
only by specific approval of the authority having jurisdiction.
         (c)   Section 403.2.6.3. Scenery and stage properties on thrust stages
shall be of noncombustible materials, limited-combustible materials, or fire-
retardant-treated wood.”
      (32)   Section 403.12.3 “Crowd Managers.”  Amend to read: “Where
facilities or events involve a gathering of more than 250 people, crowd
managers shall be provided in accordance with Sections 403.12.3.1 through
403.12.3.2. The minimum number of crowd managers shall be established at a
ratio of one crowd manager to every 250 persons.
         Exceptions:
            1.   Where approved by the Fire Code Official, the ratio of crowd
managers may be reduced by up to fifty percent where the facility is equipped
throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system or based upon the nature
of the event.
            2.   Assembly occupancies used exclusively for religious worship
with an occupant load not exceeding 1,000.”
         (a)   Section 403.12.3.1 ‘Training.’ Training for crowd managers shall
be approved and shall be based upon a valid job task analysis.
         (b)   Section 403.12.3.2 ‘Duties.’ The duties of crowd managers shall
include, but not be limited to:
            1.   Conduct periodic inspections of the area of responsibility to
identify and address any egress barriers.
            2.   Conduct periodic inspections of the area of responsibility to
identify and mitigate any fire hazards.
            3.   Verify and ensure compliance with all permit conditions,
including those governing pyrotechnics and other special effects.
            4.   Direct and assist the event attendees in evacuation during an
emergency.
            5.   Assist emergency response personnel where requested.
            6.   Other duties outlined by the Fire Code Official.
            7.   Other duties outlined in the fire safety or emergency plan.”
      (33)   Section 503.1.1 “Buildings and facilities.” Amend to read:
“Approved fire apparatus access roads shall be provided for every facility,
building or portion of a building hereafter constructed or moved into or within
the jurisdiction. The fire apparatus access road shall comply with the
requirements of this section and shall extend to within 150 feet (45,720 mm) of
all portions of the facility and all portions of the exterior walls of the
first story of the building, as measured by an approved route around the
exterior of the building or facility. Except for one- or two-family dwellings,
the path of measurement shall be along a minimum of a ten feet (10') wide
unobstructed pathway around the external walls of the structure. In sprinkled
Group R-2 apartment houses, the distance may be measured through open
breezeways having a minimum clear width of six feet.”
      (34)   Section 503.2.1 “Dimensions.” Amend and add section to read: “Fire
apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed width of not less than 24
feet (7,315 mm), exclusive of shoulders, except for approved security gates in
accordance with Section 503.6, and an unobstructed vertical clearance of not
less than 14 feet (4,267 mm).
      Exception: Vertical clearance may be reduced with approval of the Fire
Code Official; provided such reduction does not impair access by fire apparatus
and approved signs are installed and maintained indicating the established
vertical clearance when approved.”
      (35)   Section 503.2.1.1 “Mountable Curbs.”  Mountable curbs are
permitted when approved by the Fire Marshal.
      (36)   Section 503.2.2 “Authority.” Amend to read: “The Fire Code
Official shall have the authority to require an increase in the minimum access
widths and vertical clearances where they are inadequate for fire or rescue
operations.”
      (37)   Section 503.2.3 “Surface.” Amend to read: “Fire apparatus access
roads shall be designed and maintained to support the imposed loads of fire
apparatus and shall be surfaced so as to provide all-weather driving
capabilities. Drivable grass surfaces, or other alternative drivable surfaces,
are permitted when approved by the Fire Marshal or his designee and in
accordance with all of the following conditions:
         1.   Sealed documents indicating compliance with the provisions of
Section 503.2.3 shall be submitted by a registered design professional for
review.
         2.   The drivable grass surface, or alternative drivable surface,
shall not be used as the primary access to the site.
         3.   The surface shall be capable of supporting the imposed load of
fire apparatus weighing at least 75,000 pounds.
         4.   Red traffic reflectors shall be provided on each side of the
surface every 20 feet to clearly mark its boundaries. Vegetation on and
surrounding the surface shall be maintained such that said reflectors are
visible at all times.
         5.   Sod is not permitted to be placed over the drivable base.
         6.   Concrete curbing, or other approved edging, shall be installed
along both sides of the portion to be used as such for enhanced lateral
stability.
         7.   If sand or other free-flowing fill is used as a main structural
component for the surface, concrete curbing or other approved edging shall be
installed along both sides of the surface for material containment.
         8.   The surface shall be maintained in proper working order at all
times when utilized as a required fire lane. Should the surface become damaged
or fall into disrepair, the Fire Marshal or his designee shall be authorized to
require the repair and re-certification of said surface.”
      (38)   Section 503.2.5 “Dead Ends.” Amend to read: “Required fire
apparatus access roads, when not connected at both ends to a public roadway,
shall be provided with an approved area for the turning around of fire
apparatus. A turnaround as approved by the Fire Marshal or as permitted by
Appendix D are acceptable. Cul-de-sac as noted in Appendix D shall have a
minimum radius of fifty (50) feet.”
      (39)   Section 503.2.7 “Grade.” Amend to read: “The grade of the fire
apparatus access road shall be within the limits established by the Fire Code
Official based on the Fire Department’s apparatus. The maximum gradient for a
fire apparatus access road shall not exceed 12%.”
      (40)   Section 503.3 “Marking.” Amend to read: “Where required by the
Fire Code Official, striping, signs, or other markings, shall be provided for
fire apparatus access roads to identify such roads or prohibit the obstruction
thereof. The means by which fire lanes are designated, striping, signs and
other markings, shall be maintained in a clean and legible condition at all
times and be replaced or repaired when necessary to provide adequate
visibility.”
      (41)   Section 503.3.1 “Striping.” Amend to read: “Fire apparatus access
roads shall be continuously marked by painted lines of red traffic paint six
inches (6") in width to show the boundaries of the lane. The words ‘NO PARKING
- FIRE LANE’ or ‘FIRE LANE - NO PARKING - TOWAWAY ZONE’ shall appear in four
inch (4") white letters at intervals of not less than twenty-five (25) feet nor
more than thirty-five (35) feet along both edges of the fire apparatus access
roads. Where a curb is available, the striping shall be on the vertical face of
the curb.”
      (42)   Section 503.3.2 “Signs.” Amend to read: “Where required, the Fire
Marshal shall give notice, directing the owner to cause signs to be posted at
the expense of the owner at designated locations. Signs shall read ‘NO PARKING
FIRE LANE’ or ‘FIRE LANE NO PARKING’ and shall be 12" wide and 18" high. Signs
shall be painted on a white background with letters and borders in red, using
not less than 2" lettering. Signs shall be permanently affixed to a stationary
post and the bottom of the sign shall be six feet, six inches (6'6") above
finished grade. Signs shall be spaced not more than fifty feet (50') apart
along both sides of the fire lane. Signs may be installed on permanent
buildings or walls or as approved by the Fire Code Official.”
      (43)   Section 503.4 “Obstruction of Fire Apparatus Access Roads.” Amend
to read: “Fire apparatus access roads shall not be obstructed in any manner,
including the parking of vehicles. The minimum widths and clearances
established in Section 503.2.1 and any area marked as a fire lane as described
in Section 503.3 shall be maintained at all times.”
      (44)   Section 503.6 “Security Gates.” Amend to read: “The installation
of security gates across a fire apparatus access road shall be approved by the
Fire Chief. Where security gates are installed, they shall have an approved
means of emergency operation to include a Fire Department-specific key switch,
lock, or box. Upon loss of power to electric gate operators, a secondary power
source or clearly marked and identified manual release shall be provided. The
security gates and the emergency operation shall be maintained operational at
all times. Electric gate operators, where provided, shall be listed in
accordance with UL 325. Gates intended for automatic operation shall be
designed, constructed and installed to comply with the requirements of ASTM F
2200.”
      (45)   Section 503.6.1 “Direction of Swing.”  Add new section to read:
“Security gates installed across a fire apparatus access road shall swing in
the direction of travel towards the building or open horizontally to avoid
backing up of fire apparatus and to allow for an expedited response.”
      (46)   Section 503.7 “Abandonment of Fire Apparatus Access Roads.” Add a
new section to read as follows: “No owner or person in charge of any premises
served by a required fire apparatus access road shall abandon or close any such
fire apparatus access road without first complying with the following
procedure:
         1.   A request to the Fire Code Official shall be made in writing by
the owner, stating the reasons for abandonment of the fire apparatus access
road.
         2.   The Fire Code Official shall determine if said property is no
longer subject to the requirements of this code. The Fire Code Official shall
either approve or deny the request for abandonment, and notify the owner in
writing within 10 working days of receiving the request.
         3.   No fire apparatus access road may be abandoned until the Fire
Code Official has approved the abandonment in writing.”
      (47)   Section 505.1 “Address Identification.”  Amend to read: “New and
existing buildings shall have approved address numbers, building numbers or
approved building identification placed in a position that is plainly legible
and visible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall
contrast with their background. Where required by the Fire Code Official,
address numbers shall be provided in additional approved locations to
facilitate emergency response. Address numbers shall be Arabic numbers or
alphabetical letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of 6 inches (152.4 mm) high
with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch (12.7 mm). Where access is by means of
a private road, buildings do not immediately front a street, and/or the
building cannot be viewed from the public way, a monument, pole or other sign
with approved 6-inch (152.4-mm) height building numerals or addresses and 4-
inch (101.6-mm) height suite/apartment numerals of a color contrasting with the
background of the building or other approved means shall be used to identify
the structure. Address numbers shall be maintained.
      Exception: R-3, R-4 and one- and two-family occupancies, as regulated by
the IRC, shall have approved numerals of a minimum 4 inches (101.6 mm) in
height and a color contrasting with the background clearly visible and legible
from the street fronting the property and rear alleyway where such alleyway
exists.”
      (48)   Section 505.3 “Multi-Building Complexes.” Add section to read:
"Office, industrial and apartment complexes shall be identified by name and
number on a display board at the main entry roadway.”
      (49)   Section 505.3.1 “Multi-Address Complexes.” Add section to read:
“Office and industrial complexes with multiple addresses contained within shall
post all addresses so that they are visible from roadway.”
      (50)   Section 505.4 “Mall Lease Spaces.” Add section to read: “Each mall
lease space shall be identified by a uniform size number at a uniform, easily
visible location in proximity to exterior and mall entrance doors.”
      (51)   Section 505.5 “Tenant Identification.”  Add section to read:.
“Each occupied tenant space provided with a secondary exit to the exterior or
exit corridor shall be provided with tenant identification by business address.
Letters and numbers shall be posted on the corridor side of the door, be
plainly legible and shall contrast with their background. Numbers shall be a
minimum of 4 inches (101.6 mm) high or greater with a minimum stroke width of
0.5 inch (12.7 mm).”
      (52)   Section 507.3 “Fire Flow.” Amend to read: “Fire flow requirements
for buildings or portions of buildings and facilities shall be as per Appendix
B of the International Fire Code or approved method as determined by the Fire
Marshal.”
      (53)   Section 507.4 “Water Supply Test.”  Amend to read: “The water
supply test used for hydraulic calculation of fire protection systems shall be
conducted in accordance with NFPA 291, ‘Recommended Practice for Fire Flow
Testing and Marking of Hydrants’, and within one year of sprinkler plan
submittal. The Fire Code Official shall be notified prior to the water supply
test. Water supply tests shall be witnessed by the Fire Code Official, as
required. The exact location of the static/residual hydrant and the flow
hydrant shall be indicated on the design drawings. All fire protection plan
submittals shall be accompanied by a hard copy of the water flow test report,
or as approved by the Fire Code Official.”
      (54)   Section 507.5 “Fire Hydrant Systems.”  Amend to read: “Fire
hydrant systems shall comply with Sections 507.5.1 through 507.5.10.”
      (55)   Section 507.5.1 “Where Required.”  Amend to read: “Public and/or
private fire hydrants and mains are required to be installed as follows:
         1.   All non-residentially zoned property or use: As the property is
developed, fire hydrants shall be located at a maximum spacing of three hundred
(300) feet, as measured along the length of the roadway or as determined by the
Fire Code Official. No part of the structure shall be further than five hundred
(500) feet from the fire hydrant, as measured by the route that a fire hose
would be laid.
         2.   All residentially zoned property or use, except one- and two-
family dwellings: As the property is developed, fire hydrants shall be located
at a maximum spacing of six hundred (600) feet, as measured along the length of
the roadway or as determined by the Fire Code Official. No part of the
structure shall be further than five hundred (500) feet from the fire hydrant,
as measured by the route that a fire hose would be laid.”
      (56)   Section 507.5.1.1 “Hydrants for Standpipe and Sprinkler Systems.”
Amend to read: “Buildings equipped with a standpipe system or sprinkler system
installed in accordance with Sections 903 and 905 shall have a fire hydrant
within 100 feet (30,480 mm) of the Fire Department connections, unless a
greater distance is approved by the Fire Code Official.”
      (57)   Section 507.5.1.2 “Accessibility.” Add section to read: “No fire
flow credit is allowed for hydrants which are located or so obstructed as to
make their use impractical, such as, but not limited to, hydrants across
railroad tracks, across limited access highways, expressways, primary
thoroughfares, minor or principal arterials, across creeks or streams, or
walls.”
      (58)   Section 507.5.4 “Obstruction.” Amend to read: “Unobstructed access
to fire hydrants shall be maintained at all times. Posts, fences, vehicles,
growth, trash, storage and other materials or objects shall not be placed or
kept near fire hydrants, Fire Department inlet connections or fire protection
system control valves in a manner that would prevent such equipment or fire
hydrants from being immediately discernible. The Fire Department shall not be
deterred or hindered from gaining immediate access to fire protection equipment
or fire hydrants.”
      (59)   Section 507.5.7 “Design Criteria for Water Mains.” Add sections to
read: “The minimum diameter for public water mains shall be six inches in
single-family residential areas and eight inches in all other areas. Larger
mains may be required to accommodate fire flow requirements.
         (a)   Section 507.5.7.1. All fire hydrants must be capable of and
maintain a minimum flow rate, as measured by Fire Department gauges, of: 1,000
gpm in single-family residential areas; 1,250 gpm in commercially zoned areas;
and 1,500 gpm in all other areas.
         (b)   Section 507.5.7.2. Where the fire service mains are used to
supply required fire hydrants, the mains shall be sized to flow the required
fire flow as determined by Section 507.3.
         (c)   Section 507.5.7.3. Where the fire service mains are used to
supply required fire hydrants plus fire sprinkler and/or fire standpipe
systems, the mains shall be sized to flow the larger of the fire hydrant flow
demand as determined by Section 507.3, the fire sprinkler demand as determined
by Section 903.3, or the fire standpipe demand as determined by Section 905.2.
         (d)   Section 507.5.7.4. When sizing the fire service main, the
distribution of the fire flow among the required fire hydrants (as determined
by Section 507.5.7.2 or Section 507.5.7.3 above) shall be no less than 1,000
gpm at the hydrautically remote fire hydrant, with the remaining fire flow
equally distributed among the remaining required fire hydrants, unless
otherwise determined by the Fire Marshal.
         (e)   Section 507.5.7.5. Private fire mains shall be hydraulically
calculated.
         (f)   Section 507.5.7.6. Water pressure in private fire mains shall
not he less than thirty-five pounds per square inch (35 psi) with no hydrants
in use. When hydrants are in use supplying the required fire flow, water
pressure in the main at the fire hydrant discharge level shall be not less than
twenty-five pounds per square inch (25 psi) residual.
         (g)   Section 507.5.7.7. The minimum required number of fire hydrants
for the fire flow determined by Section 507.3 shall be specified in Appendix C,
Table C 105.1.
         (h)   Section 507.5.7.8. Except for specific requirements of this
code, all hydrants and mains required for private protection shall be designed,
constructed, and operated in conformance with the City of Harker Heights
criteria, specifications and regulations for public fire hydrants and mains on
public streets and NFPA 24.
         (i)   Section 507.5.7.9. Fire hydrants located on un-looped six-inch
(6") water mains of more than eighteen hundred feet (1,800'), or on looped six-
inch (6") water mains of more than three thousand five hundred feet (3,500'),
shall not be considered as meeting the requirements of this code.”
      (60)   Section 507.5.8 “Fire Hydrant Installation Criteria.” Add section
to read: “Fire hydrants shall be installed per the following criteria:
         1.   All required fire hydrants shall be Mueller Super Centurion or
American-Darling three-way, break-away-type, painted reflective yellow, no less
than five and one-quarter inches (5¼") in size, and shall conform to the
provisions of the latest AWWA specifications.
         2.   Fire hydrants shall be right turn only.
         3.   The steamer (pumper) connection shall have a nominal inside
diameter of 4 inches and shall have two other hose connections with a nominal
inside diameter of 2.5 inches in addition to the steamer (pumper) connection.
         4.   Fire hydrants shall be a minimum of two feet (2') and a maximum
of six feet (6') from the gutter face of the curb which forms a public way or
fire lane. Fire hydrants located on private property and/or in parking lots
adjacent to a fire lane or public way shall meet the same requirement for
distance and be located on a curbed island and/or protected from damage in
accordance with Section 312.
         5.   Gate valves shall be placed on all fire hydrant leads.
         6.   Required fire hydrants shall be installed so the break-away point
will be no less than three inches (3") and no greater than five inches (5")
from finished grade.
         7.   All required fire hydrants shall be installed with the steamer
connection facing the fire apparatus access road, street or fire lane, as
applicable.
         8.   All required fire hydrants shall be approved by the Fire Code
Official and installed by the contractor in accordance with city standards
prior to the delivery of combustible materials to the construction site.
         9.   There shall be no parking within fifteen feet (15') of either
side of a fire hydrant, along the curb line or within three feet (3') of the
backside of any fire hydrant. Fire hydrants shall not be blocked to the front.”
      (61)   Section 507.5.9 “Maintenance.” Add sections to read: “All fire
hydrants shall be inspected and flushed annually. All such inspections and
flushing shall be the responsibility of the Harker Heights Fire Department.
Fire hydrants shall be painted in accordance with NFPA 291, ‘Recommended
Practice for Fire Flow Testing and Marking of Hydrants’.
         (a)   Section 507.5.9.1. Any maintenance or repairs required to keep
private on-site fire hydrants in proper working order shall be the
responsibility of the owner of same, subject to the discretion of the Fire
Department; annual inspection and flushing, however, shall be the
responsibility of the Fire Department.
         (b)   Section 507.5.9.2. All required private on-site fire hydrants
shall be accessible to the Fire Department at all times.”
      (62)   Section 507.5.10 “Required Extension.”  Add section to read: “The
Fire Code Official may require that an individual extend a six-inch (6") or
larger water main and install an on-premises fire hydrant conforming to these
regulations, in cases where it is determined that a structure will be situated
such that it cannot comply with the maximum distance requirements of Section
507.5.7 of this code.”
      (63)   Section 509.1.2 “Sign Requirements.”  Add section to read: “Unless
more stringent requirements apply, lettering for signs required by this section
shall have a minimum height of 2 inches (50.8 mm) when located inside a
building and 4 inches (101.6 mm) when located outside, or as approved by the
Fire Code Official. The letters shall be of a color that contrasts with the
background.”
      (64)   Section 510.1 “Radio Coverage.” Amend to read: “Except as
otherwise provided, no person shall erect, construct, or modify any building or
structure or any part thereof, or cause the same to be done which fails to
support adequate radio coverage for City of Harker Heights public safety
services including, but not limited to, Police, Fire, and Public Works
Departments. A certificate of occupancy may not be issued for any building or
structure which fails to comply with this requirement. The frequency range
which must be supported shall be 800 MHz range or as otherwise established and
required in writing by the City of Harker Heights as being necessary tor public
safely purposes. For the purposes of this code, adequate radio coverage shall
include a minimum signal level of DAQ 3.4 (Delivered Audio Quality #) available
in 95% of the area as agreed to be in the coverage acceptable test plan by the
City of Harker Heights and the radio system manufacturer prior to system
testing. This section shall not require improvement of the existing public
safety communication systems.”
      (65)   Section 510.5.3 “Acceptance Test Procedure.” Amend first paragraph
to read: “Where an emergency responder radio coverage system is required, and
upon completion of installation, the building owner shall have the radio system
tested to verify that two-way coverage on each floor of the building is a
minimum of DAQ 3.4. Testing will be accomplished by a licensed third-party
contractor. The test procedure shall be conducted as follows:”
      (66)   Section 603.3.2.2 “Restricted Use and Connection.” Amend to read:
“Tanks installed in accordance with Section 603.3.2 shall be used only to
supply fuel oil to fuel-burning equipment installed in accordance with Section
603.3.2.4. Connections between tanks and equipment supplied by such tanks shall
be made using closed piping systems.”
      (67)   Section 604.1.2 “Installation.” Amend to read: “Critical
operations power systems (COPS), emergency and standby power systems shall be
installed in accordance with the International Building Code, NFPA 70, NFPA 110
and 111. Existing installations shall be maintained in accordance with the
original approval, except as specified in Chapter 11.”
      (68)   Section 604.2 “Where Required.” Amend to read: “Critical
operations power systems (COPS), emergency and standby power systems shall be
provided where required by Sections 604.2.1 through 604.2.16 or elsewhere
identified in this code or any other referenced code.”
      (69)   Section 604.1.9 “Natural Gas Generators.” Add section to read:
“Natural gas generators shall be allowed to be used as an emergency or standby
power source for emergency life safety equipment only when all of the following
conditions are met:
         1.   The natural gas line supplying the generator must have a separate
shutoff that is not affected by turning off the supply line to the building.
         2.   The shutoff for the natural gas line supplying the generator must
have a sign at the shutoff that reads: ‘EMERGENCY GENERATOR GAS LINE, SHUT DOWN
THIS LINE ONLY FOR EMERGENCIES INVOLVING EMERGENCY GENERATOR.’
         3.   The generator must be a minimum of 10 feet from any building
opening.
         4.   The installation of all natural gas generators shall be required
to meet the provisions of the International Plumbing Code and the National
Electrical Code.”
      (70)   Section 604.1.10 “Diesel Fueled Generator Fuel Tank Venting.” Add
section to read: “Fuel tanks associated with diesel fueled generators shall be
vented in accordance with Section 5704.2.7.3.3.”
      (71)   Section 609.1 “General.” Amend to read: “Commercial kitchen
exhaust hoods shall comply with the requirements of the International
Mechanical Code and NFPA 96.”
      (72)   Section 807.2.1 “Flameproof Testing by Fire Marshal.” Add section
to read: “The Fire Marshal may test decorative materials to determine if they
are adequately flameproof.”
      (73)   Section 807.5.2.2 “Artwork in Corridors.” Amend to read: “Artwork
and teaching materials shall be limited on the walls of corridors to not more
than 20 percent of the wall area. Such materials shall not be continuous from
floor to ceiling or wall to wall. Curtains, draperies, wall hangings and other
decorative material suspended from the walls or ceilings shall meet the flame
propagation performance criteria of NFPA 701 in accordance with Section 807, or
be noncombustible.
      Exception: Corridors protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system
installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 shall be limited to 50 percent
of the wall area.”
      (74)   Section 807.5.2.3 “Artwork in Classrooms.” Amend to read: “Artwork
and teaching materials shall be limited on the walls of classrooms to not more
than 50 percent of the specific wall area to which they are attached. Such
materials shall not be continuous from floor to ceiling or wall to wall.
Curtains, draperies, wall hangings and other decorative material suspended from
the walls or ceilings shall meet the flame propagation performance criteria of
NFPA 701 in accordance with Section 807, or be noncombustible.”
      (75)   Section 901.5 “Installation Acceptance Testing.” Amend to read:
“Fire detection and alarm systems, fire extinguishing systems, fire hydrant
systems, fire standpipe systems, fire pump systems, private fire service mains
and all other fire protection systems and appurtenances thereto shall be
subject to acceptance tests as contained in the installation standards and as
approved by the Fire Code Official. The Fire Code Official shall be notified
before any required acceptance testing. A representative of the Fire Marshal
shall witness all required acceptance tests for all these systems.”
      (76)   Section 903.1.2 “Safety Factor.” Add section to read: “Automatic
sprinkler systems shall be designed with a minimum of 10% or five psi safely
factor (whichever is greater) taken at the base of the riser for the
hydraulically most demanding design area.”
      (77)   Section 903.1.3 “High Volume Low Speed Fans in New and Existing
Buildings.” Add section to read: “The use of high volume low speed (HVLS) or
high volume low velocity (HVLV) fans in fire sprinkled areas of new and
existing buildings shall only be permitted as follows:
         1.   HVLS fans are permitted in rack storage and palletized storage
arrangement up to twenty (20) feet in height in buildings with thirty (30) feet
or less ceiling clearance, when early suppression fast response (ESFR)
sprinklers are used to protect the storage array.
         2.   HVLS fans are permitted in light-hazard and ordinary-hazard
occupancies as defined in NFPA 13, ‘Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler
Systems’.
         3.   HVLS fans are not permitted in sprinkled areas with palletized
storage greater than twelve feet (12') in height protected by control mode
sprinklers.
         4.   In all cases, HVLS fans are required to be designed and installed
to shut down automatically on any fire alarm signal. This includes automatic
shut down upon sprinkler system water flow alarm or any manual or automatic
fire alarm detection device provided in the space.
         5.   In all cases, the clearance between the HVLS fans and the ceiling
sprinklers and the top of storage shall be in compliance with the obstruction
and clearance rules of NFPA 13.
         Exception: When a technical opinion and report is provided in
accordance with Section 104.7.2, the Fire Marshal or his designee shall analyze
the opinion and report and may approve the use of HVLS or HVLV fans in
additional areas when it is determined that the effectiveness of the fire
sprinkler system is not compromised.”
      (78)   Section 903.2.1.3 “Group A-3.” Amend to read: “An automatic
sprinkler system shall be provided for fire areas containing Group A-
3 occupancies and intervening floors of the building where one of the following
conditions exists:
         1.   The fire area exceeds 12,000 square feet (1,115 m2).
         2.   The fire area has an occupant load of 300 or more.
         3.   The fire area is located on a floor other than a level of exit
discharge serving such occupancies.
         4.   Any Group A-3 occupancy that serves alcohol shall comply with the
fire sprinkler requirements for Group A-2 occupancies in Section 903.2.1.2.”
      (79)   Section 903.2.6 “Group I.” Amend to read: “An automatic sprinkler
system shall be provided throughout buildings with a Group I fire area.
      Exceptions:
         1.   An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with
Section 903.3.1.2 shall be permitted in Group I-1 Condition 1 facilities.
         2.   An automatic sprinkler system is not required where Group 1-
4 child day care facilities are at the level of exit discharge and where every
room where care is provided has not fewer than one exterior exit door.
         3.   In buildings where Group 1-4 day care is provided on levels other
than the level of exit discharge, an automatic sprinkler system in accordance
with Section 903.3.1.1 shall be installed on the entire floor where care is
provided, all floors between the level of care and the level of exit discharge
and all floors below the level of exit discharge other than areas classified as
an open parking garage.”
      (80)   Section 903.2.8 “Group R.” Amend to read: “An automatic sprinkler
system installed in accordance with Section 903.3 shall be provided throughout
all buildings with a Group R fire area.
      Exceptions:
         1.   One and two family dwellings.
         2.   Foster care family home, as defined in Section 202, General
Definitions.
         3.   Construction of one (1) apartment building containing up to four
units on a single lot constructed with a two (2) hour fire separation (with no
penetrations) from slab to the underside of the roof between dwelling units,
shall not be required to install a fire sprinkler system.”
      (81)   Section 903.2.11.3 “Buildings 35 Feet or More in Height.” Amend to
read: “An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout buildings in
excess of two stories and or with a floor level 35 feet (10,668 mm) or more
above the lowest level of Fire Department vehicle access.
      Exceptions:
         1.   Open parking structures in compliance with the International
Building Code.
         2.   Occupancies in Group F-2.
         3.   One and two family dwellings.”
      (82)   Section 903.3.1.2.3 “Elevator Machine Room.” Add section to read:
“In all R occupancies or occupancies using a 13R system with elevator systems,
the elevator machine room shall be sprinkled as per NFPA 13 standards.”
      (83)   Section 903.7 “Separation from Non-Sprinklered Areas.” Add section
to read: “Unless otherwise exempted by the 2015 International Building Code
(IBC) or 2015 International Fire Code (IFC) or required to be of a higher fire-
resistive construction by the IBC or IFC, a minimum of one-hour fire barrier
constructed in accordance with the 2015 International Building Code shall be
between sprinklered and non-sprinklered areas within a building.”
      (84)   Section 904.13 “Domestic Cooking Systems in Group I-2 Condition
1.” Amend to read: “In new and existing occupancies where domestic cooking
facilities are installed, the domestic cooking hood provided over the cooktop
or range shall be equipped with an automatic fire-extinguishing system of a
type recognized for protection of domestic cooking equipment. Preengineered
automatic extinguishing systems shall be tested in accordance with UL 300A and
listed and labeled for the intended application. The system shall be installed
in accordance with this code, its listing and the manufacturer’s instructions.
      Exceptions:
         1.   One and two family dwellings.
         2.   Foster care family home, as defined in Section 202, General
Definitions.
         3.   Duplexes and fourplexes.
         4.   Occupancies constructed in accordance with the International
Residential Code and provided with an approved automatic sprinkler system.”
      (85)   Section 907.2.1.3 “Conflicting Sounds and Visual Distractions.”
Add section to read: “Activation of fire alarm notification system shall stop
any conflicting or confusing sounds and visual distractions and cause
illumination of the means of egress with light of not less than 1 footcandle
(11 lux) at the walking surface level.”
      (86)   Section 907.2.7.1 “Occupant Notification.” Delete this section.
      (87)   Section 907.5.1 “Presignal Features and Positive Alarm Sequences.”
Amend to read: “A presignal feature or positive alarm sequence, as defined in
NFPA 72, shall not be installed unless approved by the Fire Code Official and
the Fire Department. Request to use a presignal feature or a positive alarm
sequence must be submitted in writing to the Fire Marshal and approval granted
before installation. Where a presignal feature or positive alarm sequence is
provided, a signal shall be annunciated at a constantly attended location
approved by the Fire Department, so that occupant notification can be activated
in the event of fire or other emergency. When approved by the Fire Code
Official, the presignal feature or positive alarm sequence shall be implemented
in accordance with the requirements of NFPA 72.”
      (88)   Section 907.5.2.3 “Visible Alarms.” Amend to read: “Visible alarm
notification appliances shall be provided in accordance with Sections
907.5.2.3.1 through 907.5.2.3.3.
      Exceptions:
         1.   Visible alarm notification appliances shall not be required in
exits as defined in Chapter 2.
         2.   Visible alarm notification appliances shall not be required in
elevator cars.
         3.   Visual alarm notification appliances are not required in critical
care areas of Group 1-2 Condition 2 occupancies that are in compliance with
Section 907.2.6, Exception 2.”
      (89)   Section 912.2.1 “Remote FDC.” Amend to read: “Sprinkler system and
standpipe Fire Department hose connections shall be remote and freestanding
from the building, located outside of the collapse zone of the building.”
      (90)   Section 912.2.1.1 “General Design Considerations.” Add section to
read: “General design considerations are as follows:
         1.   Within forty (40) feet of a public street, approved fire lane, or
access roadway.
         2.   Within 100 feet of an approved fire hydrant measured per hose lay
criteria in Section 507.5.1.1, except for R-2 apartments in which the Fire
Department connection shall be within 500 feet of an approved fire hydrant.
         3.   Inlets shall be a minimum of two feet above finished grade and a
maximum of four feet above finished grade.
         4.   Remote FDCs must be physically protected against impact per the
requirements of Section 312 or other approved means. The Fire Code Official
shall approve the location of remote Fire Department connections.
         5.   One (1) 2.5 inch inlet is required for all systems designed per
NFPA 13R. If the system demand of a NFPA 13R system is greater than 250 GPM,
two (2) 2.5 inch inlets are required to be installed. No FDC is required for
projects designed per NFPA 13D.”
      (91)   Section 912.2.2 “Visible Location.” Amend to read: “Fire
Department connections shall be located on the street side of buildings, fully
visible and recognizable from the street or nearest point of Fire Department
vehicle access or as otherwise approved by the Fire Chief.”
      (92)   Section 912.2.3 “Existing Buildings.” Add section to read: “On
existing buildings, wherever the Fire Department connection is not visible to
approaching fire apparatus, the Fire Department connection shall be indicated
by an approved sign mounted on the street front or on the side of the building.
Such sign shall have the letters ‘FDC’ not less than 6 inches (152 mm) high and
words in letters not less than 2 inches (51mm) high or an arrow to indicate the
location. Such signs shall be subject to the approval of the Fire Code
Official.”
      (93)   Section 1004.1.2 “Areas Without Fixed Seating.” Amend to read:
“The number of occupants shall be computed at the rate of one occupant per unit
of area as prescribed in Table 1004.1.2. For areas without fixed seating, the
occupant load shall not be less than that number determined by dividing the
floor area under consideration by the occupant load factor assigned to the
function of the space as set forth in Table 1004.1.2. Where an intended
function is not listed in Table 1004.1.2, the Fire Code Official shall
establish a function based on a listed use that most nearly resembles the
intended function. When the calculated number is not a whole number, it is
required to round up to the next whole number for determination of the occupant
load of a space.
      Exception: Where approved by the Fire Code Official, the actual number of
occupants for whom each occupied space, floor or building is designed, although
less than those determined by calculation, shall be permitted to be used in the
determination of the design occupant load.”
      (94)   SECTION 1009 “ACCESSIBLE MEANS OF EGRESS.” Amend to read: “All
buildings or portions of buildings must comply with the accessibility standards
adopted by the state. Projects shall be submitted to the Texas Department of
Licensing and Regulation for review, inspection and approval in accordance with
state law.”
      (95)   Section 1103.1 “Required Construction.” Amend to read: “Existing
buildings shall comply with not less than the minimum provisions specified in
Table 1103.1 and as further enumerated in Sections 1103.2 through 1103.11.”
      (96)   Section 1103.11 “Spray Booths and Rooms.” Add section to read:
“Existing spray booths and spray rooms shall be constructed and protected by
an. approved automatic fire-extinguishing system in accordance with Section
2404.”
      (97)   Section 2304.5 “Above Ground Tanks.” Add section to read: “The
dispensing of motor vehicle fuels from above ground fuel storage tanks shall
not be permitted without written authorization from the Fire Code Official.”
      (98)   Section 2401.2 “Nonapplicability.”  Delete this section.
      (99)   Section 3310.1 “Required Access.”  Amend to read: “Approved
vehicle access for firefighting shall be provided to all construction or
demolition sites. Vehicle access shall be provided to within 100 feet (30,480
mm) of temporary or permanent Fire Department connections. Vehicle access shall
be provided by either temporary or permanent roads, capable of supporting
vehicle loading under all-weather conditions. Vehicle access shall be
maintained until permanent fire apparatus access roads are available, Temporary
street signs shall be installed at each street intersection when construction
of new roadways allows passage by vehicles in accordance with Section 505.2.”
      (100)   Section 5601.1.3 “Fireworks.”  Amend to read: “It shall be
unlawful for any person to have, keep, store, sell, offer for sale, give away,
use, ignite, explode, discharge or manufacture fireworks or pyrotechnics of all
kinds in any quantity, within the corporate limits of the city. It shall be
unlawful for any person to use, ignite, explode, discharge or manufacture
fireworks or pyrotechnics of all kinds in any quantity, within the corporate
limits of the city, or within any area adjacent to and contiguous with the city
limits and extending 5,000 feet therefrom.
      Exceptions:
         1.   Storage and handling of fireworks as allowed in Sections 5604 and
5608 only when approved for fireworks displays.
         2.   The use of fireworks displays as allowed in Section 5608.’
      (101)   Section 5601.1.3.3 “Citation to Be Issued for Violation of
Fireworks Ordinance.” Add section to read: “A citation or notice to appear in
answer to a charge of illegal possession or use of fireworks in violation of
this section or of Section 130.41 of the Code of Harker Heights, may be issued
by any peace officer, arson investigator or fire inspector.”
      (102)   Section 5609.1 “General.” Delete this section.
      (103)   Section 5704.2.9.6.1 “Location Where Above Ground Tanks Are
Prohibited.” Amend to read: “Storage of Class I and II liquids in above ground
tanks outside of buildings is prohibited within the city limits of Harker
Heights without prior written approval from the Fire Marshal.”
      (104)   Section 5706.2.4.4 “Location Where Above Ground Tanks Are
Prohibited.” Amend to read: “Storage of Class I and II liquids in above ground
tanks is prohibited within the city limits of Harker Heights without prior
written approval from the Fire Marshal.”
      (105)   Section 5806.2 “Limitations.”  Amend to read: “Storage of
flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers outside of buildings is
prohibited within city limits of Harker Heights without prior written approval
from the Fire Marshal.”
      (106)   Section 6104.2 “Maximum Capacity Within Established Limits.”
Amend to read: “Within the limits established by law restricting the storage of
liquefied petroleum gas for the protection of heavily populated or congested
areas, the storage of liquefied petroleum gas is prohibited within the city
limits of Harker Heights without prior written approval from the Fire Marshal.
         Exceptions:
            1.   In particular installations, this capacity limit shall be
determined by the Fire Code Official, after consideration of special features
such as topographical conditions, nature of occupancy, and proximity to
buildings, capacity of proposed LP-gas containers, degree of fire protection to
be provided and capabilities of the local Fire Department.
            2.    Liquefied petroleum gas for single family dwelling use stored
in tanks holding 120 gallons or less.”
      (107)   CHAPTER 80 “REFERENCED STANDARDS.” Amend by adding the following
referenced standard:
         (a)   NFPA 96, “Standard Ventilation Control and Fire Protection of
Commercial Cooking Operations”.
         (b)   Appendices A, J, K, L and M are not adopted.
         (c)   Appendices B, C, D, E, F, G, H and I are hereby adopted.
      (108)   APPENDIX B “FIRE-FLOW REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDINGS.” Sections B105
(Fire-Flow Requirements for Buildings), B105.1, B105.2, Table B105.1(1), Table
B105.2, and Section B105.3 are hereby repealed in their entirety and replaced
with the following.
         (a)   Section B105.1 “One- and Two-Family Dwellings.” The minimum
fire-flow and flow duration requirements for one- and two-family dwellings
having a fire-flow calculation area that does not exceed 3,600 square feet
(344.5 m2) shall be 1,000 gallons per minute (3,785.4 L/min) for 1 hour. Fire-
flow and flow duration for dwellings having a fire-flow calculation area in
excess of 3,600 square feet (344.5 m2) shall not be less than that specified in
Table B105.1(2).
         Exception: A reduction in required fire-flow of 50 percent, as
approved is allowed when the building is equipped with an approved automatic
sprinkler system.
         (b)   Section B105.2 “Buildings Other than One- and Two-Family
Dwellings.” The minimum fire-flow and flow duration for buildings other than
one- and two-family dwellings shall be as specified in Table B105.1(2).
         Exceptions:
            1.   Buildings equipped throughout with an approved automatic
sprinkler system in accordance with Sections 903.3.1.1, 903.3.1.2, or 903.3.1.3
shall qualify for a reduction in the required fire flow according to Table
B105.2 below.
            2.   Non-fire sprinklered, non-combustible open parking garages
meeting the requirements of Section 406.3 shall have a maximum required fire
flow of 2,200 gpm.
         (c)   Table B105.2.
REQUIRED FIRE-FLOW FOR BUILDINGS OTHER THAN ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLINGS
 
Automatic Sprinkler System Minimum Fire-Flow         Flow Duration
                           (gallons per minute)1 2   (hours)1 2
(Design Standard)
No automatic sprinkler     Value in Table B105.1(2)  Duration in Table B105.1
system                                               (2)
Section 903.3.1.1 of the   25% of the value in Table Duration in Table B105.1
International Fire Code    B105.1(2)3                (2) at the reduced flow
                                                     rate
Section 903.3.1.2 of the   25% of the value in Table Duration in Table B105.1
International Fire Code    B105.1(2)4                (2) at the reduced flow
                                                     rate
 
   Footnotes:
   1. As determined by Fire Marshal on a case-by-case basis.
   2. Mixed-use occupancies shall be evaluated for the most restrictive
occupancy present in the building.
   3. The reduced fire-flow shall be not less than 1,000 gallons per minute.
   4. The reduced fire-flow shall be not less than 1,500 gallons per minute.
         (d)   Section B105.3 “Water Supply for Buildings Equipped with an
Automatic Sprinkler System.” Approved sprinkler demand (ASD) is the sprinkler
demand as defined in NFPA or other nationally recognized standards and includes
the hose stream demand. When multiple sprinkler systems are in one building,
the approved sprinkler demand shall be the greatest sprinkler demand (including
hose stream demand). Mixed-use occupancies shall be evaluated for the most
restrictive occupancy present in the building.
      (109)   APPENDIX C. Section C103.1, Section C103.3, and Table C105.2 are
amended as follows:
         (a)   Section C103.1 “Hydrant Spacing.” Fire apparatus access roads
and public streets providing required access to buildings in accordance with
Section 503 of the International Fire Code shall be provided with one or more
fire hydrants, as determined by Section C102.1. Where more than one fire
hydrant is required, the distance between required fire hydrants shall be
determined by the fire code official based on fire flow requirements and
responding personnel / apparatus needs.
         (b)   Section C103.3 “Maximum Spacing.” The maximum spacing between
fire hydrants shall be in accordance with Table C102.1.
         (c)   Table C102.1.
   REQUIRED NUMBER AND SPACING OF FIRE HYDRANTS
 
Fire-Flow Requirement (gpm) Minimum Number of Hydrants
1,750 or less 1
2,000-2,250   2
2,500         3
3,000         3
3,500-4,000   4
4,500-5,000   5
5,500         6
6,000         6
6,500-7,000   7
7,500 or more 8 or more e
 
            For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 gallon per minute = 3.785 L/m
      (110)   APPENDIX D “FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS ROADS.” Amend Section D103.4,
accompanying table, and Section D103.7 to read:
         (a)   Section D103.4 “Dead Ends.” Dead-end fire apparatus access roads
in excess of 150 feet (45,720 mm) shall be provided with width and turnaround
provisions in accordance with Table D103.4 and Section 503.2.5.
         (b)   Table D103.4.
   REQUIREMENTS FOR DEAD-END FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS
 
Length   Width  Turnarounds
(feet)    (feet) Required
0-150     24     120-foot Hammerhead, 60-foot “Y” or 100-foot diameter cul-de-sac in
                 accordance with figure D103.1
151-500   24     120-foot Hammerhead, 60-foot “Y” or 100-foot diameter cul-de-sac in
                 accordance with figure D103.1
501 -750  26     120-foot Hammerhead, 60-foot “Y” or 100-foot diameter cul-de-sac in
                 accordance with figure D103.1
750       Special approval required
 
            For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm
         (c)   Figure D103.1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c1571a65b7b02c10eb93f44129eee9cd116e360b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6939.png]
 
         (d)    Section D103.7 “Marking s.” Add the followin g:
            “1.   All required fire apparatus access roads shall be
conspicuously marked, and shall have markings that shall read ‘NO PARKING -
FIRE LANE’ or ‘FIRE LANE - NO PARKING - TOW AWAY ZONE’, and all required on-
premi ses fire hydrants shall be marked ‘FIRE HYDRANT - DO NOT BLOCK - TOW AWAY
ZONE’ or ‘NO PARKING - FIRE LANE’.
            2.   All required markings shall consist of four inch (4") white
letters on a minimum six inch (6") red background.
            3. Required markings shall be spaced at intervals of not less than
twenty-five (25) feet nor more than thirty-five (35) feet along both edges of
the fire apparatus access roads.
            4.   Required fire hydrant markings shall be placed on both sides
of the hydrant along the curb line or fire apparatus access roads, as
applicable, for a distance no less than fifteen feet (15').
            5.   It shall be the responsibility of the owners of all required
fire apparatus access roads, signs and/or markings to maintain same in good
condition and legible at all times.”
   (K)   The National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition (NFPA 70), as promulgated
by the National Fire Protection Association, except for the following, which
shall amend and change said code only to the extent referenced:
      (1)   Article 230.70(A)(1) “Readily Accessible Location." Amend to read:
“The disconnecting means shall be installed at a readily accessible location
outside of the building or structure served, and at the point of entrance of
all conductors to the building. The main service disconnect switch shall not be
located more than five (5) feet above finished grade.”
      (2)   Article 334.12(A) “Uses Not Permitted.” Amend to read:
         “(A) Types NM, NMC, and NMS. Types NM and NMS cables shall not be used
as follows:
            (1)   As open runs in dropped or suspended ceilings in other than
one and two family and multi-family dwellings.
            (2)   As service entrance cable.
            (3)   In any of the following types of occupancies:
               a.    Apartment houses of two stories of occupancies or greater.
               b.    Any commercial building.
               c.    Any industrial building.
               d.    Educational buildings.
               e.    Churches and church accessory structures.
               f.    Public buildings.
            (4)    Embedded in poured cement, concrete, or aggregate."
      (3)   Annexes A, B, C, D, E, F, G, I, and J are adopted.
      (4)   Annex H is not adopted.
(Ord. 99-01, passed 1-12-99; Am. Ord. 2002-14, passed 8-13-02; Am. Ord. 2004-
33, passed 8-24-04; Am. Ord. 2007-06, passed 2-13-07; Am. Ord. 2009-11, passed
4-14-09; Am. Ord. 2010-03, passed 2-9-10; Am. Ord. 2011-07, passed 4-12-11; Am.
Ord. 2012-23, passed 9-25-12; Am. Ord. 2014-29, passed 11-18-14; Am. Ord. 2015-
25, passed 12-8-15; Am. Ord. 2016-03, passed 2-9-16; Am. Ord. 2018-09, passed
2-13-18; Am. Ord. 2019-22, passed 8-13-19)  Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.03  CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   In the event of a conflict between any of the adopted codes, as amended
herein, or between said codes and the Code of Harker Heights, the more
restrictive shall govern.
(Ord. 99-01, passed 1-12-99; Am. Ord. 2002-14, passed 8-13-02; Am. Ord. 2007-
06, passed 2-13-07; Am. Ord. 2010-03, passed 2-9-10)
§ 150.04  INSPECTION NOTICES.
   The city hereby adopts the following inspection notices for use on all
construction projects:  A rectangular adhesive sticker, either red in color for
not approved or green in color for approved, to be placed conspicuously at the
job site and visible from the roadway.  No other inspection authority, whether
public or private, may use any sticker that by means of color or shape
conflicts with or causes confusion regarding the city stickers.
(Ord. 2002-14, passed 8-13-02; Am. Ord. 2007-06, passed 2-13-07) 
Penalty, see § 150.99
§ 150.05  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the terms "Lot," "Parcel," and "Premises"
shall have the meanings defined in §
93.01 unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
(Ord. 2004-27, passed 8-10-04)
FENCES AND SCREENING
§ 150.30  SCOPE.
   (A)   This subchapter shall control the construction, alteration,
replacement, repair, and location of fences and required screenings within the
city limits.
   (B)   This subchapter is hereby declared to be remedial and shall be
construed to secure the beneficial interest and purpose thereof, which are
public health, safety, and general welfare of the of the community.
(Ord. 87-20, passed 5-26-87)
§ 150.31  QUALITY CONTROL.
   Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of
this subchapter except as it relates to the purposes stated within.
(Ord. 87-20, passed 5-26-87)
§ 150.32  MATERIAL.
   (A)   Ranch style fencing typical for maintaining livestock and for predator
control (such as a field fence, hours mesh fence, split rail, and ranch board)
may be used on premises of three acres or more in size. In addition, barbed
wire fencing may be used on premises upon which large farm animals are legally
kept and maintained. Permits are not required for internal cross-sectioning of
such premises for the control of animals, to enforce rotational grazing, or for
the repair of ranch style fencing to the extent that it is a necessary part of
normal maintenance.
   (B)   Except as provided in division (A), fences may be constructed only of
masonry, cedar, redwood, treated lumber, chain link, or decorative iron, and no
other materials are permitted unless approved in writing by the Building
Official. Wooden fence material placed in contact with the earth shall be
treated to protect the material from rot, decay, and termites.
   (C)   (1)   The use of any alternative fence materials must be approved by
the Building Official. Such authorization shall be based on specific proposals
that demonstrate superior craftsmanship, aesthetic harmony with and enhancement
of the streetscape and the neighborhood, structural integrity, durability,
safety, and overall design exceeding the standards under §
150.36.
      (2)   Alternative fence materials exceeding six feet in height must be
approved in writing by the Director of Planning and Development and the
Building Official.
   (D)   All fences must be maintained in good order and repair.
(Ord. 87-20, passed 5-26-87; Am. Ord. 96-39, passed 7-23-96; Am. Ord. 2004-27,
passed 8-10-04; Am. Ord. 2020-08, passed 4-14-20)
§ 150.33  PLACEMENT.
   (A)   Fences shall be built on property lines to avoid conflicts between
property owners. In the event that there is a dispute between property owners
of the location of a property line, it shall be the responsibility of the
property owners to resolve the conflict without intervention by the city.
   (B)   Any fence built in or across utility easements shall remain the
responsibility of the property owner. In the event that the fence is
constructed on an easement and the fence is subsequently damaged or destroyed
through the exercise of the rights of the owner of the easement, the repair or
replacement of the fence shall be the sole responsibility of the property
owner.
   (C)   On premises five acres or larger in size, fences may not be greater
than five feet in height. Otherwise, fences and gates built in the front yard
within the 25-foot building setback, where permitted, shall not exceed four
feet in height and must be constructed of chain link, wrought iron, or other
semitransparent materials as approved by the Building Official.
   (D)   Fences built on a side yard shall be placed on the property line.
      (1)   Fences built on a side yard facing a public street may be placed on
the property line. When the side yard is adjacent to the adjoining property's
front yard, the side yard fences may not exceed four feet in height unless they
are set back to the adjoining properties front yard setback line.
      (2)   Any fence in the rear yard of lots that contain a 25-foot building
setback in the rear portion of the lot shall not exceed four feet in height.
(Ord. 87-20, passed 5-26-87; Am. Ord. 88-07, passed 3-8-88; Am. Ord. 94-07,
passed 6-14-94; Am. Ord. 2004-27, passed 8-10-04; Am. Ord. 2020-08, passed 4-
14-20)  Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.34  FENCE HEIGHT.
   Fences constructed in areas zoned "R" shall not exceed eight feet in height
measured from the finished grade. Fences constructed in all other zoned areas
shall not exceed eight feet in height measured from the finished grade.
(Ord. 87-20, passed 5-26-87; Am. Ord. 2013-11, passed 4-30-13; Am. Ord. 2020-
08, passed 4-14-20)  Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.35  SCREENING.
   Where screening is required, the following are the approved types of
screening:
   (A)   Screening alternate A. Consists of a solid masonry or concrete wall,
eight feet in height measured from the average grade of the nearest property
line of the property adjacent to that on which the screening is required.
   (B)   Screening alternate B. Consists of a chain link fence with redwood
slats, eight feet in height measured from the average grade of the nearest
property line of the property adjacent to that on which the screening is
required.
   (C)   Screening alternate C. Consists of a solid wood fence, eight feet in
height measured from the average grade of the nearest property line of the
property adjacent to that on which screening is required.
(Ord. 87-20, passed 5-26-87; Am. Ord. 2020-08, passed 4-14-20)  Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.36  STANDARDS FOR SCREENING.
   Where screening is required, the following are the approved types of
screening:
   (A)   Screening alternate A. Consists of a solid masonry or concrete wall,
six feet in height measured from the average grade of the nearest property line
of the property adjacent to that on which the screening is required.
   (B)   Screening alternate B.  Consists of a chain link fence with redwood
slats, six feet in height measured from the average grade of the nearest
property line of the property adjacent to that on which the screening is
required.
   (C)   Screening alternate C.  Consists of a solid wood fence, six feet in
height measured from the average grade of the nearest property line of the
property adjacent to that on which screening is required.
(Ord. 87-20, passed 5-26-87)
Penalty, see § 150.99
§ 150.37  MAINTENANCE.
   All required screening shall be kept in good repair and maintained in a neat
and orderly manner at all times. The duty of maintenance shall be the
responsibility of the person or persons in charge and control of the property
where screening is required.
(Ord. 87-20, passed 5-26-87)
Penalty, see § 150.99
§ 150.38  ADDITIONAL SCREENING OR FENCING.
   The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend and the City Council may
require screening or fencing requirements in any zoning case, in addition to
these requirements, when the nature and character of surrounding or adjacent
property dictate a need to require such devices, in order to protect such
property and to further provide protection for the general health, welfare, and
morals of the community.
(Ord. 87-20, passed 5-26-87)
§ 150.39  SCREENING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Screening shall be installed and maintained as provided in §§
150.30 through
150.38, with the exception that perimeter fencing around subdivisions, or
between zoning districts, may be increased to eight feet in height.
   (B)   Landscaping, fencing or other material shall be erected to a height
not less than six feet, to provide a visual barrier from adjacent properties
and streets. Such screening shall be permanently and adequately maintained by
the owner of the property on which the screening is required. Except for the
landscape buffer, no screening fence or wall shall have more than 40 square
inches of openings over any one square foot of fence or wall surface.
   (C)   Screening fence may consist of solid wood panel or a galvanized metal
chain link fence with all-weather slats interwoven into the metal fabric. Such
fencing shall be constructed on metal posts and placed in concrete footings
with bracing.
   (D)   Screening fence may be constructed of native stone, brick, precast
concrete panels with decorative finish, or decorative masonry units;
constructed with the finish side out. In no case shall more than 25% of the
area of the wall be erected with common smooth-laced masonry units.
(Ord. 2020-08, passed 4-14-20)
§ 150.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision
of the technical codes adopted under this chapter, or fail to comply therewith,
or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter,
install, demolish or move any structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or
plumbing system, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or
demolished a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing
system, in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and permitted
thereunder, shall be guilty of a Class “C” misdemeanor.  Each such person shall
be considered guilty of separate offense for each and every day or portion
thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of said codes are
committed or continued, and upon conviction of any such violation in the
Municipal Court such person shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000.
(Ord. 64-01, passed 5-12-64; Am. Ord. 99-01, passed 1-12-99)
   (B)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of §§ 150.030
through 150.038, upon conviction thereof in the municipal court, shall be fined
in any sum not exceeding $2,000, and each day such violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 87-20, passed 5-26-87)
CHAPTER 151:  SIGN REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
151.001   Definitions
   
151.002   Permits required
   
151.003   Permits not required
   
151.004   Applications
   
151.005   Licensed personnel required
   
151.006   Granting and revocation of permits
   
151.007   Effect on permits
   
151.008   Corrections; stopping of work
   
151.009   Permit fees
   
151.010   Time limit on permits
   
151.011   Prohibited signs
   
151.012   Posting in public places
   
151.013   Posting on private premises
   
151.014   Prohibited support
   
151.015   Off-premises outdoor advertising signs in certain areas
   
151.016   Special events
   
151.017   Nonconforming signs
Construction Requirements
   
151.040   Standards
   
151.041   Clearance from utilities, exits, or standpipes
   
151.042   Obstruction of openings, doors, windows, or fire escapes
   
151.043   Clearance at street intersections
Sign Restrictions; Residential
   
151.055   Scope
   
151.056   Real estate signs
   
151.057   Address signs for single-family residences
   
151.058   Multi-family complexes
   
151.059   Lighted signs
   
151.060   Signs advertising sale of personal property
   
151.061   Signs inside buildings
   
151.062   Political signs
   
151.063   Garage, estate sale, and lost pet signs
   
151.064   Home occupation signs
   
151.065   Model home signs
   
151.066   Subdivision signs
   
151.067   Institutional signs
   
151.068   Noncommercial logos, emblems, and the like
   
151.069   Signs on vacant land
   
151.070   Construction project signs
   
151.071   Cumulative sign area restrictions
Sign Restrictions; Nonresidential
   
151.080   Scope
   
151.081   On-premises advertising signs; free-standing
   
151.082   On-premises advertising signs; free-standing high rise
   
151.083   On-premises advertising signs; wall signs
   
151.084   On-premises advertising signs; projecting signs
   
151.085   On-premises advertising signs; roof signs
   
151.086   On-premises advertising signs on projecting overhangs and awnings
   
151.087   Real estate signs
   
151.088   Construction signs
   
151.089   Lighted signs
   
151.090   Signs inside buildings
   
151.091   Institutional signs
   
151.092   Signs on vacant land
   
151.093   Political signs
   
151.094   Shopping centers, malls, and multi-commercial buildings
   
151.095   Portable signs
   
151.096   Off-premises outdoor advertising signs
   
151.097   Vision clearance and setback requirements
   
151.098   Compliance with other regulations
   
151.099   Dangerous signs; removal
Relocation; Reconstruction; Removal
   
151.110   Procedure for alteration of signs
   
151.111   Compensation for relocated sign
   
151.112   Compensation for reconstructed sign
   
151.113   Compensation for removal of off-premises signs
   
151.114   Compensation for removal of on-premises signs
   
151.115   Method of compensation
   
151.116   Tax appraisal of property with nonconforming signs
   
151.117   Exceptions
   
151.118   Appeal
   
151.119   Appeals to Board of Adjustments
 
   
151.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.001  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. All other
words contained in this chapter shall have definitions as they appear in the
current edition of Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary.
   ADDRESS SIGN.  A sign denoting the street address number and/or the name of
the owner of the property, which sign is located on the same site as the
building.
   ALTERATIONS.  Any change in copy, content, color, size, shape, position,
location, construction, or supporting structure.
   AREA OF SIGN.  The area included within the outer dimensions of a sign,
including those portions of the frame or support structure which either border
or adjoin the face of the sign, or are of a size, dimension, or configuration
which is intended to attract attention or are in excess of that necessary to
support the sign. In the case of a multiple-faced sign, each face shall be
deemed to be a separate sign for the purposes of determining the area of sign;
each face is entitled to the allowable sign area. If a sign is placed on a wall
or other surface, or if letters or other portions of the sign are supported
individually, without any border, the area shall be computed by enclosing the
entire sign within sets of parallel lines. The portion of the sign represented
by a logo shall be calculated by enclosing the logo in geometrical figures
consisting of right angles only from which the total area may be calculated.
   AWNING.  A projecting overhang of a rigid frame but otherwise composed of
flexible canvas, nylon, or similar material.
   BUILDING.  Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any
use or occupancy.
   BUILDING IDENTIFICATION SIGN.  A sign displaying the name and/or address of
a building, which sign is located on the same site as the building.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL.  The person who is so designated by the Building Code of
the city, or his designated deputy.
   BUSINESS IDENTIFICATION SIGN.  A sign displaying the name of the business to
which it pertains and/or the names or description of the products or services
sold or offered by such business at the site on which the business and sign are
located.
   CHANGEABLE ELECTRONIC VARIABLE MESSAGE SIGN (CEVMS).  A sign which permits
light to be turned on or off periodically or which is operated in a way whereby
light is turned on or off periodically (including any illuminated sign on which
such illumination is not kept stationary or constant in intensity and color at
all times when such sign is in use, LED (light emitting diode) sign or digital
sign) and which varies in intensity or color. A CEVMS sign does not include a
sign located within the right-of-way that functions as a traffic control device
and that is described and identified in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices (MUTCD) approved by the Federal Highway Administrator as the national
standard.
   CONSTRUCTION SIGN.  A temporary sign stating the names of those individuals
or businesses directly connected with a construction project, or with any
maintenance or improvement activity on a property including financial
institutions, general and subcontractors, architectural, and engineering firms,
painting, roofing, and landscaping firms, and all such parties, addresses, and
telephone numbers.
   FACE OF A BUILDING.  The general outer surface, not including cornices,
windows, openings, or architectural projections of any kind.
   FACE, SIGN FACE, OR FACE OF A SIGN.  Any plane or other side of a sign which
is painted or stained or lighted or has lettering or is illustrated, separately
or in combination, to attract attention. In the case of a side other than a
plane, the area thereof shall be computed as including only the minimum single
display surface which is visible from any one position from which persons might
usually view the same.
   FACIA SIGN.  Any sign attached to the facia of a building. It shall include
any sign attached to a “projecting overhang” as defined in this section.
   FREE-STANDING SIGN.  A sign which is supported by one or more uprights,
braces, pedestals, or other solid foundations in or upon the ground. It may be
a multi-face sign and shall also include signs sometimes referred to as post
signs, monument signs, pole signs, or ground signs.
   GARAGE SALE OR ESTATE SALE SIGNS. Signs advertising the sale by the
homeowner of items of personal property and containing only the words “Garage
Sale” or “Estate Sale.”
   GLASS FRONTAGE.  Total area of the front and side of a building: facing or
abutting a public street or courtyard or parking area; utilized by a particular
business; and, consisting of windows, show windows, or other glass covered
space, through which the interior of the building is visible.
   GRADE.  The level of the public sidewalk at the closest distance to the
sign, or ground level at the wall to which a sign may be attached, whichever is
higher.
   ILLUMINATED SIGN OR LIGHTED SIGN.   Terms which may be used interchangeably
and shall refer to any sign which has a source of light, either internal or
external, for the purpose of illuminating such sign.
   INSTITUTIONAL SIGN.  Any on-premises sign relating to schools, churches,
hospitals, universities, or similar institutions.
   LICENSED CONTRACTOR.  An individual, firm, or corporation duly licensed by
the city to perform sign work required by the Standard Building Code.
   LOST PET SIGN.  A sign indicating the loss of a pet giving a description
thereof and the address and phone number of the owner.
   MAINTENANCE AND MINOR REPAIRS.  All routine work associated with a sign that
does not constitute a change in the sign configuration, structure, or size,
such as painting, bulb or ballast replacement, replacement of facings, and the
like.
   MEDICAL EMERGENCY FACILITY DIRECTORY SIGN.  Any sign which advises vehicular
or pedestrian traffic of proper direction solely to emergency facilities of a
hospital or medical clinic.
   MONUMENT SIGN.  A sign which has, as an integral part of its supporting
structure, a message intended to attract attention, and said message may extend
to grade. In differentiating from a ground sign, a MONUMENT SIGN has no free
clearance between the face of the sign and the ground. Any such sign shall be
considered a MONUMENT SIGN.
   OFF-PREMISES SIGN.  Any sign that advertises products, goods, services,
business entities, or other items, entities, or activities that are not located
on the same premises as the sign.
   ON-PREMISES SIGN.  Any sign that advertises products, goods, services,
business entities, or other items,  entities, or activities that are located on
the same premises as the sign.
   POLITICAL SIGN.  A temporary sign indicating the name and/or picture of an
individual seeking election or appointment to a public office, or relating to a
forthcoming public election or referendum, or pertaining to the advocating by
persons, groups, or parties of political views or policies.
   PORTABLE SIGN.  Any sign or other advertising device which is not intended
to be permanently affixed to the ground or any supporting structure. Such signs
include trailer-mounted signs. The Building Official shall have the authority
to determine what signs are portable on a case by case basis.
   PROJECTING SIGN.  A sign which projects from and is supported by a wall of a
building with the display surface of the sign in a plane other than a plane
parallel to the wall.
   PUBLIC ROADWAY.  The entire width between property lines of a road, street,
way, thoroughfare, or bridge if any part of same is open to the public for
vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
   PYLON SIGN.  A free-standing structure which contains two or more separate
business identification signs for entities within a shopping mall, strip
center, or similar project.
   REAL ESTATE SIGN.  (Such as a “for sale” sign, “for lease” sign, “for rent”
sign, and the like.) A sign indicating that the premises on which the sign is
located, or any portion thereof, is for sale, lease, or rent, and containing
any of the following information: a description of the premises offered for
sale, lease, or rent. The sign may include information indicating a pending
contract or the fact that the property is sold, or the fact that the building
is open for public viewing.
   ROOF SIGN.  A sign located upon and above the roof of any building.
   SHINGLE SIGN.  A flat, non-electric, wooden or metal sign not exceeding 32
square feet in area, that is attached flat to the wall of a building.
   SHOPPING CENTER.  Any identifiable area or group of buildings or stores
commonly referred to as SHOPPING CENTERS with one or more businesses having
their principal or main entrance off and adjacent to parking areas or parking
facilities and shall include any area so designated by the Building Official,
or any pedestrian arcade, courtyard, promenade, or mall, whether covered by a
roof or not, within or between any structures or buildings, upon which the
principal or main entrance to one or more retail business therein are located.
   SIGN.
      (1)   Any writing, name, number, figure, character, outline, emblem,
graphic, window etching, stained or painted glass, mark, logo, mural, symbol,
spectacle, display, delineation, announcement, advertising, billboard,
signboard, flag, banner, pennant, bunting, device, appliance, structure erected
for the purposes of supporting a sign, or any other thing of similar nature
designed to attract attention outdoors, in or on any trace or wall, window, or
store front of any building, or on any pole or other form of support or
structure and shall include all parts, portions, units, and materials composing
the same, together with the frame, background, and support or anchorage
thereof.
      (2)   The following shall not be deemed to be included within the
definition of SIGN:
         (a)   Signs of a duly constituted governmental body including, but not
limited to, traffic or similar regulatory devices required by law, and warnings
at railroad crossings.
         (b)   Signs required to be maintained by law or governmental order,
rule, or regulation provided that the total surface area of all such signs on
any one lot or parcel does not then exceed ten square feet or as required by
state law.
         (c)   Signs placed by a public utility for the safety, welfare, or
convenience of the public, such as signs identifying high voltage, public
telephone, or underground cable.
         (d)   Signs upon a vehicle, trailer, boat, or wagon, provided that any
such vehicle, trailer, boat, or wagon with signs thereon is not conspicuously
parked or left standing for advertising purposes so as to constitute a device
or other type of sign pursuant to the definition of a SIGN.
         (e)   Signs not more than two in number and noticing or soliciting the
sale, lease, or hire of a vehicle to which such signs are attached if such
signs are nine inches by 12 inches or less.
         (f)   Signs located inside a building or structure provided the sign
is not so located as to be visible and readable without intentional and
deliberate effort from outside the building or structure.
         (g)   Barber poles of the traditional type and design not exceeding
three feet in height (vertical portion of the pole) and not erected so as to
extend more than 12 inches from the front of the building to which it is
attached.
         (h)   Noncommercial decorations in a residential zone commemorating a
generally recognized seasonal event or occasion.
         (i)   Commemorative/historical markers which have been approved by the
City Council.
         (j)   Stained-glass windows in a residence or in a place of worship,
as long as no commercial connotation is associated with same.
   SITE.  All of that contiguous ground area legally assembled into or as part
of one building or business location, or one residence.
   TEMPORARY SIGN.  That type of sign that is not intended to remain in place
indefinitely, and has a purpose limited in time.
   WALL SIGN.  A sign which is affixed to (or painted on) an exterior wall of
any building or structure with the display surface of the sign in a plane
parallel to the plane of the wall.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92; Am. Ord. 2008-16, passed 5-27-08)
§ 151.002  PERMITS REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful to erect, re-erect, construct, alter, or install any
sign except as provided by this chapter and pursuant to a required permit for
the same  issued  by  the  Building  Official.  Except  as hereinafter
provided, a permit shall be required for each sign. In addition, electrical
permits shall be obtained for lighted or illuminated signs. A permit for
alteration of a sign which involves only a change in copy, content, or color
and which does not involve any change in any part of the structure or lighting
of the sign itself shall not be denied on the basis that the sign is otherwise
nonconforming, if such sign was erected in accordance with applicable city
ordinances in force at the time.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92) 
Penalty, see § 151.999
§ 151.003  PERMITS NOT REQUIRED .
   The following shall be subject to all other requirements of this chapter
even though a permit shall not be required therefor:
   (A)   Maintenance and minor repairs to existing signs for which a valid
permit was obtained if required at the time of the initial installation.
   (B)   Repainting without the alteration of existing signs to which a valid
permit was obtained if required at the time of the initial installation.
   (C)   Signs for public safety and convenience or those required for the
enforcement of private property rights, such as “Entrance,” “Parking,” “No
Trespassing,” or “No Parking” provided not more than one such sign is
maintained on each street, courtyard, or alley frontage on each site area and
provided such signs do not exceed 150 square inches in area in any residential
zone or four square feet in any non-residential zone.
   (D)   Public notice signs, such as notices to remove weeds.
   (E)   Flags as permitted by §
151.016.
   (F)   Political signs.
   (G)   Garage sale or estate sale signs.
   (H)   Lost pet signs.
   (I)   Real estate signs.
   (J)   Address and security protection signs.
   (K)   Temporary signs advertising items for sale, as long as such signs do
not constitute portable or free-standing signs as defined in this chapter and
do not exceed two square feet in area.
   (L)   Construction signs.
   (M)   Changes in copy or content of changeable-type signs and legal
nonconforming portable signs which were not constructed or installed in
violation of any ordinance.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92) 
Penalty, see § 151.999
§ 151.004  APPLICATIONS .
   (A)   Application for sign permits shall be made in writing upon forms
furnished by the Building Official. Such applications shall contain the
location by street and number of the proposed sign structure, as well as the
name and address of the owner and the person or business erecting the sign.
Plans and specifications showing all pertinent sign information shall be
submitted with the permit application. In addition, if the erection of the sign
involves electrical wiring or connection, the Electrical Inspector of the city
shall examine the plans and specifications for compliance with the city's
electrical code, and shall approve or disapprove prior to final approval or
disapproval by the Building Official.
   (B)   The plans and specifications shall include the following:
      (1)   Two copies of a scaled drawing showing the complete, elevation of
the building on which the sign is to be placed; such drawing shall include all
exterior dimensions of the structure. Superimposed on this drawing shall be the
proposed sign drawn to scale showing the dimensions, type, and size of
lettering. The drawing shall be drawn to an appropriate scale, which shall be
indicated on each sheet.
      (2)   Two copies of a scaled and fully dimensioned plot plan drawing of
the property upon which the sign is proposed to be erected shall be submitted.
This drawing shall show all property lines, street lines, driveways, and
traffic patterns into and out of the premises, existing structures, utility
easements, the location of existing signs, and the location of proposed signs.
All set back dimensions shall be indicated also. This shall not be required of
signs that are to be affixed to a building.
      (3)   The drawing for all signs which are to be illuminated shall show
the location of electrical outlets, conduits, and lighting sources. The plan
shall also indicate the intensity of illumination, which shall not exceed the
maximum specified herein, and the Building Official may require certification
thereof by a lighting consultant or an electrical engineer. At the contractor
or owner's option, a separate electrical permit may be applied for by the
electrician per-forming the work. The application must contain the information
specified herein and need not be applied for or issued simultaneously with the
permit for the sign proper; however, no electrical work shall be done until
both permits have been approved and issued.
      (4)   The drawing shall indicate the method of fastening the sign to the
building or other supporting structure.
      (5)   Any other information deemed necessary by the Building Official in
determining whether the proposed sign meets the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92)
§ 151.005  LICENSED PERSONNEL REQUIRED .
   (A)   All signs for which permits are required shall be designed,
fabricated, erected, and/or installed by contractors who are licensed by the
city to engage in the business of designing, fabricating, erecting, and/or
installing signage in the city.
   (B)   Exceptions. 
      (1)   Temporary signs as defined herein.
      (2)   Nonelectric shingle-type signs made of metal or wood not exceeding
32 square feet in area and attached flat to the wall of a building.
      (3)   Signs in residential areas, unless such a sign is intended to serve
a commercial operation that exists in a residential zoning district as a non-
conforming use.
      (4)   Signs that are designed, fabricated, and installed under the
supervision of a licensed sign contractor. Said sign contractor shall then be
responsible for the proper design, fabrication, and installation of said sign.
This provision does not authorize an individual to perform any electrical work
without the required electrician's license.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92) 
Penalty, see § 151.999
§ 151.006  GRANTING AND REVOCATION OF PERMITS .
   The Building Official, before granting a permit for the erection
construction, reconstruction, repair, or alteration of any sign will determine
whether the proposed sign conforms to all applicable laws and regulations,
including, without limitation, those with respect to design, construction,
location and materials. Any such permit may at any time be revoked should any
of the provisions of this chapter be violated.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92)
§ 151.007  EFFECT OF PERMITS .
   The granting of a permit shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an
approval of, any violation of the provisions of any law or regulation of the
city, state or federal government, or of any deed restriction.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92)
§ 151.008  CORRECTIONS; STOPPING OF WORK .
   The granting of a permit shall not prevent the Building Official from
thereafter requiring the correction of errors in the work or from preventing
further work being done thereunder when such work is in violation of the
provisions of any regulation or law of the city.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92)
§ 151.009  PERMIT FEES .
   (A)   A sign permit shall not become valid until the applicant has paid to
the city the appropriate fee according to the permit fee schedule as adopted
annually by the City Council. There shall be no fee for alterations involving
only change in copy, content, or color. Valuation shall mean the total cost of
the sign or the value thereof if cost was not arrived at by transaction between
independent parties.
   (B)   A fee shall not be required for signs for which a permit is not
required or for graphics, murals, etchings, or stained or painted glass that
does not have a name, mark, logo, symbol, or commercial identification attached
or associated therewith.
   (C)   Whenever any sign for which a permit is required has been installed,
replaced, or altered without first having obtained a permit, a special
investigation consisting of inspection of the site, communication with the
owner of the property or business and review of necessary records shall be made
before a permit shall be issued for such work. An investigation fee, in
addition to the permit fee, shall be collected, whether or not a permit is then
or subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be twice the amount of the
permit fee and shall not exceed $250. The payment of such investigation fee
shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this
chapter or from any penalty prescribed by law.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92)
§ 151.010  TIME LIMIT ON PERMITS .
   Time limits on permits shall be as set forth in the Standard Building Code
adopted by § 150.001,
Chapter 150 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92)
§ 151.011  PROHIBITED SIGNS .
   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or otherwise display any sign
that is not specifically authorized and controlled by this chapter. It shall
also be  unlawful for any person  to erect, install, or otherwise display any
sign that does not conform to the specific requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92) 
Penalty, see § 151.999
§ 151.012  POSTING IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any
person to post, suspend, print, stick, stamp, tack, or otherwise affix, or
cause the same to be done, any notice, placard, bill, card, poster, sticker,
banner, sign, advertising, or other device calculated to attract the attention
of the public to, over, or upon any street right-of-way, public sidewalk, curb
(except house numbers), lamp post, hydrant, tree, electrical light pole,
telephone pole, telegraph pole, or upon any fixture of the alarm systems,
telephone systems, or similar or related systems involving governmental or
public service of the city, or upon any public building or utility. This
section is not applicable to public convenience, safety, and regulatory signs
erected by the city.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92) 
Penalty, see § 151.999
§ 151.013  POSTING ON PRIVATE PREMISES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to post, print, stick, stamp, tack, or
otherwise affix, or cause the same to be done, any notice, placard, bill, card,
poster, sticker, banner, sign, advertising, or other device calculated to
attract the attention of the public over or on private land, or to, at, from,
or upon any post, fence, wall, building, structure, or any part of any building
or structure located in or upon any private premises or property within the
city, unless the consent of the owner, agent, or occupant has first been
obtained, and appropriate permits issued where required.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92) 
Penalty, see § 151.999
§ 151.014  PROHIBITED SUPPORT.
   No sign shall be supported in whole or in part from any public utility
installation or any tree.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92) 
Penalty, see § 151.999
§ 151.015  OFF-PREMISES OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGNS IN CERTAIN AREAS.
   (A)   Outdoor off-premises signs are prohibited except as provided in §
151.096.
   (B)   Off-premises changeable electronic variable message signs shall comply
with the following requirements:
      (1)   The interval of change between each individual message shall be at
least ten seconds, not including the time required for one message to
transition to the next. A change of message must be accomplished within two
seconds or less.
      (2)   The sign shall contain a default mechanism that will freeze the
display in a static image if a malfunction occurs.
      (3)   The sign may not display light of such intensity or brilliance to
cause glare, impair the vision of an ordinary driver, or constitute a nuisance.
For purposes of this section, the terms DAYTIME and NIGHTTIME shall have the
meanings set forth in Texas Transportation Code § 541.401, as amended, and
light exceeding the following intensity levels (NITS) constitute a nuisance:
 
Intensity Levels (NITS)
Color           Daytime Nighttime
Red Only        3,150   1,125
Green Only      6,300   2,250
Amber Only      4,690   1,675
Multiple Colors 7,000   2,500
 
      (4)   Prior to the issuance of a sign permit, the applicant shall provide
written certification from the sign manufacturer that the light intensity has
been factory programmed not to exceed 7,000 NITS and that the intensity level
is protected from end-user manipulation by password-protected software, or
other method satisfactory to the Director of Planning and Development.
      (5)   The sign shall not:
         (a)   Resemble a warning or danger signal;
         (b)   Resemble or simulate any lights or official signage used to
control traffic in accordance with the 2003 Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices, with Revision No. 1 published by the Federal Highway Administration
(FHWA); or
         (c)   Cause an ordinary driver to mistake the sign for a warning or
danger signal.
      (6)   The sign face dimensions may not exceed 672 square feet.
      (7)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit light in
violation of §
155.040(D), or any other applicable regulation. In addition, to the extent of
any conflict this section controls over §
151.089 and §
151.096.
      (8)   The sign must be equipped with both a dimmer control and a
photocell, and automatically adjust the display intensity according to natural
ambient light conditions.
      (9)   A nonconforming sign may not be enlarged. However, a nonconforming,
off-premises sign may be replaced with a changeable electronic variable message
sign of equivalent height and size, provided the replacement sign otherwise
meets the requirements of this chapter.
      (10)   The sign may not be in a line of sight with another off-premises
changeable electronic variable message sign, or within 1,500 feet of another
off-premises sign facing the same traveled way.
      (11)   The city may require Amber Alerts, information regarding terrorist
attacks or natural disasters, or emergency information messages to be displayed
on the sign. Upon notification, the sign operator shall display emergency
information messages in appropriate sign rotations, and maintain such messages
in rotation according to the designated issuing agency protocols.
   (C)   No off-premises sign shall be erected or altered to include animation,
such as parts that move, flashing/blinking lights, or smoke issuing from the
sign which may be distracting to motorists. This prohibition does not include
time and temperature and message signs.
   (D)   All off-premises signs must be kept in good repair. If the lot on
which the sign is located is undeveloped, the area between the billboard and
the street or highway to which it is oriented, as well as 25 feet around the
support pole, must be kept free of all sign materials, weeds, debris, trash and
other refuse.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92; Am. Ord. 2008-16, passed 5-27-08; Am. Ord. 2018-
19, passed 8-7-18)  Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.016  SPECIAL EVENTS.
   (A)   Subject to the requirements of this chapter governing permitting,
size, height, placement, setbacks, number, spacing, and the like, signs,
bunting, flags, banners, and other such decorations, which might otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter, will be permitted on a temporary basis for the
following seasonal events, special occasions, and local civic or community
projects:
      (1)   Commercial endeavors. For grand openings only, provided that the
grand opening period shall begin within 30 days from the date a new business is
fully registered with the city and has paid all associated fees, including any
occupation tax due, and provided that such period shall not exceed seven days.
      (2)   Non-profit organizations. For seasonal events benefitting the
general public or bona fide charitable organizations, provided that such
signage, decorations, and the like shall not be placed more than three days
prior to the event and shall be removed within three days after the event, and
the total duration does not exceed seven days. Such events shall not
individually or cumulatively exceed 30 days on any given site in a calendar
year.
      (3)   Seasonal events. For seasonal events conducted on property that
abuts a principal arterial, minor arterial, or collector (as those terms are
defined in the Mobility 2030 Thoroughfare Plan), provided that such signage,
decorations, and the like shall not be placed more than three days prior to the
event and shall be removed within three days after the event. Such events shall
not individually or cumulatively exceed 90 days in any given calendar year, and
must be hosted by a non-profit or a fully registered business that has paid all
associated fees (including any occupation tax due).
         (a)   Only four such signs shall be allowed on any public street
frontage for a premises at any one time.
         (b)   A permit shall be required for the new installation of any such
sign and for the relocation of any such sign on the same premises. Such permit
shall be valid until December 31 of the year in which the permit is issued, and
shall list all posting and removal dates for the sign. Such permits may be
modified at no cost to modify posted dates for the sign, so long as the
cumulative posted dates do not exceed the aforementioned limits for the year.
         (c)   Such signs shall constitute part of the allowable area for
freestanding signs on a premises, but in no case shall any such sign exceed 32
square feet in area or six feet in height.
         (d)   Such signs shall be anchored to prevent movement or overturning
in a manner approved by the Building Official.
   (B)   All other provisions of this section shall be complied with; if at any
time the Building Official or any Police Officer determines that signage,
decorations, and the like authorized by this section constitute a nuisance or a
safety hazard, they may order its immediate removal regardless of whether
permission had previously been granted.
   (C)   The size, area, and/or number of temporary signs authorized by this
section shall be limited to that allowed for permanent signage, however, it
shall be allowed in addition to the maximum permanent signage allowed.
   (D)   Such requests will be submitted in writing to city identifying the
time frame permit is requested with an illustration of proposed sign.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92; Am. Ord. 93-25, passed 9-28-93; Am. Ord. 2018-19,
passed 8-7-18)
§ 151.017  NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   (A)   All signs in existence and in use on the date this chapter becomes
effective which were erected in accordance with all applicable regulations of
the city in force at that time, and which do not wholly conform to the
applicable provisions of this chapter shall be declared legal nonconforming
signs. As long as a legal nonconforming sign does not constitute a hazard to
public safety or a nuisance, such sign may be maintained and may be replaced or
re-erected if destroyed by fire, vandalism, windstorm or other natural forces
or events beyond the control to the owner and the repair cost is less than 60%
of the cost of erecting an identical new sign. A building permit is required
for any replacement or re-erection. Upon any type of restoration, the
conditions which rendered said sign nonconforming may not be expanded or
increased. If any nonconforming sign should be dismantled, removed, or
destroyed other than by fire, vandalism, windstorm, or other natural forces or
events beyond the control of the owner and the repair cost is more than 60%
percent of the cost of erecting an identical new sign, it shall not be
replaced, re-erected, or rebuilt unless it is made to wholly conform to the
provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Notwithstanding division (A) of this section, the City Council
reserves the right at any time to institute a sign abatement program on its own
motion. Such a program must follow procedures outlined in §§
151.110 through
151.118 of this chapter, which were adopted pursuant to Tex. Loc. Gov't Code
Chapter 216.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92) 
Penalty, see § 151.999
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS
§ 151.040  STANDARDS.
   (A)   Signs shall conform to the construction requirements of this
subchapter. All signs, except temporary signs, shall be designed, fabricated,
and erected so as to meet the applicable requirements of the Standard Building
Code, Article 600 of the National Electrical Code, and the requirements of this
chapter.
   (B)   All signs that are lighted, illuminated, or otherwise wired for
electricity, shall be constructed entirely of noncombustible materials, except
that the sign facings may be constructed of materials that burn at a rate no
faster than 2½ inches per minute when tested in accordance with ASTM D 635.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92) 
Penalty, see § 151.999
§ 151.041  CLEARANCE FROM UTILITIES, EXITS, OR STANDPIPES.
   Signs shall conform to the general clearance requirements of this section
except where more stringent requirements may apply in other sections of this
chapter.
   (A)   Signs shall be located not less than six feet horizontally or 12 feet
vertically from overhead electrical conductors which are energized in excess of
750 volts. The term “overhead conductors” as used in this section means any
electrical conductor, either bare or insulated, installed above the ground,
except such conductors as are enclosed in electrical conduit or other material
covering of equal strength. No sign shall be erected nearer than six feet to
any telephone cable, power line, or any street light standard. In the case of a
conflict between this section and the requirements of the National Electrical
Code or any Public Utility, the more restrictive requirements shall govern.
   (B)   No sign or sign structure shall be erected in such a manner that any
portion of its surface or supports will interfere in any way with the free use
of any fire escape, exit, or standpipe.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92) 
Penalty, see § 151.999
§ 151.042  OBSTRUCTION OF OPENINGS, DOORS, WINDOWS, OR FIRE ESCAPES.
   (A)   No sign shall obstruct any openings to such an extent that light or
ventilation is reduced to a point below that required by this chapter. Signs
erected within five feet of an exterior wall in which there are openings within
the area of the sign shall be constructed of noncombustible material or
approved plastics.
   (B)   No sign shall be erected, relocated, or maintained so as to prevent
free ingress to or egress from any door, window, or fire escape. No sign of any
kind shall be attached to a standpipe, or fire escape, nor be placed in such a
manner as to interfere with any opening required for legal ventilation.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92) 
Penalty, see § 151.999
§ 151.043  CLEARANCE AT STREET INTERSECTIONS.
   On corner lots, no sign of any kind shall encroach within the area formed by
a right triangle, the legs of which are each 30 feet in length and are
extensions of the roadway surface edges or curbs as the case may be, that
intersect one another. If the curb or roadway surface edges form a radius at
their intersections, then the legs of the triangle shall be considered tangents
of that radius. If the roadways intersect at other than 90° angles, then the
legs of the triangle shall be considered acute or obtuse to one another, as the
case may be. (See Appendix A at the end of this title)
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92) 
Penalty, see § 151.999
SIGN RESTRICTIONS; RESIDENTIAL
§ 151.055  SCOPE.
   The regulations set forth in this subchapter shall apply specifically to
residential zones as determined by the zoning code,
Chapter 155 of this code of ordinances, and amendments thereto. Only those
types of signs referred to in this subchapter may be utilized in residential
ones. Signs listed in this subchapter shall be subject to all other general
provisions of this chapter as applicable.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92)
§ 151.056  REAL ESTATE SIGNS.
   Real estate signs on property that has a building erected thereon shall not
exceed six square feet in area, provided that riders or additional plates not
exceeding two in number and 240 square inches in area in the aggregate may be
attached. Such signs shall be erected or constructed so that no portion thereof
exceeds a height of four feet from the ground. Not more than two real estate
signs shall be located on any one premises at any one time. Real estate signs
must be removed not later than ten days after the transaction pursuant to which
the property is sold or leased is closed or the contract is otherwise
terminated.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92) 
Penalty, see § 151.999
§ 151.057  ADDRESS SIGNS FOR SINGLE- FAMILY RESIDENCES.
   Address signs for single family dwellings shall be limited to one per home.
Said signs shall be attached to the wall of the home where visible from the
street on which the home fronts. A free-standing address sign not to exceed
four feet in height and six square feet in area may also be erected in the
front yard as long as it is entirely within the buildable area of the lot as
determined by the zoning code,
Chapter 155 of this code of ordinances. In addition, one address sign may be
stenciled on the curb for each single family residence. This sign shall be
limited to street number only and shall consist of four-inch high black letters
on a white background. Address signs on mailboxes shall be allowed in addition
to that specified herein, and shall not exceed two square feet in area.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92) 
Penalty, see § 151.999
§ 151.058  MULTI-FAMILY COMPLEXES.
   Every household unit in a multi-family residential complex may have its own
address sign attached to or near the entrance to the unit. In addition, one
building identification sign may be installed on the wall of each individual
building containing residential units, provided the sign does not exceed 32
square feet in area. Residential communities, such as mobile home and
recreational vehicle parks and apartment complexes, shall be allowed one sign
not to exceed 100 square feet in area and six feet in height for each roadway
frontage. In addition, one secondary sign not to exceed 32 square feet and six
feet in height shall be allowed for each roadway entrance to the community.
Heights are to be measured from adjacent grade.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92) 
Penalty, see § 151.999
§ 151.059  LIGHTED SIGNS.
   Lighted or illuminated signs are not permitted except for institutional
signs and signs advertising residential rental communities.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92) 
Penalty, see § 151.999
§ 151.060  SIGNS ADVERTISING SALE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY.
   Signs advertising the sale of motor vehicles, boats, trailers, or other
personal property shall not exceed six square feet in area, and no more than
one such sign shall be allowed on the site at any given time. Such signs shall
be permitted only for the time such sale is occurring, and shall be removed
upon consummation of the sale or removal of the personal property from the
premises.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92) 
Penalty, see § 151.999
§ 151.061  SIGNS INSIDE BUILDINGS.
   Signs inside a residential structure, or any other building of the type
intended to be covered by this subchapter, attached to any window or opening
with the sign copy visible from the outside or otherwise so located so as to be
visible and readable without intentional and deliberate effort from outside the
building or structure shall be considered part of the total allowable sign area
permitted.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92) 
Penalty, see § 151.999
§ 151.062  POLITICAL SIGNS.
   Temporary political signs, each not exceeding six square feet in area and
four feet in height, shall be permitted. Such signs shall not be illuminated.
All political signs shall be removed not later than seven days after the
occurrence of election or voting day or event to which the political sign makes
reference or to which such sign is relevant. Temporary political signs shall
not be posted before the 60th day prior to the election. Temporary political
signs proposed under §
151.069 of this chapter shall not be subject to the size limitations of this
section, although they shall be subject to all other requirements hereof.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92) 
Penalty, see § 151.999
§ 151.063  GARAGE, ESTATE SALE, AND LOST PET SIGNS.
   Garage, estate sale, and lost pet signs shall be permitted. Garage and
estate sale signs shall be permitted for the period during which any such sale
is actually occurring; and lost pet signs shall be permitted for the period
during which such pet remains lost.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92) 
Penalty, see § 151.999
§ 151.064  HOME OCCUPATION SIGNS.
   Signs for home occupations or businesses authorized by the zoning code or a
special use permit authorized by the City Council shall not exceed one in
number and six square feet in area. The sign message shall be limited to the
name of the business, a brief description of the nature of such business, and
the hours of operation. Such signs shall not be illuminated.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92) 
Penalty, see § 151.999
§ 151.065  MODEL HOME SIGNS.
   Signs advertising model homes or sales offices for new homes in residential
areas, when authorized to conduct such business by ordinance or City Council
action, shall be limited to 32 square feet in area. Such signs shall not exceed
six feet in height as measured from existing grade, and shall not be
illuminated. Such signs shall be removed within ten days of the cessation of
the sales activity of the particular home builder, seller, or his agents in
that area to which the sign applies.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92) 
Penalty, see § 151.999
§ 151.066  SUBDIVISION SIGNS.
   Signs erected at the entrance to or within a subdivision or other
development for the purpose of decoration and subdivision or development
identification shall be allowed. Signs intended to be permanent shall not
exceed 100 square feet in area or six feet in height. Signs that are intended
to be temporary shall not exceed 64 square feet in area and ten feet in height.
Temporary subdivision signs shall be authorized only as long as there is
continuous new home building activity in the subdivision, and shall be removed
within ten days from the cessation of said new home building activity. Only
one, temporary subdivision sign may be authorized for each subdivision.
Subdivision signs shall be illuminated by reflected light only.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92) 
Penalty, see § 151.999
§ 151.067  INSTITUTIONAL SIGNS.
   Signs relating to schools, churches, hospitals, universities, or similar
institutions (and individual buildings comprising these institutions) may be
wall signs limited to 20 square feet in area, or ground signs limited to 50
square feet in area and six feet in height.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92) 
Penalty, see § 151.999
§ 151.068  NONCOMMERCIAL LOGOS, EMBLEMS, AND THE LIKE.
   Signs advertising noncommercial activities, associations, interest groups,
organizations, employment affiliations, and the like, shall be attached flat to
the building and all such signs shall not exceed a cumulative area of more than
six square feet. Such signs shall not be illuminated.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92) 
Penalty, see § 151.999
§ 151.069  SIGNS ON VACANT LAND.
   Signs shall not be placed upon any vacant lot or on unimproved property,
except non-illuminated signs that deal exclusively with the sale or lease of
such property, or temporary political signs, subject to the following:
   (A)   If any such sign is 50 feet or less from other property boundaries as
measured along the front property line, then that sign shall not exceed six
square feet in area, provided that riders or additional plates not exceeding
two in number and 240 square inches in the aggregate may be attached. The sign
shall not exceed four feet in height.
   (B)   If any such sign is more than 50 feet from other property boundaries
as measured along the front property line, then that sign shall not exceed 32
square feet in area or six feet in height.
   (C)   Where parcels or lots are located at the corner of a roadway
intersection, one sign shall be allowed for each roadway frontage as long as
they both conform to the provisions for distances from property boundaries as
outlined in divisions (A) and (B) of this section.
   (D)   Adjacent parcels or tracts of land under common ownership shall not be
construed as one or more larger tracts for the purposes of divisions (A) and/or
(B) above.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92) 
Penalty, see § 151.999
§ 151.070  CONSTRUCTION PROJECT SIGNS.
   Construction project signs shall be subject to the same requirements and
limitations as real estate signs mentioned in §
151.056 of this subchapter, except that only one shall be allowed upon a
premises.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92) 
Penalty, see § 151.999
§ 151.071  CUMULATIVE SIGN AREA RESTRICTIONS.
   Requirements for particular signs described herein notwithstanding, no
premises upon which a residence is located shall have a cumulative total sign
area of more than 32 square feet. Model homes and sales offices for new homes
shall not have a cumulative total of more than 64 square feet. These
requirements do not apply to institutions and residential rental communities.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92) 
Penalty, see § 151.999
SIGN RESTRICTIONS; NONRESIDENTIAL
§ 151.080  SCOPE.
   The regulations set forth in this subchapter shall apply specifically to
areas of the city that are not classified as residential zones as determined by
the zoning code,
Chapter 155 of this code of ordinances, and any amendments thereto. Signs
listed in this section shall be subject to all of the general provisions of
this chapter.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92)
§ 151.081  ON-PREMISES ADVERTISING SIGNS; FREE-STANDING.
   (A)   One free-standing sign, not exceeding 300 square feet in area and 35
feet in height, shall be allowed on a lot or parcel where a business is
located. Additional free-standing signs, each not exceeding the height and area
limitations previously described, shall be allowed in accordance with the
following schedule:
Principal   Number of
Lot Frontage   Signs Allowed
75 feet or less   1
75 to 150 feet   2
Each 150 feet thereafter   one additional
   (B)   For the purposes of the schedule above, corner lots shall be
considered as having separate frontage on each street.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92) 
Penalty, see § 151.999
§ 151.082  ON-PREMISES ADVERTISING SIGNS; FREE-STANDING HIGH RISE.
   The provisions of §
151.081 notwithstanding, free-standing signs erected within 660 feet of the
highway right-of-way of Central Texas Expressway (U.S. Highway 190) may be
erected to a height not in excess of 42½ feet as measured from nearest adjacent
grade of the express lanes of Central Texas Expressway, as long as said sign
otherwise meets all the requirements of this subchapter for free-standing
signs. Not more than one allowable free-standing sign on a premises shall be a
high-rise free-standing sign.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92) 
Penalty, see § 151.999
§ 151.083  ON-PREMISES ADVERTISING SIGNS; WALL SIGNS.
   Wall signs, as defined in §
151.001 of this chapter, shall be allowed to be installed on a business
premises subject to the following:
   (A)   Wall signs shall be placed on a wall parallel to the surface to which
it is attached, and shall only face abutting or facing streets or parking lots.
   (B)   Not more than three wall signs shall be permitted on a permitted side
or wall of a building; the cumulative area of all signs on any permitted side
or wall of a building shall not exceed 50% of the total area of said side or
wall. Separate tenant spaces in a shopping center shall be considered separate
buildings for the purposes of determining allowable wall signage.
   (C)   Accessory structures of a permanent nature shall be allowed wall
signage in the same manner as that prescribed in division (B) of this section.
In computing the wall area for open-sided canopy type structures, the extreme
elevation dimensions shall be used.
   (D)   Business identification signs, building identification signs and
special signs of any nature shall be considered as comprising a part of the
allowable wall signage unless such sign meets the definition of a temporary
sign as defined in this chapter.
   (E)   Wall signs less than eight feet above grade shall not be illuminated
or electrified in any manner.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92) 
Penalty, see § 151.999
§ 151.084  ON-PREMISES ADVERTISING SIGNS; PROJECTING SIGNS.
   Projecting signs, as defined herein, shall be considered as part of the
allowable wall signage. Only one side of a projecting sign shall be counted as
part of the allowable area. Projecting signs must be erected at least nine feet
above grade, and shall not project more than ten feet from the wall of the
building to which they are attached; however, in no case shall they ever extend
into a public right-of-way or over any property line.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92) 
Penalty, see § 151.999
§ 151.085  ON-PREMISES ADVERTISING SIGNS; ROOF SIGNS.
   Roof signs shall be allowed only when no practical alternative exists for
wall signage. For purposes of determining allowable area and number, roof signs
shall be considered as part of the allowable wall signage on the wall that the
roof sign fronts upon. Plans for the installation of roof signs shall be
approved and sealed by a structural engineer licensed to practice in the State
of Texas. The structural integrity of the sign and the supporting building
components shall be attested to by said engineer.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92) 
Penalty, see § 151.999
§ 151.086  ON-PREMISES ADVERTISING SIGNS ON PROJECTING OVERHANGS AND AWNINGS.
   Projecting overhangs and awnings installed perpendicular to the wall or side
of a building shall be allowed signage as if each particular elevation view of
such projecting overhang or awning was a separate wall. In determining the wall
area, the elevation dimensions shall be used.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92) 
Penalty, see § 151.999
§ 151.087  REAL ESTATE SIGNS.
   Real estate signs on premises where a building is located shall not exceed
six square feet in area, provided that riders or additional plates not
exceeding two in number and 240 square inches in area in the aggregate may be
attached. Such signs shall be erected or constructed so that no portion thereof
exceeds a height of four feet from the ground. There shall be allowed only two
real estate signs per site. Real estate signs must be removed not later than
ten days after the transaction, pursuant to which the property is sold or
leased, is closed, or the contract is otherwise terminated. If the property to
be sold or leased includes a building with glass frontage, one additional real
estate sign not to exceed six square feet in area may be placed behind each 30
feet of length of glass frontage or fraction thereof.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92) 
Penalty, see § 151.999
§ 151.088  CONSTRUCTION SIGNS.
   Construction signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in area or six feet in
height. Not more than one such sign shall be permitted on any one site, and any
such sign shall face the street upon which said site fronts. All references to
parties involved shall be on a single sign. Such signs shall be removed upon
completion of the construction project.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92) 
Penalty, see § 151.999
§ 151.089  LIGHTED SIGNS.
   Lighted signs shall be allowed in accordance with the following:
   (A)   All electrical wiring shall conform to article 600 of the National
Electrical Code edition in effect at the time of permit issuance.
   (B)   No single light bulb shall exceed 40 watts.
   (C)   Lighted signs shall not resemble official traffic signals or emergency
vehicle lights.
   (D)   Sign lighting shall not move, flash, strobe, blink, rotate, change in
intensity, or appear to do any of the foregoing. Exception: decorative building
lighting, including permitted wall signs, when the same are at least 25 feet
from the property line along any roadway running contiguous with the premises.
Also, lighted signs which indicate time and/or temperature shall be excepted.
   (E)   If any sign lighting shall be reasonably calculated to constitute a
hazard to the safety of motorists operating vehicles at night, such lighting
shall be altered or changed to eliminate the hazard whether or not such
lighting meets the other provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92) 
Penalty, see § 151.999
§ 151.090  SIGNS INSIDE BUILDINGS.
   Signs, including neon signs, locating inside a building or structure and so
located so as to be visible and readable from outside the building or structure
without intentional and deliberate effort shall be considered as part of the
allowable sign area for the particular wall or side of the building it is
intended to be viewed from. In no case shall any such sign encroach upon the
minimum window area required by the building code for emergency egress or
minimum light and/or ventilation. These requirements apply to signs not
otherwise excluded from the definition of a sign by this chapter.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92) 
Penalty, see § 151.999
§ 151.091  INSTITUTIONAL SIGNS.
   Signs relating to schools, churches, hospitals, universities, or similar
institutions in nonresidential areas shall be allowed signage equivalent to
that allowed for any commercial business.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92)
§ 151.092  SIGNS ON VACANT LAND.
   Signs shall not be placed on any vacant lot or unimproved property, except
political signs (subject to the provisions of §
151.093, off-premises outdoor advertising signs (subject to the provisions of §
151.096), and signs that deal exclusively with the sale or lease of such
property (For example, real estate signs). Real estate signs shall not exceed
32 square feet in area and six feet in height. The allowable number of real
estate signs on a given lot or parcel shall be determined in the same manner as
that for free-standing on-premises signs in §
151.081. Real estate signs shall be removed no later than ten days after the
transaction pursuant to which the property is leased or sold, is closed, or the
contract is otherwise terminated.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92) 
Penalty, see § 151.999
§ 151.093  POLITICAL SIGNS.
   Political signs, not exceeding a cumulative total of more than 32 square
feet in area per premises (and six feet in height for individual signs) shall
be permitted in nonresidential areas. All political signs shall be removed not
later than ten days after the occurrence of election or voting day or event to
which the political sign makes reference to or to which such sign is relevant.
Temporary political signs shall not be posted before the 60th day prior to
election.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92) 
Penalty, see § 151.999
§ 151.094  SHOPPING CENTERS, MALLS, AND MULTI-COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Criteria required.  The owners of premises comprising shopping
centers, malls, and other multi-occupancy commercial buildings shall develop
sign criteria for their particular premises that is consistent with this
chapter. Nothing shall prohibit such an owner from developing criteria that is
more restrictive than the provisions of this chapter, however, those criteria
may not be less restrictive than these provisions. The criteria developed shall
be considered as part of the lease provisions for the particular premises
involved.
   (B)   Free-standing signs. Free-standing signs shall meet the criteria for
same set forth in §§
151.081,
151.082 of this chapter, as applicable, except that the allowable free-standing
signs shall only advertise the shopping center, mall, or multi-occupancy
building, as the case may be, and not any particular business located therein.
In addition to the 300 square feet of allowable sign area on each permitted
sign face, an additional 300 square feet of area may be attached to the same
structure, or to another structure if another free-standing sign is otherwise
allowed, which area shall be shared equally by each individual business within
the shopping center, mall, or multi-occupancy building for advertising their
particular businesses.
   (C)   Wall signs.  Wall signs shall meet the criteria for wall signs as set
forth in sections §§
151.083 through
151.085, as applicable, except that a business that does not have a dedicated
main entrance on the building exterior shall not be allowed an exterior wall
sign. Doorways used exclusively for emergency egress purposes or for deliveries
and not intended for normal use by patrons shall not be considered as meeting
this requirement.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92) 
Penalty, see § 151.999
§ 151.095  PORTABLE SIGNS.
   Portable signs shall be allowed on a business premises subject to the
following:
   (A)   Only one such sign shall be allowed on any premises at any one time.
   (B)   A permit shall be required for the new installation of any such sign
and for the relocation of any such sign on the same premises.
   (C)   A portable sign shall constitute part of the allowable area for free-
standing signs on a premises, but in no case shall any portable sign exceed 32
square feet in area and six feet in height.
   (D)   Portable signs shall be anchored to prevent movement or overturning in
a manner approved by the Building Official.
   (E)   If the sign is electric, it must be supplied with an approved
weathertight receptacle installed within six feet of the sign. The receptacle
must be supplied by an approved branch circuit; no extension cords shall be
allowed under any circumstances. As an option, portable signs may be hard-
wired.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92) 
Penalty, see § 151.999
§ 151.096  OFF-PREMISES OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGNS.
   (A)   Off-premises outdoor advertising signs may be installed within the
areas under the control of the State of Texas along the Interstate Highway 14/
U.S. Highway 190 (Central Texas Expressway) corridor. Such signs shall be
subject to the applicable provisions of Chapter 391 of the Texas Transportation
Code, as well as the permit requirements of this chapter and of the state.
   (B)   Off-premises outdoor advertising signs may be installed upon lands
abutting the Business Highway 190 (Veterans Memorial Boulevard) subject to the
following conditions:
      (1)   Maximum sign area shall not exceed 300 square feet.
      (2)   Maximum height shall not exceed 35 feet as measured from adjacent
road grade.
      (3)   Signs shall be spaced no closer to each other than 1,000 feet apart
along the same side of the roadway. This shall be a linear measure along the
centerline of the roadway.
      (4)   Signs shall not be erected closer than 1,000 feet to any public
recreational area, church, school, residentially zoned area, or any scenic area
so designated by a governmental authority.
   (C)   Off-premises outdoor advertising signs shall be permitted on any
vacant property that abuts a principal arterial, minor arterial, or collector
(as those terms are defined in the Mobility 2030 Thoroughfare Plan) subject to
the following conditions:
      (1)   Only one such sign shall be allowed on any public street frontage
of the premises at any one time.
      (2)   A sign permit shall be required for the new installation of any
such sign and for the relocation of any such sign on the same premises. The
sign permit shall be valid for six months and shall be eligible for renewal so
long as it remains in compliance with all conditions within this code.
      (3)   Such signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in area or six feet in
height.
      (4)   The sign may not be illuminated and may not be a changeable
electronic variable message sign.
   (D)   No off-premises outdoor advertising sign shall be designed or used in
such a way as to constitute an on-premises business identification sign as
herein defined. This requirement applies whether or not a business activity
began operations prior to or subsequent to the erection of the sign.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92; Am. Ord. 2018-19, passed 8-7-18)  Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.097  VISION CLEARANCE AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.
   Free-standing signs including off-premises signs, temporary signs, and
displays and portable signs, may be placed anywhere on the premises subject to
the following:
   (A)   Such signs shall not be installed within the 30-foot triangle at
roadway intersections.
   (B)   If controlled vehicular ingress and egress is provided by a clearly
defined entrance and exit ways into and out of a premises, signs that are
erected within a right triangle whose legs are 20 feet in length and are
extensions at the roadway surface edge or curb, as the case may be, and the
edge of the private ingress and/or egress driveway shall:
      (1)   Not be in excess of three feet in total height as measured from the
lowest part of the driveway.
      (2)   Be erected to any height allowed by this chapter provided that the
sign face is entirely above the ten-foot level as measured from the highest
part of the driveway, and provided that no part of the structure, pole, or
standard below the ten-foot level shall present a cumulative obstruction to the
view of a motorist of more than 16 inches in width.
   (C)   If controlled ingress and egress is not provided into and out of the
premises, then any sign or display erected or installed within ten feet of a
public roadway must meet the same minimums or maximums of the height of the
sign face as mentioned in division (B) of this section for vision clearance
purposes.
   (D)   No sign or display shall ever be erected or installed in city street
right-of-way, except that real estate signs of the six square foot and smaller
variety and political signs of the poster type may be installed in the city
streets or rights-of-way when the distance between property line and the
roadway surface exceeds 12 feet; however, such signs shall not be erected
closer to the roadway than 12 feet under these circumstances.
   (E)   Signs shall not be erected or installed so as to encroach upon any
property line or public right-of-way. The Building Official shall have the
authority to require an applicant for a sign permit to conduct a survey to
verify property line locations when the same are in question.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92) 
Penalty, see § 151.999
§ 151.098  COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER REGULATIONS.
   Compliance with the provisions of all other relevant ordinances of the city,
including, but not limited to, those ordinances dealing with electrical and
building construction and permits, is mandatory.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92) 
Penalty, see § 151.999
§ 151.099  DANGEROUS SIGNS; REMOVAL.
   (A)   Any sign, or any part thereof which was not erected and/or is not
maintained in accordance with the design, construction, or location
requirements contained or referred to in this chapter, or any sign or part
thereof which is liable to fall down and/or endanger persons or property, or is
a fire hazard, or is a dangerous structure, or any sign or part thereof which,
from age, neglect, or faulty construction becomes dangerous or dilapidated,
shall be deemed to be  a public nuisance,  and such public nuisance shall be
abated by the Building Official as provided in division (B) of this section.
   (B)   All signs, or parts thereof, which are deemed a public nuisance under
this section may be abated by way of repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or
removal, as the particular circumstances may require, and as may be hereinafter
specified, any remedy specified in this chapter shall be in addition to any
other procedures or remedies available to the city for the enforcement of this
chapter.
   (C)   A public nuisance as defined herein, shall be abated in accordance
with the provisions of
Chapter 93 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92) 
Penalty, see § 151.999
RELOCATION; RECONSTRUCTION; REMOVAL
§ 151.110  PROCEDURE FOR ALTERATION OF SIGNS.
   (A)   The city may require that any sign within the city limits be
relocated, reconstructed, or removed. The city shall do so in accordance with
the procedure described in this section.
   (B)   The City Council shall appoint a municipal board on sign control.
Members of this board are appointed for terms of two years. The board must be
composed of:
      (1)   Two real estate appraisers, each of whom must be a member in good
standing of a nationally recognized professional appraiser society or trade
organization that has an established code of ethics, educational program, and
professional certification program;
      (2)   One person engaged in the sign business in the city;
      (3)   One employee of the State Department of Highways and Public
Transportation who is familiar with real estate valuations in eminent domain
proceedings; and,
      (4)   One architect or landscape architect licensed by the State of
Texas.
   (C)   The board on sign control shall determine the amount of compensation
to which the owner of the sign that is required to be relocated, reconstructed,
or removed is entitled. The determination shall be made after the owner of the
sign is give the opportunity for a hearing before the board about the issues
involved in the matter.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92)
§ 151.111  COMPENSATION FOR RELOCATED SIGN.
   The compensable costs for a sign that is required to be relocated include
the expenses of dismantling the sign, transporting it to another site, and re-
erecting it. The board shall determine the compensable costs according to the
standards applicable in a proceeding under Tex. Property Code, Ch. 21. In
addition, the city shall issue to the owner of the sign a appropriate permit or
other authority to operate a substitute sign of the same type at an alternative
site of substantially equivalent value. Whether an alternative site is of
substantially equivalent value is determined by standards generally accepted in
the outdoor advertising industry, including visibility, traffic count, and
demographic factors. The city shall compensate the owner for any increased
operating costs, including increased rent, at the new location. The owner is
responsible for designating an alternative site where the erection of the sign
would be in compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92)
§ 151.112  COMPENSATION FOR RECONSTRUCTED SIGN.
   The compensable costs for a sign that is required to be reconstructed
includes expenses of labor and materials and any loss in the value of the sign
due to the reconstruction in excess of 15% of that value. The board shall
determine the compensable costs according to standards applicable in a
proceeding under Tex. Property Code, Ch. 21.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92)
§ 151.113  COMPENSATION FOR REMOVAL OF OFF-PREMISES SIGNS.
   (A)   For an off-premises sign that is required to be removed, the
compensable cost is an amount computed by determining the average annual gross
revenue received by the owner from the sign during the two years preceding
September 12, 1985, or the two years preceding the month in which the removal
date of the sign occurs, whichever is less, and by multiplying that amount by
three. If the sign has not been in existence for all of either two-year period,
the average annual gross revenue for that period, for the purpose of this
computation, is an amount computed by dividing 12 by the number of months that
the sign has been in existence, and multiplying that result by the total amount
of the gross revenue received for the period that the sign has been in
existence. However, if the sign did not generate revenue for at least one month
preceding September 1, 1985, this computation of compensable costs is to be
made using only the average annual gross revenue received during the two years
preceding the month in which the removal date of the sign occurs, and by
multiplying that amount by three. In determining the amounts under this
division, a sign is treated as if it were in existence for the entire month if
it was in existence for more than 15 days of the month and is treated as if it
were not in existence for any part of the month if it was in existence for 15
or fewer days of the month.
   (B)   The owner of the real property on which the sign was located is
entitled to be compensated for any decrease in the value of the real property.
The compensable cost is to be determined by the board according to standards
applicable in a proceeding under Tex. Property Code, Ch. 21.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92)
§ 151.114  COMPENSATION FOR REMOVAL OF ON-PREMISES SIGNS.
   For an on-premises sign that is required to be removed, the compensable cost
is an amount computed by determining a reasonable balance between the original
cost of the sign, less depreciation, and the current replacement cost of the
sign, less an adjustment for the present age and condition of the sign.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92)
§ 151.115  METHOD OF COMPENSATION.
   (A)   To pay the compensable costs required under this subchapter, the city
may use only a method, or a combination of the methods, prescribed by this
section.
   (B)   If a sign is required to be relocated or reconstructed, the city,
acting pursuant to the Property Redevelopment and Tax Abatement Act (Tex. Tax
Code, Ch. 312), may abate municipal property taxes that otherwise would be owed
by the owner of the sign. The abated taxes may be on any real or personal
property owned by the owner of the sign except residential property. The right
to the abatement of taxes is assignable by the holders and the assignee may use
the right to abatement with respect to taxes on any nonresidential property in
the same taxing jurisdiction. Under this scenario, the costs include reasonable
interest and the abatement period may not exceed five years.
   (C)   The city may allocate to a special fund in the city treasury to be
known as the sign abatement and community beautification fund, all or any part
of the municipal property taxes paid on signs, on the real property on which
the signs are located, or on other real or personal property owned by the owner
of the sign. The city may make payments from that fund to reimburse compensable
costs to owners of signs required to be relocated, reconstructed, or removed.
   (D)   The city may provide for the issuance of sign abatement revenue bonds
and use the proceeds to make payments to reimburse costs to the owners of signs
within the city that are required to be relocated, reconstructed, or removed.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92)
§ 151.116  TAX APPRAISAL OF PROPERTY WITH NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   For each nonconforming sign, the board shall file with the Bell County Tax
Appraisal District the boards compensable costs value appraisal of the sign.
The appraisal office shall consider the board's appraisal when the office, for
property tax purposes, determines the appraised value of the real property to
which the sign is attached.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92)
§ 151.117  EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The requirements of this subchapter do not apply to a sign that was
erected in violation of any local ordinances, laws, or regulations applicable
at the time of its erection.
   (B)   The requirements of this section do not apply to a sign that, having
been permitted to remain in place as a nonconforming use, is required to be
removed by the city because the sign, or a substantial part of it, is blown
down or otherwise destroyed or dismantled for any purpose other than
maintenance operations or for changing the letters, symbols, or other matter on
the sign.
   (C)   For purposes of division (B) of this section, a sign or substantial
part of it is considered to have been destroyed only if the cost of repairing
the sign is more than 60% of the cost of erecting a new sign of the same type
at the same location.
   (D)   This subchapter does not limit or restrict the compensation provisions
of the highway beautification provisions contained in Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat.,
Art. 4477-9a, §§ 4.01 et seq.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92)
§ 151.118  APPEAL.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the board may file in district
court a verified petition setting forth that the decision is illegal, in whole
or in part, and specifying the grounds of the illegality. The petition must be
filed within 20 days after the date the decision is rendered by the board.
   (B)   On the filing of the petition, the court may issue a writ of
certiorari directed to the board to review the decision of the board and shall
prescribe in the writ the time within which a return must be made, which must
be longer than ten days and may be extended by the court.
   (C)   The board is not required to return the original papers acted on by
it, but it shall be sufficient to return certified or sworn copies of the
papers. The return must concisely set forth all other facts as may be pertinent
and material to show the grounds of the decision appealed from and must be
verified.
   (D)   The court may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the
decision brought up for revision.
   (E)   Costs may not be allowed against the board unless it appears to the
court that the board acted with gross negligence, in bad faith, or with malice
in making the decision appealed from.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92)
§ 151.119  APPEALS TO BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTS.
   The Board of Adjustments may hear and decide appeals which allege error in
any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Building
Official in connection with the refusal to grant a permit required by this
chapter, the revocation of a permit granted under the provisions of this
chapter or a decision involving any substantive or material interpretation of a
provision of this chapter. The decision of the Board of Adjustments with regard
to such appeal shall be final.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92)
§ 151.999  PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, or corporation in violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction in Municipal Court, be fined not less than
$50 and not more than $2,000. Each day such violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense. The Building Official or his or her designee shall have the
authority to issue citations or file complaints in Municipal Court for
violations of this chapter said authority being in addition to any other remedy
available under any other applicable ordinance or statute.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 10-6-92)
CHAPTER 152:  MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS
Section
General Provisions
   
152.01   Definitions
   
152.02   Movement, placement, and replacement of manufactured homes; permit
required
   
152.03   Replacement of non-conforming homes
   
152.04   One manufactured home per lot
Skirting and Anchoring Requirements
   
152.15   [Repealed]
   
152.16   Skirting and anchoring required
   
152.17   Skirting construction materials
   
152.18   Additional skirting requirements
   
152.19   Anchoring requirements
   
152.20   Time limits
   
152.21   Inspection fees
   
152.22   Violations
Manufactured  Home Parks
   
152.35   Definitions
   
152.36   Manufactured home park plan
   
152.37   Location
   
152.38   Maintenance
   
152.39   Additional construction
   
152.40   Office building
   
152.41   License required
   
152.42   License fees
   
152.43   Application
   
152.44   Revocation of license
   
152.45   (Reserved)
   
152.46   Posting of licenses
   
152.47   Rules and regulations for the park
   
152.48   Facilities and services
   
152.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.01  DEFINITIONS.
   The following definitions shall apply in this chapter unless the context
clearly requires a different meaning:
   ANCHORING SYSTEM.  A combination of ties, anchoring equipment, and anchoring
devices that will, when properly designed and installed, resist overturning and
lateral movement of the manufactured home from wind forces.
   HUD-CODE MANUFACTURED HOME.  A structure constructed on or after June 15,
1976, according to the rules of the United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the
traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in
length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built
on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the
plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems. The term does not
include a recreational vehicle as that term is defined by 24 C.F.R Section
3282.8(g).
   MANUFACTURED HOME LOT.  A plot of ground within a manufactured home park
designed for the accommodation of one manufactured home.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or PARK.
   Any plot of ground upon which two or more manufactured homes occupy space
for dwelling or sleeping purposes and where a compensation is made for such
accommodations, provided that this chapter does not apply to parks established
for a recreational vehicle park. A plan for a recreational vehicle park must be
submitted as an application for a conditional use permit following procedures
outlined in
Chapter 155.
   MANUFACTURED HOUSING or MANUFACTURED HOME.    Manufactured Home or a mobile
home and collectively means and refers to both.
   MOBILE HOME.  A structure that was constructed before June 15, 1976,
transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight
body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected
on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis
and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation
when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating,
air-conditioning, and electrical systems.
   PERMANENT FOUNDATION.  When used in the context of a manufactured home,
means a system of supports, including piers, either partially or entirely below
grade which is certified by the consumer/mortgagor and the lender/mortgagee in
a real estate loan transaction as having permanently affixed the structure to
the real estate or which is:
      (1)   capable of transferring all design loads imposed by or upon the
structure into soil or bedrock without failure;
      (2)   placed at an adequate width below grade to prevent frost damage;
      (3)   constructed of concrete, metal, treated lumber or wood, or grouted
masonry;
      (4)   designed so that the components of the foundation system cannot be
removed from the site and used at any other location;
      (5)   designed so that the attached structure resists overturning due to
wind pressure by the dead load resisting moment of the structure and
foundation. The weight of earth superimposed over footings may be used to
calculate the dead load resisting moment. The overturning moment shall not
exceed 2/3 of the dead load resisting moment;
      (6)   designed to have the structure attached without the towing hitch,
axles, brakes, wheels and other parts of the chassis that operate only during
transportation; and
      (7)   designed in accordance with accepted engineering practice to resist
damage due to decay, insects and condensation. A licensed engineer or architect
shall stamp and sign each foundation drawing. The foundation drawings shall
contain the statement, “This foundation drawing describes a permanent
foundation.”
   PRIVATE LOT.  When used in the context of a manufactured home, any lot or
parcel of land within the city limits, regardless of zoning or ownership, that
is not part of an approved manufactured home park.
   SKIRTING.  The enclosing of the open space between the underside of a
manufactured home and the ground around the entire perimeter of the structure,
using a masonry wall or a framework to which panels are attached.
(Ord. 99-37, passed 11-9-99)
§ 152.02  MOVEMENT, PLACEMENT, AND REPLACEMENT OF MANUFACTURED HOMES; PERMIT
REQUIRED.
   The following procedures will be followed whenever a manufactured home is
moved, placed or replaced within the city:
   (A)   A permit is required prior to the movement of any manufactured home
into, out of, or within the city. Prior to issuing the permit, the following
will be verified by the Director of Planning and Development:
      (1)   That applicant is a party to the action, for example, the home
owner, their agent, such as a dealer or commercial mover, or a repossessor.
      (2)   If moving into or within the city, the lot on which the home is to
be situated will be checked to assure proper zoning. The lot must be a
recognized home park (licensed and zoned R-MH) or R-1 zoned with a suffix M (R-
1(M)).
   (B)   Manufactured home installation, move-out, and replacement permits
shall expire 60 days after the date of approval. With the exception of expired
replacement permits, the Building Official may reissue an expired permit at
one-half the total fees for the original permit provided that not more than ten
days have elapsed since the expiration date.
   (C)   An applicant who is denied a replacement permit shall have the right
to appeal said denial to the City Council by submitting a written request for
appeal to the City Manager within five days of said denial.
(Ord. 99-37, passed 11-9-99)
Penalty, see § 152.99
§ 152.03  REPLACEMENT OF NON-CONFORMING HOMES.
   (A)   A manufactured home which is not located in an R-1(M) or R-MH zone may
be replaced with a HUD-Code manufactured home if each of the following
conditions are met:
      (1)   The home to be replaced was in place on December 31, 1999, or was
permitted to be placed in that location under paragraph (B) of this section.
      (2)   The home to be replaced and the replacement home must be used or
occupied as a residential dwelling.
      (3)   The home to be replaced must at the time of the replacement have
been lawfully in place as a non-conforming use.
      (4)   If on a private lot the replacement home must comply with the
requirements set forth in §
155.020(G)(1) and (2).
      (5)   A replacement permit must be obtained prior to removal of the home
to be replaced.
      (6)   The replacement home must be a HUD-Code Manufactured Home,
manufactured on or after June 15, 1976.
   (B)   Notwithstanding paragraph (A) of this section, a manufactured home
which is not located in an R-1(M) or R-MH zone may be replaced with a HUD-Code
Manufactured home if each of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The home to be replaced has been destroyed because of accidental
fire, explosion, flood, wind, earthquake, or other calamity or act of God or
the public enemy, to the extent of 50% or more of its fair market value.
      (2)   The home to be replaced and the replacement home must be used or
occupied as a residential dwelling.
      (3)   The home to be replaced must at the time of the replacement have
been lawfully in place as a non-conforming use.
      (4)   If on a private lot the replacement home must comply with the
requirements set forth in §
155.020(G)(1) and (2).
      (5)   A replacement permit must be obtained prior to removal of the home
to be replaced.
      (6)   The replacement home must be a HUD-Code Manufactured Home,
manufactured on or after June 15, 1976.
(Ord. 99-37, passed 11-9-99)
Penalty, see § 152.99
§ 152.04  ONE MANUFACTURED HOME PER LOT.
   Normally only one manufactured home will be located on a dedicated lot.
Where more than one manufactured home is to be located on a dedicated lot,
approval to do so must be obtained by a variance through the Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
(Ord. 99-37, passed 11-9-99)
Penalty, see § 152.99
SKIRTING AND ANCHORING REQUIREMENTS
§ 152.15  [REPEALED]
§ 152.16  SKIRTING AND ANCHORING REQUIRED.
   (A)   Except as provided in paragraph (B) of this section, it shall be
unlawful for any person to rent, offer for rent, occupy, allow or otherwise
maintain a manufactured home upon any private lot, or within any manufactured
home park within the city limits, unless said manufactured home is skirted and
anchored according to the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   If all applicable regulations have been satisfied except for
installation of the required skirting, the Building Official shall issue a
temporary permit authorizing occupancy of the home for a period not exceeding
the time allowed under §
152.20 for skirting installation. This paragraph shall not apply to any
manufactured home which has been installed for longer than the time allowed
under §
152.20 for skirting installation on that home.
(Ord. 89-07, passed 5-23-89; Am. Ord. 99-37, passed 11-9-99)
Penalty, see § 152.99
§ 152.17  SKIRTING CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS.
   Skirting shall consist of a framework of treated weather resistant lumber or
steel, which is sufficiently rigid to adequately support a paneling system. 
The paneling system shall be fastened to the framework and shall extend from
the underside of the manufactured home to the ground around the entire
perimeter of the manufactured home.  All joints shall be sufficiently tight to
assure the entire assembly is substantially rodent proof.  The paneling
material shall consist of a durable material that is substantially decay-
resistant, and such material shall be color coordinated with the exterior of
the manufactured home.  Acceptable materials shall include R-panel sheet metal
(minimum 31 gauge), U-panel sheet metal (minimum 31 gauge), fiber cement siding
(minimum 5/16"), or similar materials.  Non-prefinished materials shall be
color coordinated with that of the manufactured home paneling and shall be
fastened to the framework with galvanized or other corrosion resistant
fasteners.  All materials shall be installed in a neat and workmanlike manner. 
In lieu of the framework/paneling system described above, a skirting system may
consist of a veneer of masonry.  Such masonry need not be load-bearing or
reinforced but shall extend from the underside of the manufactured home to the
ground around the entire perimeter of the manufactured home.  Such masonry
shall consist of brick, stone, ashlars, or CMU block.  All bed and head joints
are to be mortared, approximately 3/8 inch wide, and tooled concave or rubbed.
Masonry courses shall be run level, plumb and true to line.  The first course
shall be laid upon a level concrete footing that is at least as wide as the
wall itself.  The wall and all openings in it shall be sufficiently
weathertight and rodent-proof. Brick, when used, shall be of a color
coordinated with the exterior of the manufactured home. CMU block, when used,
shall have the exterior treated with a compatible CMU block filler and shall
then be painted or plastered a color coordinated with the exterior of the
manufactured home. Adequate protection shall be provided for installations in
flood hazard areas in accordance with §
153.21,
Chapter 153, Flood Damage Prevention.
(Ord. 89-07, passed 5-23-89; Am. Ord. 97-32, passed 11-25-97) 
Penalty, see § 152.99
§ 152.18  ADDITIONAL SKIRTING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Vent openings shall be installed in the skirting walls. They shall be
arranged to provide cross-ventilation and shall be covered with corrosion-
resistant wire mesh of not less than ¼-inch nor more than ½-inch in any
dimension. Vent openings shall have a combined net area of not less than one
square foot for each 150 square feet of crawl space.
   (B)   An access hatch shall be installed to allow access under the
manufactured home for maintenance and repairs. The access hatch shall be
sufficient in size to allow a person to crawl through. The door of the access
hatch shall have sufficient hardware to keep it closed tightly when not in use.
(Ord. 89-07, passed 5-23-89) 
Penalty, see § 152.99
§ 152.19  ANCHORING REQUIREMENTS.
   The anchoring system shall be made and installed according to the
Administrative Rules of the Texas Department of Housing and Community Affairs -
Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 10 - September 1, 1995, or its successor
regulations.
(Ord. 89-07, passed 5-23-89; Am. Ord. 99-37, passed 11-9-99) 
Penalty, see § 152.99
§ 152.20  TIME LIMITS.
   Skirting installation shall be completed within:
   (A)   60 days after the date of annexation for manufactured homes installed
upon a tract of land which is annexed into the city after December 31, 1999;
   (B)   6 months after the issue date of the required manufactured home
installation permit for all manufactured homes installed between June 1, 1999,
and December 31, 1999; and
   (C)   60 days after the issue date of the required manufactured home
installation permit for all other manufactured homes.
(Ord. 89-07, passed 5-23-89; Am. Ord. 99-37, passed 11-9-99)
Penalty, see § 152.99
§ 152.21  INSPECTION FEES.
   (A)   Homes fixed within the city on or before December 1, 1997.
      (1)   An owner of a manufactured home which is located within the city on
or before December 1, 1997, but which is not completely skirted on that date
must obtain a skirting permit and pay a skirting inspection fee not later than
January 31, 1998.  However, an owner of more than one such manufactured home
who submits an application for multiple permits under this subsection will be
charged no more than $100 in inspection fees for such application.
      (2)   An owner of a manufactured home which is located within the city on
or before December 1, 1997, and which on that date is completely skirted in a
manner that does not comply with the skirting requirements of this subchapter,
must obtain a skirting permit and pay a skirting inspection fee whenever such
skirting is replaced or falls into such disrepair as to constitute a public
nuisance, whichever occurs first.  However, an owner of more than one such
manufactured home who submits one application for multiple permits under this
subsection will be charged no more than $100 in inspection fees for such
application.
      (3)   An owner of a manufactured home which, on December 1, 1997, is both
located within the city and in compliance with the skirting requirements of
this subchapter will not be required by this subchapter to pay any skirting
inspection fees except as required by §
152.21 (B)(2).
   (B)   Homes moved into or relocated within the city after December 1, 1997.
      (1)   An owner of a manufactured home which is moved into the city after
December 1, 1997, and which is not in compliance with the skirting requirements
of this subchapter must obtain a skirting permit and pay a skirting inspection
fee at the time that the residential occupancy permit is issued.
      (2)   An owner of a manufactured home which is moved into or relocated
within the city after December 1, 1997, and which is in compliance with the
skirting requirements of this subchapter must pay a skirting inspection fee at
the time that the residential occupancy permit is issued.
   (C)   The skirting inspection fee imposed by this subchapter shall be fixed
in a fee schedule adopted annually by the City Council.
(Ord. 89-07, passed 5-23-89; Am. Ord. 97-32, passed 11-25-97)
§ 152.22  VIOLATIONS.
   Failure to comply with the provisions of this subchapter will result in the
filing of charges against the violator in municipal court. These charges will
be filed by the Building Official or his designated representative, and may be
in the form of a citation issued directly to the violator. Said citation shall,
as a minimum, bear the name of the violator, the location and the date of the
violation, the specific violation and the signature of the issuing officer. The
citation shall show the time and place where the violator must go to enter a
plea. In addition to the filing of charges, the city may refuse utility
services to any manufactured home in violation of the provisions of this
subchapter if said utility services are not already in use or if they shall
become discontinued for any reason.
(Ord. 89-07, passed 5-23-89) 
Penalty, see § 152.99
MOBILE HOME PARKS
§ 152.35  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CAMPER.  Any type of manufactured structure or recreational vehicle which is
not independent as defined in this section.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.  A vehicle which is built on a single chassis, is
self-propelled or towable and designed primarily as temporary living quarters
for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. It shall be capable of
legal registration for use on public highways; have a body of substantial, safe
and weatherproof construction, mounted upon a chassis of adequate carrying
capacity; and be completely self-contained as a vehicle having all of the basic
conveniences of a home including cooking, sleeping, and sanitary facilities. It
shall have a minimum, interior height of six feet in the living area with a
fixed roof (not a pop-up variety); a gas or electric refrigerator; built-in
heater which, if using a combustible fuel, must be vented to the outside; and a
toilet with connected discharge into a holding tank(s) so arranged that all
liquid waste of any kind flows directly into such holding tank(s) and none ever
flows onto the ground.
(Ord. 71-3, passed 3-17-71; Am. Ord. 96-25, passed 5-28-96; Am. Ord. 99-37,
passed 11-9-99)
§ 152.36  MANUFACTURED HOME PARK PLAN.
   (A)   The following requirements are generally applicable to all parks.
      (1)   The minimum size of the park will not be less than five acres. 
This minimum size shall not apply to the following parks zoned for manufactured
home park use but not currently active:  Woodlawn III (4.34 acres comprised of
parcels located on North Mary Jo and Jan Circle and Mary Addition (2.015 acres
located on E. Veterans Memorial Blvd. and Edwards Drive).
      (2)   The park shall be located on a well drained site, free from
stagnant pools of water.
      (3)   Entrances to the mobile home park must be clearly defined and
identified by address. Each mobile/manufactured home and/or travel trailer must
be clearly identified by three inch lot numbers.  This number must be visible
from the internal roadway at all times.
      (4)   Lots shall be clearly defined.  Manufactured housing shall be so
harbored on each lot that there shall be at least a 35 foot clearance between
manufactured homes.  In addition, no manufactured home or accessory building
shall be located closer than ten feet from any building, roadway, lot line or
from any property line bounding the park.  Lot size for site built residences
in a park shall comply with  lot area  requirements of  R-1 lots. Two parking
spaces constructed of asphalt or concrete will be provided for off-street
parking for each manufactured home.
      (5)   All park lots shall abut upon an internal roadway of not less than
36 feet in width which shall have unobstructed access to public street, alley,
or highway. All internal roadways shall be well marked in the daytime, and
lighted at night.
      (6)   Walkways, not less than two feet wide, shall be provided from the
park lots to the service buildings open to residents of the park; such as, but
not limited to, laundry room, pool, game room, sanitation facilities, etc.  The
walkway shall be hard surfaced, well marked in the daytime, and lighted at
night.
      (7)   All streets and internal roadways within the parks will be a
minimum of one inch hot asphalt cement on a four inch base of crushed stone. 
Any interior roadway not connected to a public street on both ends must have a
turn around with a minimum radius of 80 feet.
      (8)   Recreational vehicles may occupy a park lot for no more than six
months.  Request for occupancy for any period exceeding six months should be
submitted in writing to the Harker Heights Building Official.
   (B)   The following requirements are applicable to parks which provide space
for camper structures.
      (1)   Prior to renting or leasing space to a camper structure, park
owners/managers must obtain a conditional use permit following procedures
outlined in
Chapter 155, as amended.
      (2)   Sanitation support facilities, to include flush toilet and bath/
showers, must be made available in any park providing space for camper
structures.  Facilities will be located within 200 feet of the camper structure
lot.  Separate facilities must be available for men and women. These facilities
will be sized based on two flush toilets and two bath/shower units per every
ten spaces or increment thereof. Facilities must comply with Americans With
Disabilities Act standards.  By accepting a  license to operate a park, the
holder consents to provide the Harker Heights Building Official access to the
licensed premises and facilities to conduct an inspection for the purpose of
evaluating compliance with this chapter.
      (3)   A camper structure may be placed on a 2,000 square foot lot.  Such
lot will contain no accessory use structures and may be occupied by a tenant
for no more than 60 days.  Requests for occupancy for any period exceeding 60
days shall be submitted in writing to the city Building Official.
      (4)   Specific design and layout of the separate area and any service
facilities to be provided will be submitted to the Planning and Zoning
Commission with the request for a conditional use permit.
   (C)   The physical requirements identified in this chapter do not apply to
parks established specifically for recreational vehicles.  A plan for a
Recreational Vehicle Park must be submitted as an application for a conditional
use permit following procedures outlined in
Chapter 155.
(Ord. 71-3, passed 3-17-71; Am. Ord. 96-25, passed 5-28-96; Am. Ord. 96-31,
passed 6-11-96; Am. Ord. 99-37, passed 11-9-99)
Penalty, see § 152.99
§ 152.37  LOCATION.
   Manufactured Home Parks may be located only in conformity with the zoning
ordinance of the city and, in addition to the requirements contained therein,
each boundary of the park must be at least 200 feet from any permanent
residential building located outside the park, unless separated therefrom by a
natural or artificial screening which complies with §
150.36. The provisions of this section shall not apply to parks already
existing and operating on March 17, 1971. Such parks shall be treated as a non-
conforming use insofar as the requirements of this section are concerned.
(Ord. 71-3, passed 3-17-71; Am. Ord. 96-25, passed 5-28-96; Am. Ord. 99-37, 11-
9-99) 
Penalty, see § 152.99
§ 152.38  MAINTENANCE.
   Every person owning or operating a park shall maintain such park and any
facilities, fixtures, and permanent equipment in connection therewith, in a
clean and sanitary condition and shall maintain said equipment in a state of
good repair.
(Ord. 71-3, passed 3-17-71; Am. Ord. 96-25, passed 5-28-96) 
Penalty, see § 152.99
§ 152.39  ADDITIONAL CONSTRUCTION.
   Except as permitted by this section or by a license or permit issued by the
city, it shall be unlawful for any person operating a park or occupying a
manufactured home to construct or authorize construction in such park, or in
connection with such manufactured home any additional structure, building or
shelter as an accessory with or attached to a manufactured home without a
building permit approved by the Building Official.  Awnings of canvas or metal,
suitably constructed, may be attached to said manufactured homes.  Permits for
portable prefabricated temporary rooms, for the express purpose of increasing
the manufactured home, commonly called "cabana," may be approved by the
Building Official if they meet the following requirements:
   (A)   Strength of materials and structure to meet minimum standards of the
city Building Code.
   (B)   Capable of being dismantled when moved.
   (C)   Such rooms shall be completely dismantled and removed from the site at
the time the manufactured home to which it is accessory to is moved.
   (D)   Finish and appearance to be as near the same as possible to the
manufactured home to which it is an accessory and will not exceed the elevation
of the main use structure.
   (E)   The length must not exceed the length of the manufactured home to
which it is accessory to and will not exceed one-half of the square area of the
main use structure.
   (F)   Only one such structure per manufactured home shall be permitted.
(Ord. 71-3, passed 3-17-71; Am. Ord. 96-25, passed 5-28-96) 
Penalty, see § 152.99
§ 152.40  OFFICE BUILDING.
   Each park shall be provided with an on-site office in which shall be kept
copies of all records pertaining to the management and supervision of the park,
as well as all rules and regulations of the park.  Such records, rules and
regulations will be available for inspection by law enforcement officers,
public health officials, and other officials whose duties necessitate
acquisition of the information contained therein.
(Ord. 71-3, passed 3-17-71; Am. Ord. 96-25, passed 5-28-96) 
Penalty, see § 152.99
§ 152.41  LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate, within the
limits of the city, any park unless such person shall first obtain a license
therefor.
(Ord. 71-3, passed 3-17-71; Am. Ord. 96-25, passed 5-28-96) 
Penalty, see § 152.99
§ 152.42  LICENSE FEES.
   The fee for the park shall be as prescribed by the annual fee schedule
published with the city's operating budget.
(Ord. 71-3, passed 3-17-71; Am. Ord. 96-25, passed 5-28-96)
§ 152.43  APPLICATION.
   (A)   Application for a park license shall be filed with the city's Planning
and Development Department.  Applications shall be in writing, signed by the
applicant, and shall contain the following:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant.
      (2)   The common street address location and legal description of the
park.
      (3)   A complete plan of the park showing compliance with §§
152.36 -
152.40 of this chapter.
      (4)   Plans and specifications of all buildings and other improvements
constructed, or to be constructed within the park.
      (5)   Such further information as may be requested by the Planning and
Zoning Commission and/or the City Council to enable it to determine if the park
will comply with the legal requirements.
   (B)   The application and all accompanying plans and specifications shall be
filed in triplicate.  The City Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the
application and inspect the proposed plans and specifications.  It shall then
make a report to the City Council concerning such applicant and include therein
the recommendations relative to the issuance of a license. If the park is in
compliance with all provisions of this chapter and all other applicable
ordinances or statutes, the City Council may approve the application, and in
the case of proposed parks, may make such approval contingent upon the
completion of the park according to the plans and specifications submitted with
the application.  The City Manager, at the direction of the City Council, shall
issue the license.
(Ord. 71-3, passed 3-17-71; Am. Ord. 96-25, passed 5-28-96)
§ 152.44  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   The City Council may revoke any license or permit issued under this chapter
in case any of the provisions hereof are violated.  However, before said
license or permit may be revoked, the City Council must give ten days notice to
the holder of said license and hold a hearing thereon.  After said license or
permit has been revoked, the owner may reapply for a new license following
provisions outlined in this section, if the reasons for said revocation have
been duly corrected.
(Ord. 71-3, passed 3-17-71; Am. Ord. 96-25, passed 5-28-96)
§ 152.45  (RESERVED).
§ 152.46  POSTING OF LICENSES.
   The license certifications shall be conspicuously posted in the office of
the park at all times.
(Ord. 71-3, passed 3-17-71; Am. Ord. 96-25, passed 5-28-96; Am. Ord. 96-60,
passed 1-28-97) 
Penalty, see § 152.99
§ 152.47  RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR THE PARK.
   It shall be the duty of the owner, his agent, representative or manager to
prescribe rules and regulations for the management of the park; to make
adequate provisions for the enforcement of such rules; and to subscribe to any
and all the subsequent rules and regulations which may be adopted for the
management of such park.  Copies of all such rules and regulations shall be
furnished to the City Planning and Development Department.  In addition
thereto, it shall be the duty of the owner, his agent, representative or
manager to comply strictly with the following:
   (A)   Request the city perform an inspection of the water and sanitary
conveniences at least annually.
   (B)   Provide for the collection and removal of garbage and other waste
material.
   (C)   Prohibit the placing or storage of unsightly material or vehicles of
any kind.
(Ord. 71-3, passed 3-17-71; Am. Ord. 96-25, passed 5-28-96) 
Penalty, see § 152.99
§ 152.48  FACILITIES AND SERVICES.
   (A)   Water supply and sanitary sewer.  All independent manufactured homes
must be properly connected to an approved water, sewer, and electrical system. 
A manufacture home park must include a fire protection system designed to meet
commercial development standards.
   (B)   Fuel.  Bottled gas and propane equipment shall be installed and
maintained as prescribed by the Texas Railroad Commission Liquefied Petroleum
Gas Division Rules.
(Ord. 71-3, passed 3-17-71; Am. Ord. 96-25, passed 5-28-96) 
Penalty, see § 152.99
§ 152.99  PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, or corporation violating this chapter or any portion
thereof shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined
not more than $2,000, and each day that such violation occurs or continues
shall be considered a separate offense and punishable accordingly. 
(Ord. 89-07, passed 5-23-89; Am. Ord. 96-25, passed 5-28-96)
CHAPTER 153:  FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
153.01   Statutory authorization
   
153.02   Findings of fact
   
153.03   Statement of purpose
   
153.04   Methods of reducing flood losses
   
153.05   Definitions
   
153.06   Applicable lands
   
153.07   Areas of special flood hazard
   
153.08   Establishment of development permit
   
153.09   Compliance
   
153.10   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
153.11   Interpretation
   
153.12   Warning and disclaimer of liability
Administration
   
153.20   Designation and duties of the Floodplain Administrator
   
153.21   Permit procedures
   
153.22   Variance procedures
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
   
153.30   General standards
   
153.31   Specific standards
   
153.32   Standards for subdivision proposals
   
153.33   Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones)
   
153.34   Floodways
Enforcement and Penalties
   
153.90   Injunction
 
   
153.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.01  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The legislature of the State of Texas has in the Flood Control Insurance
Act, Tex. Water Code, § 16.315, delegated the responsibility of local
governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. 
Therefore, the City Council of the City of Harker Heights, Texas does ordain
this chapter.
(Ord. 2008-25, passed 9-23-08)
§ 153.02  FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the City of Harker Heights are subject to
periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which
adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
   (B)   These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and
velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to
floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated,
floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage.
(Ord. 2008-25, passed 9-23-08)
§ 153.03  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
   (A)   Protect human life and health;
   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
floodplains;
   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood
blight areas; and
   (G)   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood
area.
(Ord. 2008-25, passed 9-23-08)
§ 153.04  METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.
   In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following
methods:
   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or
property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or
velocities;
   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood
waters;
   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage;
   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands.
(Ord. 2008-25, passed 9-23-08)  Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.05  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLUVIAL FAN FLOODING.  Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan
or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-
velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and
deposition; and unpredictable flow paths.
   APEX.  A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow
path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial
fan flooding can occur.
   APPEAL BOARD.  The Zoning Board of Adjustment.
   APPURTENANT STRUCTURE.  A structure which is on the same parcel of property
as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to
the use of the principal structure.
   AREA OF FUTURE CONDITIONS FLOOD HAZARD.  The land area that would be
inundated by the 1% annual chance (100-year) flood based on future conditions
hydrology.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING.  A designated AO, AH, AR/A0, AR/AH, or VO zone on
a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a 1% or greater annual
chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly
defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and
where velocity flow may be evident.  Such flooding is characterized by ponding
or sheet flow.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.  Is the land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a  1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The
area may be designated as Zone A on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). After
detailed rate making has been completed in preparation for publication of the
FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/
A1-30, AR/AE, AR/A0, AR/AH, ARIA, VO, V 1-30, VE or V.
   BASE FLOOD.  The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE).  The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Zones
A, AE, AH, Al -A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the water surface
elevation resulting from the flood that has a 1% chance of equaling or
exceeding that level in any given year - also called the Base Flood.
   BASEMENT.  Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   BREAKAWAY WALL.  A wall that is not part of the structural support of the
building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under
specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion
of the building or supporting foundation system.
   CRITICAL FEATURE.  An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood
protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire
system would be compromised.
   DEVELOPMENT.  Any man-made change to improved and unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
   ELEVATED BUILDING.  For insurance purposes, a non-basement building, which
has its lowest elevated floor, raised above ground level by foundation walls,
shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION.  For the purposes of determining rates, structures
for which the  “start of construction” commenced before the effective date of
the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date.
“Existing construction” may also be referred to as “existing structures.”
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FLOOD OR FLOODING.  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
      (2)   The unusual and rapid, accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
   FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY.  An examination, evaluation and determination of
flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or
an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (such as mudflow) and/
or flood-related erosion hazards.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM).  An official map of a community, on which
the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special flood
hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS).  See Flood Elevation Study.
   FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD-PRONE AREA.  Any land area susceptible to being
inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding).
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT.  The operation of an overall program of corrective
and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management
regulations.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS.  Zoning ordinances, subdivision
regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances
(such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control
ordinance) and other applications of police power.  The term describes such
state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards
for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
   FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM.  Those physical structural works for which funds
have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been
constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of
the area within a community subject to a “special flood hazard” and the extent
of the depths of associated flooding.  Such a system typically includes
hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes.  These specialized
flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound
engineering standards.
   FLOOD PROOFING.  Any combination of structural and non-structural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
   FLOODWAY.  See Regulatory Floodway
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE.  A use, which cannot perform its intended
purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The
term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for
the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship
repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related
manufacturing facilities.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE.  The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE.  Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary a the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
         (a)   By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior or;
         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
   LEVEE.  A man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control,
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
   LEVEE SYSTEM.  A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or
levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which
are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
   LOWEST FLOOR.  The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely  for
parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National
Flood Insurance Program regulations.
   MANUFACTURED HOME.  A structure transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.  The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a “recreational vehicle”.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL.  For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base
flood elevations shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are
referenced.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION.  For the purpose of determining insurance rates,
structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the
effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is
later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For
floodplain management purposes, NEW CONSTRUCTION means structures for which the
“start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of a
floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.  A vehicle which is (1) built on a single chassis; (2)
400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
(3) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck;
and (4) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   REGULATORY FLOODWAY.  The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.
   RIVERINE.  Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook and the like.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA.  See Area of Special Flood Hazard.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION.  (For other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)),
includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of
the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE.  For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed
building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above
ground, as well as a manufactured home.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE.  Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.  Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before “start of construction” of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial
damage”, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either: (1) Any project for improvement of a structure to
correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions
or (2) any alteration of a “historic structure”, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a “historic
structure.”
   VARIANCE.  A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain
management regulation. (For full requirements see Section 60.6 of the National
Flood Insurance Program regulations.
   VIOLATION.  The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in Section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)
(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) National Flood Insurance Program
regulations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION.  The height, in relation to the North American
Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1938 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of
various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
areas.
(Ord. 2008-25, passed 9-23-08)
§ 153.06  APPLICABLE LANDS.
   The chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the city.
(Ord. 2008-25, passed 9-23-08)
§ 153.07  AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in the current scientific and engineering report entitled,
“The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) Bell County and Incorporate areas,” dated
September 26, 2008, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps and/or Flood
Boundary-Floodway Maps (FIRM and/or FBFM) dated September 26, 2008, and any
revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of
this chapter.
(Ord. 2008-25, passed 9-23-08)
§ 153.08  ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   A Floodplain Development Permit shall be required to ensure conformance with
the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2008-25, passed 9-23-08)  Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.09  COMPLIANCE.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use
changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other
applicable regulations.
(Ord. 2008-25, passed 9-23-08)  Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.10  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.  However, where this chapter and
another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. 2008-25, passed 9-23-08)
§ 153.11  INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be: (1) considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of
the governing body; and (3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers
granted under state statutes.
(Ord. 2008-25, passed 9-23-08)
§ 153.12  WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations.  On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes.  This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages.  This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
(Ord. 2008-25, passed 9-23-08)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 153.20  DESIGNATION AND DUTIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   The City Council will appoint a Flooplain Administrator to manage and
implement the provisions of this chapter and other appropriate sections of 44
CFR Part 59 (Emergency Management and Assistance - National Flood Insurance
Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management.
   (B)   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining
to the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   Review permit application to determine whether to ensure that the
proposed building site project, including the placement of manufactured homes,
will be reasonably safe from flooding.
      (3)   Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits
required by adoption of this chapter.
      (4)   Review permits for proposed development to assure that all
necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is
required.
      (5)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions)
the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
      (6)   Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the State
Coordinating Agency, which is the Texas Water Development Board (TWDB), prior
to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
      (7)   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained.
      (8)   When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance
with §
153.07, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably
utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a
federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of §§
153.30 through
153.34 of this chapter.
      (9)   When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the Floodplain
Administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements,
or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and
AE on the community’s FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative
effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the
base flood more than one foot at any point within the community.
      (10)   Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the
National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain
development in Zones Al -30, AE, AH, on the community’s FIRM which increases
the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than  one foot, provided
that the community first completes all of the provisions required by Section
65.12.
(Ord. 2008-25, passed 9-23-08; Am. Ord. 2014-23, passed 8-26-14)
§ 153.21 PERMIT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Application for a Floodplain Development Permit shall be presented to
the Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but
not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location,
dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and
proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the
location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard.
Additionally, the following information is required:
      (1)   Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures;
      (2)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential
structure shall be floodproofed;
      (3)   A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect
that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing
criteria of §
153.31(B);
      (4)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural
drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; and
      (5)   Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with §
153.20(B)(1).
   (B)   Approval or denial of a Floodplain Development Permit by the Flooplain
Administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the
following relevant factors:
      (1)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (2)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (3)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      (4)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (5)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      (6)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems;
      (7)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site;
      (8)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable; and
      (9)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use.
(Ord. 2008-25, passed 9-23-08; Am. Ord. 2009-01, passed 1-13-09)
§ 153.22  VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The Appeal Board shall hear and render judgment on requests for
variances from the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   The Appeal Board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when
it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination
made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of
this chapter.
   (C)   Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board
may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction.
   (D)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all actions
involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency upon request.
   (E)   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or
the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of this chapter.
   (F)   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in size contiguous to
and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level, providing the relevant factors in §
153.21(B) have been fully considered.  As the lot size increases beyond the 1/
2 acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance
increases.
   (G)   Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this
chapter, the Appeal Board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this
chapter.
   (H)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
   (I)   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will
not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure and
the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and
design of the structure.
   (J)   Prerequisites for granting variances:
      (1)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      (2)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         (a)   Showing a good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the
public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
      (3)   Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given
written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the
reduced lowest floor elevation.
   (K)   Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of
a functionally dependent use provided that (1) the criteria outlined in
divisions (A) through (I) of this section are met, and (2) the structure or
other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during
the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
(Ord. 2008-25, passed 9-23-08; Am. Ord. 2009-01, passed 1-13-09)
PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 153.30  GENERAL STANDARDS.
   In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required
for all new construction and substantial improvements:
   (A)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy;
   (B)   All new construction or, substantial improvements shall be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
   (C)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials resistant to flood damage;
   (D)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding;
   (E)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;
   (F)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and
discharge from the systems into flood waters; and
   (G)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding.
(Ord. 2008-25, passed 9-23-08)
§ 153.31  SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has
been provided as set forth in §§
153.07,
153.20(B)(8), or
153.32(C), the following provisions are required:
   (A)   Residential construction.  New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including
basement), elevated to one foot or more above the base flood elevation. A
registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a
certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standard of this
division as proposed in §
153.21(A)(1), is satisfied.
   (B)   Nonresidential construction.  New construction and substantial
improvements any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall
either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to one foot or more
above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer
or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and
plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined
in this section. A record of such certification which includes the specific
elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are
floodproofed shall be maintained by the Floodplain Administrator.
   (C)   Enclosures.  New construction and substantial improvements, with fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of
vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which
are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters.  Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by
a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
      (1)   A minimum of two openings on separate walls having a total net area
of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject
to flooding shall be provided.
      (2)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above
grade.
      (3)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
   (D)   Manufactured homes.
      (1)   All manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A on the
community’s FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which
minimize flood damage.  For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured
homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of
over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition
to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
      (2)   All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved
within Zones Al-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites (a) outside of
a manufactured home park or subdivision, (b) in a new manufactured home park or
subdivision, (c) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision, or (d) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on
which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as a result of a
flood, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor
of the manufactured home is elevated to one-foot or more above the base flood
elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system
to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
      (3)   All manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites
in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with Zones A1-30, AH and
AE on the community’s FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of division
(D) of this section shall be elevated so that either:
         (a)   The lowest floor of the manufactured home is one foot or more
above the base flood elevation; or
         (b)   The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers
or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less
than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
   (E)   Recreational vehicles.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites
within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community’s FIRM shall either (1) be on
the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, or (2) be fully licensed and
ready for highway use, or (3) meet the permit requirements of §
153.21(A) and the elevation and anchoring requirements for “manufactured homes”
in division (D) of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway
use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by
quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently
attached additions.
(Ord. 2008-25, passed 9-23-08; Am. Ord. 2009-01, passed 1-13-09)
§ 153.32  STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.
   (A)   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with §§
153.02 through
153.04 of this chapter.
   (B)   All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the
placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet Floodplain
Development Permit requirements of §§
153.08 and
153.21, and the provisions of §§
153.30 through
153.34 of this chapter.
   (C)   Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals
and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions which is greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever
is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to §
153.07 or §
153.20(B)(8) of this chapter.
   (D)   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure
to flood hazards.
   (E)   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage.
(Ord. 2008-25, passed 9-23-08; Am. Ord. 2009-01, passed 1-13-09)  Penalty, see
§
153.99
§ 153.33  STANDARDS FOR AREAS OF SHALLOW FLOODING (AO/AH ZONES).
   Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in §
153.07, are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special
flood hazards associated with flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly
defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable,
and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by
ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply:
   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated one foot or more
above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high
as the depth number specified in feet on the community’s FIRM (at least two
feet if no depth number is specified).
   (B)   All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential
structures:
      (1)   Shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated one foot
or more above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least
as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community’s FIRM (at least
two feet if no depth number is specified); or
      (2)   Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities shall be
designed so that below the base specified flood depth in an AO Zone, or below
the Base Flood Elevation in an All Zone, the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads of effects of buoyancy.
   (C)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a
certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standards of this
section, as proposed in §
153.21 are satisfied.
   (D)   Within Zones AH or AO there shall be adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes to guide flood waters around and away from proposed
structures.
(Ord. 2008-25, passed 9-23-08)  Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.34  FLOODWAYS.
   Located within areas of special flood hazard established in §
153.07 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely
hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris,
potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall
apply:
   (A)   Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory
floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic
analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the
proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within
the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
   (B)   If §
153.34(A) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements
shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of §§
153.30 through
153.34 of this chapter.
   (C)   Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the
National Flood Insurance Program Regulations, a community may permit
encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an
increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first completes
all of the provisions required by Section 65.12.
(Ord. 2008-25, passed 9-23-08; Am. Ord. 2009-01, passed 1-13-09)  Penalty, see
§
153.99
ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
§ 153.90  INJUNCTION.
   In addition to any other remedies which may be available at law or in
equity, the city may sue in the appropriate court for an injunction to prohibit
the violation of, or to enforce compliance with, any regulation contained in
this chapter. The city is not required to give bond as a condition to the
issuance of injunctive relief
(Ord. 2008-25, passed 9-23-08)
§ 153.99  PENALTY.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not
more than $500 for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and
expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City
of Harker Heights from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to
prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. 2008-25, passed 9-23-08)
CHAPTER 154:  SUBDIVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
154.01   Definitions
   
154.02   Authority and purpose
   
154.03   Fees
   
154.04   Thoroughfare plan
   
154.05   Overview
   
154.06   Developers presence required
   
154.07   Exemptions
   
154.08   Building permits
   
154.09   Site prep plan
   
154.10   Appeals
Platting Process
   
154.20   General residential and commercial
   
154.21   Preliminary plat
   
154.22   Final plat
   
154.23   Guarantee of performance
   
154.24   Maintenance bond required
   
154.25   As built drawings
   
154.26   Special plats or procedures
Design Standards
   
154.35   Design standards within city limits
   
154.36   Public infrastructure improvements
   
154.37   Streets
   
154.38   Street lighting
   
154.39   Block lengths
   
154.40   Sidewalks
   
154.41   Drainage and storm water management
   
154.42   Easements
   
154.43   Lots
   
154.44   Monuments
   
154.45   Special provision for Rural, Hillside and Larger Lot Subdivision
ETJ Area
   
154.55   Application to the extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ)
Administration and Enforcement
   
154.60   Waivers
   
154.61   Findings
   
154.62   Conflict with other provisions
   
154.63   Enforcement of regulations
   
Appendix A: Pavement Design Procedure
   
Appendix B: Rainfall Intensity Curve
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESS.  The means by which property is connected to a public street. ACCESS
to/from TXDOT facilities must be approved by TXDOT prior to approval of a plat.
ACCESS to/from nonresidential property through or to residential streets must
be avoided.
   ALLEY.  A narrow public passage which provides a secondary means of
vehicular access to abutting property and which is used primarily for vehicular
traffic to the rear or side of properties which otherwise abut on a public
street.
   AMENDING PLAT.  A subdivision plat that reflects changes to an original
filed final plat.
   BENCHMARK.  A monument that is part of a leveling network and is a point of
precisely measured elevation. See MONUMENT.
   BUILDING.  Any structure that encloses a space used for sheltering any
occupancy. Each portion of a building separated from other portions by a
firewall shall be considered a separate building.
   CITY ATTORNEY.  The attorney employed as City Attorney of the city.
   CITY COUNCIL.  The duly and constitutionally elected governing body of the
city.
   CITY MANAGER.  The person employed as the chief administrative officer of
the city, and duly appointed by the City Council.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.  The plan and adaptations, thoroughfare plan, bikeway
plan, future land use plan, gateways and corridors, amendments or supplements
thereto, adopted by the City Council and used as a guide for future development
of the city and surrounding areas.
   CONCEPT PLAN. The Concept Plan is the initial project layout that provides
an opportunity to review and evaluate the impact of a proposed development on
the character of the surrounding area in which it is proposed to be located.
The process takes into consideration the general form of the land before and
after development, as well as the spatial relationship of the proposed
structures, open space, landscape areas, parking, and general access and
circulation patterns as they relate to the proposed development and the
surrounding areas.
   COUNTY COMMISSIONERS COURT.  The duly and constitutionally elected governing
body of Bell County, Texas.
   COVENANT.  A private legal restriction on the use of land contained in the
deed to the property or otherwise formally recorded.
   DENSITY.  The number of dwelling units per acre in a residential
development.
   DEVELOPER.  Any person or persons, firm or corporation subdividing or
developing a tract or parcel of land to be sold or otherwise marketed.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any activity initiated or directed to improve real estate and
requiring a permit from a city, county, or government agency, including without
limitation intensive brush and or tree removal of a significant amount.
   EASEMENT.  A strip of land reserved for public use by the grantor and
accepted by the city for the installation and maintenance of utility lines,
improved drainage ditches or channels, or for other city or public services or
for access to property. The ownership or title to the land encompassed by the
easement being retained by the owner.
   EASEMENT, PEDESTRIAN.  EASEMENT, as defined above, for the purposes of
pedestrian traffic (i.e. for sidewalks, bike paths).
   EASEMENT, VEHICULAR.  EASEMENT, as defined above, for the purposes of
vehicular traffic.
   ENGINEER.  A person duly authorized and licensed under the provisions of the
Texas Engineering Practice Act (V.T.C.A., Tex. Occupations Code Ch. 1001), as
heretofore or hereinafter amended, to practice the profession of engineerings
   ENGINEERING DRAWINGS.  Engineering drawings support and provide greater
detail to a plat. ENGINEERING DRAWINGS typically, where applicable, include,
but are not limited to, water layout, sewer layout, drainage and topography,
street light layout, street plan and profile sheets, sewer main plan and
profile, water utility details, sewer utility details, paving details, drainage
details, erosion and sedimentation control plan and standard construction
details. ENGINEERING DRAWINGS shall be prepared and sealed by a Texas Licensed
Professional Engineer and shall conform to the general requirements and minimum
standards of design and requirements as presented in this chapter.
   EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION (ETJ). Under the terms of V.T.C.A., Tex. Loc.
Gov’t Code Ch. 42, the unincorporated area, not a part of  any other city,
which is contiguous to the corporate limits of the city, the outer boundaries
of which are measured from the extremities of the corporate limits of the city
outward for a distance of two miles, except where it overlaps the ETJ, of other
municipalities. Such overlaps are apportioned by mutual agreement with the
other municipalities, adopted by resolution and shown on the official ETJ map.
   FLAG LOT.  A large lot not meeting minimum frontage requirements where
access to the public road is by a narrow 30 foot wide strip of land which is
part of the lot. Flag lots should be avoided if at all possible.
   INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS.  Any public facility, service or amenity,
constructed to sustain a proposed land use activity. INFRASTRUCTURE includes,
but is not limited to, streets, alleys, sidewalks, crosswalks, sanitary sewers,
sewage lift stations, septic tanks or other sewage facilities to include water
mains, water systems, drainage culverts, lined channels, storm sewers, bridges,
streetlights and fire hydrants.
   LAY DOWN CURB.  A curb constructed of concrete that is a lower height to
promote drainage, allow access onto property or into a driveway or allows for
handicap access to a sidewalk.
   LOT.  A physically undivided tract or parcel of land having frontage on a
public street and which is, or in the future may be, offered for sale,
conveyance, transfer, lease or improvement, which is designated as a distinct
and separate tract and which is identified by a lot number or tract symbol on
an approved subdivision plat which has been officially recorded.
   LOT, CORNER.  A lot abutting two or more streets at their intersection.
   LOT DEPTH.  The average depth of the lot.
   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE.  A lot that fronts and backs on two streets.
   LOT FRONT OR FRONTAGE.  That portion of a lot or tract of land which is the
principal side of a property and which abuts on a public street. This shall be
the same side in which direction a building will face and the side on which
there is the main entrance.
   LOT WIDTH.  The average width of the lot.
   MAINTENANCE BOND.  Bond or letter of credit guaranteeing against defects in
public roads, utilities, drainage features or other public infrastructure for a
specified time period following the approval of the final plat by the city.
   MAY.  Deemed permissible.
   MINOR SUBDIVISIONS.  See SUBDIVISIONS, MINOR.
   MONUMENT.  A reference point, line or plane used as a basis for
measurements.
   OPEN SPACE.  A public or common ownership property designated for a
recreation area, private park, building setback and ornamental areas open to
general view within the development. OPEN SPACE does not include streets or
alleys.
   PARCEL.  A tract of land owned and recorded as the property of the same
persons or controlled by a single entity.
   PAVEMENT WIDTH.  The width from the back of curb to the back of curb of a
street.
   PERFORMANCE BOND.  A surety bond posted by a developer guaranteeing full
performance as specified in plans approved by the city with the proceeds to be
used by the city to complete the improvements on the plans in the event of the
developers nonperformance.
   PERSON.  Any individual, association, firm, corporation, governmental
agency, partnership or political subdivision.
   PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.  A board comprised of citizens of the city
appointed by the City Council as an advisory body, charged to recommend changes
in the zoning and other planning functions as delegated by the City Council.
   PLAT.  A map of a subdivision showing the location and boundaries of
individual parcels of land subdivided into lots, with streets, alleys and the
like, and drawn to scale. As used in this chapter, a PLAT includes final plats,
replats, amending plats and minor plats.
   PRELIMINARY PLAT.  A map indicating the proposed layout of all phases of
development of an area of land under the same ownership that is submitted to
city staff for preliminary approval.
   REPLAT.  The process of re-subdividing property.
   RESERVE STRIP OR PARCEL.  Any lot, tract, parcel, strip or any other land
which prohibits access from public or private tracts or parcels of land
dedicated or intended to be dedicated to public use.
   RE-SUBDIVISION.  The replacement of all or a part of a recorded plat with a
new plat which alters the lines within the perimeter boundary of the previous
plat.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY.  A strip of land dedicated to the public for public streets or
to accommodate access and/or utilities to lots or tracts.
   SERVICE LINES, PRIVATE.  That portion of the utility service line from the
property line at the right-of-way to the structure itself.
   SERVICE LINES, PUBLIC.  That portion of the utility service line that is
completely contained within the right-of-way.
   SHALL.  Deemed as mandatory.
   SIDEWALK.  A paved pedestrian walkway constructed within a street right-of-
way and generally parallel to the street.
   SITE DEVELOPMENT REVIEW COMMITTEE (SDRC).  A committee consisting of
representatives from various city departments and private utility companies
which reviews all plats and development proposals for compliance with
applicable codes and ordinances.
   STREET.  A way for vehicular traffic, whether designed as a street, highway,
thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place or
other designation. STREETS may be classified as follows.
      ALLEY.  Minor public right-of-way which provides a secondary means of
vehicular access to abutting property and which is used primarily for vehicular
traffic to the rear or side of properties which otherwise abut on a public
street.
      CUL-DE-SAC.  Street with only one outlet which terminates in a vehicular
turnaround at the other end. See §
154.37 for specific standards associated with cul-de-sac streets.
      DEAD-END.  Street with only one outlet but with no vehicular turnaround
at the other end (see STREET and/or CUL-DE-SAC). See §
154.37 for specific standards associated with dead-end streets.
      FRONTAGE ROAD.  Service road, usually parallel to a highway, designed to
reduce the number of driveways that intersect the highway. See §
154.37 for specific standards associated with frontage roads.
      INTERNAL STREET.  Street within a subdivision that begins at an
intersection and ends in a cul-de-sac or connects to the same street of origin.
This street does not provide for the through movement of traffic. See §
154.37 for specific standards associated with internal streets.
      LOCAL STREET.  Street whose primary function is to provide access to
individual lots or tracts. See §
154.37 for specific standards associated with local streets.
      MAJOR ARTERIAL.  High volume streets with multiple lanes. Arterials shall
be between 60 and 80 feet wide, depending on the needs and the design as
determined by the city. The right-of-way shall be between 90 and 120 feet,
depending on the design requirements as determined by the city. These are high
volume streets with five or more lanes. These are limited access roads on which
no single-family or two-family residential lots may front.
      MAJOR COLLECTORS.  Streets generally located along borders of
neighborhoods and within commercial areas to collect and to channel this
traffic to the arterial system. MAJOR COLLECTORS shall be 48 feet wide with a
minimum of 80 feet of right-of-way. These are limited access roads on which no
single-family or two-family residential lots may front (i.e., no driveways
shall be allowed) unless there is no other reasonable and safe access to the
lot.
      MINOR ARTERIALS.  High volume streets that conduct traffic between
communities and activity centers and connect to major state and interstate
highways. Arterials shall be between 60 and 80 feet wide, depending on the
needs and the design as determined by the city. The right-of-way shall be
between 90 and 120 feet, depending on the design requirements as determined by
the city. These are high volume streets with five or more lanes. These are
limited access roads on which no single-family or two-family residential lots
may front.
      MINOR COLLECTORS.  Streets generally located within subdivisions or
between subdivisions to collect traffic from residential streets and to channel
this traffic to major collectors. Residential lots may front on these streets.
MINOR COLLECTORS shall be 42 feet wide, with a minimum of 70 feet of right-of-
way.
      RESIDENTIAL STREETS.  Streets that serve individual residential lots.
They carry low traffic volumes at low speeds. RESIDENTIAL STREETS shall be 36
feet in width back-of-curb to back-of-curb with a minimum 60 feet of right-of-
way. These are streets that serve individual residential lots. Where entrances
to subdivisions are not part of a collector street, they shall be 42 feet wide
with 70 feet of right-of-way for a distance of 100 feet from the intersection.
   STRUCTURE.  Anything that is built or constructed with a roof covering.
   SUBDIVISION.  Any division of land for which a plat is required to be
approved and recorded under the provision of V.T.C.A., Tex. Loc. Gov’t. Code, §
212.004. This includes the division of land situated within the corporate
limits of the city, or within the city’s extraterritorial jurisdiction, into
two or more parts for any purpose no matter how it is conveyed. However, it
does not include the division of land into parts greater than five acres where
each part has access and no public improvement is being dedicated. No
subdivision of land within the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction may be
recorded with the County Clerk until a final plat, accurately describing the
property to be subdivided and platted, has been approved by the city in
accordance with this chapter, signed and dated by the Mayor, Chair of the
Planning and Zoning Commission and/or other designated officers of the city.
      SUBDIVISION, MAJOR.  Any subdivision consisting of five or more lots and/
or a subdivision requiring extension of municipal facilities. Typically, MAJOR
SUBDIVISIONS incorporate more than one phase of development.
      SUBDIVISION, MINOR.  A subdivision of four or fewer lots fronting on
existing streets and not requiring the creation of any new street or extension
of municipal facilities.
   SURVEYOR.  A licensed state land surveyor or a registered professional land
surveyor, as authorized by the Professional Land Surveying Practices Act
(V.T.C.A., Tex. Occupations Code, Ch. 1071).
   TEXAS COMMISSION ON ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY (TCEQ).  The environmental agency
for the state.
   THOROUGHFARE PLAN.  The plan of major and secondary streets and highways,
which is the part of the comprehensive plan adopted by the City Council.
(Ord. 2010-08, passed 3-9-10; Am. Ord. 2012-21, passed 10-9-12)
§ 154.02  AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   This chapter is adopted under the authority of the Constitution and
laws of the State of Texas, specifically Tex. Loc. Gov’t. Code, Ch. 212
regarding Municipal Regulation of Subdivisions and Property Development, as
amended. The regulations contained herein shall govern every subdivision of
land as defined within the corporate limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction
of the city.
   (B)   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the orderly, safe and
healthful development of the areas within the city and its extraterritorial
jurisdiction. Specifically, this chapter is intended to coordinate the orderly
subdivision of property along with other city ordinances relating to flood
prevention and protections, zoning, site development review, access and off-
street parking, building codes and other development related codes.
(Ord. 2010-08, passed 3-9-10)
§ 154.03  FEES.
   Fees shall be as presented in the Fee Schedule approved by the City Council
as part of the current fiscal year’s operating budget.
(Ord. 2010-08, passed 3-9-10)
§ 154.04  THOROUGHFARE PLAN.
   (A)   The thoroughfare plan map attached to Ordinance 2004-15 as Exhibit “A”
and incorporated herein by reference for all relevant purposes as if set forth
at length herein, is hereby adopted and approved by the City Council as the
transportation thoroughfare plan map. All prior thoroughfare plans and
associated thoroughfare plan maps are hereby repealed, and the comprehensive
plan is amended to reflect the changes shown in the thoroughfare plan map
herein adopted.
   (B)   The transportation thoroughfare plan is the city’s general plan for
guiding thoroughfare system development, including sidewalks, the planned
widening and extension of its roads, streets and public highways within the
city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. The plan indicates the needed
rights-of-way, general alignments for planned new roadways, as well as plans
for widening and extensions of existing thoroughfares. Proposed general
alignments are shown for planned new roadways, but actual alignments may vary
depending upon the topography of the land and changing conditions. The
importance of thoroughfare planning is to decide, in advance, the general
location and type of thoroughfares that are needed to serve the projected
future mobility needs of the city and region, and to require consideration of
thoroughfare right-of-way needs concurrent with new development or
redevelopment.
   (C)   Sidewalks and other pedestrian pathways such as linear parks along
drainage channels are necessary to move people safely to and from schools and
commercial areas while providing opportunity for neighborhoods to be more
neighborly and residents to walk, exercise and the like.
   (D)   The plan shows approximate alignments and right-of-way requirements
for planned thoroughfares that should be considered in platting of
subdivisions, required right-of-way dedication and construction of major
roadways. The plan does not show future alignments of residential streets
because the function of these streets is to provide access to adjacent land
development. The alignment of residential streets may vary depending upon
specific development plans. Minor collectors’ alignments are to be determined
based on function approval during the planning process for new developments.
   (E)   The original of the thoroughfare plan map shall be filed in the office
of the City Secretary. This copy shall be the official map and shall bear the
signature of the Mayor and attestation of the City Secretary. This copy shall
not be changed in any manner except as the Council may amend this thoroughfare
plan from time to time. In case of any question, this copy, together with any
amending ordinances, shall be controlling.
   (F)   Additional copies of the original map shall be placed in the offices
of the Planning and Development Director and the Public Works Director. These
copies shall be maintained up-to-date by posting thereon all subsequent
amendments and shall be identified as the official thoroughfare plan map.
(Ord. 2010-08, passed 3-9-10)
§ 154.05  OVERVIEW.
   (A)   A filed plat shall be required in accordance with the procedures
outlined in this chapter in the following circumstances:
      (1)   Subdivision of land into two or more parts;
      (2)   Changing the configuration of existing filed plats;
      (3)   Division of land where there is no access to the tract(s);
      (4)   Division of land where new public infrastructure is required; or
      (5)   Prior to obtaining building permits on unplatted lots.
   (B)   If the Director of Planning and Development or his or her designee
determines that a plat or replat is required, no building permit shall be
issued by the city until satisfactory compliance is achieved.
   (C)   The subdivider, developer or person requesting plat approval will be
required to install, at his or her own expense, all water lines, streets,
street signs, sewer lines, storm sewer lines, drainage facilities and
structures within the subdivision, in accordance with city standards governing
the same, including all engineering costs covering design, layout and
construction. When a street pavement of a greater width than 42 feet, back of
curb to back of curb, is required by the city, the city shall pay the cost of
paving the additional width and associated costs. There will be no
participation by the city in the cost of any of the underground utility lines
or drainage facilities, within the subdivision, except in the event of the
requirement for oversize mains to serve land areas and improvements beyond the
subdivision in question or to serve other subdivisions. The city’s
participation will be considered individually, upon the merits of each facility
and the condition involved, and shall be in accordance with policies set forth
by the City Council. All utility mains will be sized to meet the acceptable
services/pressures adopted by the city. The city will not participate in water
mains eight inches or larger in diameter and sewer mains eight inches or larger
in diameter unless these mains are required by the city for future expansion
and which are not required to serve the development in question with acceptable
services/pressures adopted by the city.
(Ord. 2010-08, passed 3-9-10)
§ 154.06  DEVELOPERS PRESENCE REQUIRED.
   The developer or his or her authorized representative must be present at all
Planning and Zoning Commission Meetings and City Council meetings at which his
or her plan or plat is on the agenda for discussion or action. Failure of the
developer or his or her authorized representative to appear before the Planning
and Zoning Commission or City Council during a meeting on which the plan or
plat is on the agenda for discussion or action may be deemed a withdrawal of
the plat or plan.
(Ord. 2010-08, passed 3-9-10)
§ 154.07  EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter do not apply to:
   (A)   The division of land within city limits or extraterritorial
jurisdiction (ETJ) by metes and bounds in parcels five acres or more where each
parcel has access to a public street and no public improvement is required;
   (B)   Cemeteries complying with all state and local laws and regulations;
   (C)   Divisions of land created by a court of competent jurisdiction;
   (D)   The use of two or more platted lots to create a larger development
site:
      (1)   The proposed use is the same as that for which the subdivision was
platted by the subdivider (i.e., in R-l zoning district, only one home may be
constructed on both adjoining lots);
      (2)   No increase is anticipated in the estimated traffic generation or
utility demands; and
      (3)   Off-site storm water runoff is neither increased nor concentrated.
   (E)   The division of an existing legal lot, the division being caused by
the city’s acquisition of a part of the legal lot, when the Council finds that
the acquisition by the city is in the best interest of the public health,
safety and welfare of the citizens of Harker Heights and/or its
extraterritorial jurisdiction.
Upon the Council so finding, the resulting parcels shall be deemed to
constitute legal lots for the purposes of developing under the requirements of
this chapter and other applicable city regulations. In creating the division,
the Council is empowered to attach to the resulting parcels acquired by the
city, and the remainder parcels not acquired by the city upon agreement with
the owner, such conditions as it finds reasonable and necessary to offset any
adverse effects resulting from the city’s acquisition as a part of the original
legal lot, in so far as any such condition is not contrary to the spirit and
intent of the ordinance.
(Ord. 2010-08, passed 3-9-10)
§ 154.08  BUILDING PERMITS.
   No building permit, certificate of occupancy, plumbing permit, electrical
permit or utility tap shall be issued by the city for or with respect to any
land within the city limit for any parcel of land which was developed not in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter until full compliance and proper
approvals have been obtained.
(Ord. 2010-08, passed 3-9-10)
§ 154.09  SITE PREP PLAN.
   No excavation of land or construction of any public or private improvements
shall take place or commence prior to obtaining a site preparation permit and
no public infrastructure construction shall begin within any proposed
subdivision until such time as the city approves the plans and specifications
for such subdivision and the construction of the approved erosion and sediment
control measures.
(Ord. 2010-08, passed 3-9-10)
§ 154.10  APPEALS.
   Decisions of the Director of Planning and Development may be appealed first
to the City Manager and then to the City Council.
(Ord. 2010-08, passed 3-9-10)
PLATTING PROCESS
§ 154.20  GENERAL RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL.
   (A)   The owner of a lot, tract, site or parcel must obtain final plat
approval for any subdivision or development activity to which this chapter
applies. The plat approval process generally consists of the following
procedures:
      (1)   One or more pre-application meetings with city staff for review and
discussion of the applicant's basic concept plan. The pre-application meeting
is the initial step in the development process intended to introduce basic
project components and area information. The pre-application meeting provides
the opportunity for review, analysis, and discussion of basic project intent,
design, components and compatibility.
      (2)   Submission of an application and a concept plan by the applicant
for initial review by city staff, with final review and approval required by
the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council.
         (a)   Concept plan. The purpose of the concept plan is to demonstrate
compatibility of the proposed development with this chapter and other
applicable city ordinances, and the coordination of improvements within and
among individually platted parcels, sections, or phases of a development, and
the surrounding properties prior to the consideration of a preliminary plat.
The concept plan is an opportunity to detect and correct design challenges
before the developer prepares detailed engineering documents, but does not
constitute the submittal of a plat.
         (b)   Any residential development involving four or fewer lots
fronting on an existing street and not requiring the creation of any new street
or the extension of any municipal facilities does not require the submittal of
a concept plan.
         (c)   In lieu of a concept plan, the City Manager may permit submittal
of a site plan at the time of building permit application.
         (d)   The concept plan shall contain or have attached thereto the
following:
            1.   Name of the developer, record owner, and authorized agents,
proposed name of the development.
            2.   A layout of the entire tract, including internal lots, and its
relationship to adjacent property, existing development and recorded plats,
showing the existing property lines of the land being subdivided, north
indicator, and scale.
            3.   Topographic contours available from the U.S. Geological
Survey.
            4.   Significant drainage features and structures including any
regulatory one-hundred-year floodplains, the location of existing watercourses,
dry creek beds, wells, sinkholes and other similar features.
            5.   Specific information related to land use for the proposed
development and adjoining property for a distance of 300 feet.
            6.   Building placement and building envelopes.
            7.   Parking layout.
            8.   General landscaping and buffer areas.
            9.   Location of all existing and proposed water and sewer lines.
            10.   All existing and/or proposed public utility easements and
private  easements.
            11.   Location of all existing and proposed stormwater drainage
easements or onsite detention plan.
            12.   Location of all existing and proposed streets, sidewalks,
alleys, and access points.
            13.   Vehicular circulation/ connectivity plan.
            14.   Location of all existing and proposed fire/emergency vehicle
access lanes.
            15.   Location of all existing and proposed fire hydrants.
         (e)   A concept plan shall be submitted to the Planning and
Development Department prior to the submittal of a preliminary plat unless the
Director of Planning and Development authorizes concurrent filing.
         (f)   The concept plan shall be drawn on 24" x 36" sheets and/or on a
plat document size format so as to be consistent with the preliminary/final
plat document. When more than one sheet is necessary to illustrate the entire
area, an index sheet showing the entire subdivision, at a scale sufficient to
identify the drawings that follow, shall be attached to the concept plan
document.
         (g)   The City Manager or his designated appointee will have the
authority to review and approve any substantial amendments to a prior concept
plan.
         (h)   An approved concept plan shall expire if there is more than a
24-month period of time between its approval and the submittal of a preliminary
plat.
      (3)   Submission of a preliminary plat and preliminary engineering
drawings by the applicant for review and approval by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and City Council.
      (4)   Submission of final engineering drawings and construction of
infrastructure by the applicant for approval by the Director of Planning and
Development and the Director of Public Works.
      (5)   Submission of a final plat by the applicant for review and approval
by the Director of Planning and Development along with a letter of credit or
performance bond for any infrastructure item that is not complete. The Planning
and Development Director may not disapprove the plat but shall refer any plat
to the Planning and Zoning Commission if the applicant refuses to implement the
Director's recommendations.
      (6)   Submission of Mylars, field notes, dedication, and as built
drawings signed by a Texas Professional Engineer (when required). In addition,
if the applicant is other than a natural person acting on his own behalf,
submit a resolution, unanimous consent, or other such instrument in recordable
form  authorizing specific persons to act on behalf of the applicant in
requesting final plat approval.
      (7)   Filing of final plat.
   (B)   Applications for minor plats, replats, amending plats, preliminary
plats and final plats shall be submitted to the Planning and Development
Department. Applications shall contain the following.
      (1)   Application.  Completed application form.
      (2)   Fee.  Application fee as established by the City Council and stated
in the city’s fee schedule.
      (3)   Copies.
         (a)   Preliminary plats shall require ten paper copies of the plat,
and seven sets of preliminary engineering drawings with necessary calculations.
After plat comments are approved by the City Council, the developer shall
submit three corrected copies of the plat and/or engineering drawings if
changes to the plat and/or engineering drawings are required. Corrected copies
should be submitted before construction begins on the subdivision.
         (b)   Final plats shall require ten paper copies of the plat and seven
sets of final engineering drawings with necessary calculations. After plat
comments are approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, and the City
Council if necessary, the developer shall submit three corrected copies of the
plat and/or engineering drawings if changes to the plat and/or engineering
drawings are required.
         (c)   A digital copy of the final plat must be submitted. Digital
final plat files should be submitted in DXF, DWG or GIS shapefile/feature
class/coverage format. This digital format shall be an exact replica of any
required and/or included data represented on the submitted hard copy of the
final plat. Engineering drawings are excepted from this requirement. This data
must be provided on standard transfer media or by electronic transfer (three
and one-half inch floppy disk or CD-ROM, DVD, e-mail attachment or any other
media as approved by the city Planning Department). The submitted transfer
media shall be labeled with the project name (subdivision name) and filing
date. State Plane 83 Texas South Central Zone 4204 coordinate system should be
the base of all submissions whenever possible.
      (4)   Time line. Submittal of plats and engineering drawings, not meeting
the standards for being a minor plat, shall be made 28 days prior to the
scheduled Planning and Zoning Commission meeting as preliminary plats and
preliminary engineering drawings. Preliminary plats and preliminary engineering
drawings shall be presented to the Council within 30 days of action being taken
by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Final plats and final engineering
drawings shall be reviewed by the Director of Planning and Development. Final
plats and final engineering drawings shall be reviewed by the Planning and
Zoning Commission and the Council only if the Director of Planning and
Development finds that there is substantial deviation, as defined in §
154.21(B), from the preliminary plat or preliminary engineering drawings. If
the Director of Planning and Development rules that a final plat and/or final
engineering drawings substantially deviate from the approved preliminary plat
and/or preliminary engineering drawings, then the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall have 30 days from the date of application of the plat to make
a ruling and the City Council shall have 30 days from the date of the Planning
and Zoning Commission’s ruling to take action on the final plat.
      (5)   Post approval of final plat.  The developer shall provide the city
with two original reproducible Mylars and two paper copies of the plat with the
required original signatures, dedications and specific notations.
      (6)   As built drawing submital requirements. The developer shall provide
the city with a digital copy and a single set of paper drawings of the
constructed infrastructure. These drawings shall meet the requirements as set
in §
154.25, “As Built Drawings”. Digital as built files should be submitted in PDF,
DXF, DWG or GIS shapefile/feature class/coverage format. This digital format
shall be an exact replica of any required and/or included data represented on
the submitted hard copy drawing/document. This data must be provided on
standard transfer media or by electronic transfer (three and one-half inch
floppy disk or CD-ROM, DVD, e-mail attachment or any other media as approved by
the city Planning Department). The submitted transfer media shall be labeled
with the project name (subdivision name) and filing date. State Plane 83 Texas
South Central Zone 4204 coordinate system should be the base of all submissions
whenever possible. Failure to do so could result in revocation or denial of
construction permits and/or certificate of occupancy.
(Ord. 2010-08, passed 3-9-10; Am. Ord. 2012-21, passed 10-9-12; Am. Ord. 2014-
25, passed 10-28-14)
§ 154.21  PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   (A)   General. The preliminary plat and preliminary engineering drawings
shall show all proposed phases of development of an area of land under the same
ownership.  Approval or conditional approval of the concept plan (if required),
the preliminary plat and preliminary engineering drawings is required by the
Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council prior to consideration of the
final plat and final engineering drawings by the Director of Planning and
Development. Preliminary plats and preliminary engineering drawings shall be
deemed approved if no action is taken by the Planning and Zoning Commission
within 30 days of submittal, and if no action is taken by the City Council
within 30 days of Planning and Zoning Commission approval.
   (B)   Changes to preliminary plat.  An approved preliminary plat and/or
preliminary engineering drawings is binding and must be complied with; however,
it may be amended at the request of the developer, or required by the city per
this section. Substantial amendments or changes to an approved preliminary plat
or preliminary engineering drawings must be reviewed and approved by the
Planning and Zoning Commission as well as by the City Council. Minor amendments
may be approved by the Planning and Development Director. Minor amendments are
those that:
      (1)   Increase by 10% or less the number of lots or potential structures
that can be accommodated by the infrastructure;
      (2)   Reduce the number of lots; and
      (3)   Any proposed change in infrastructure is considered a major
amendment, unless deemed by the Public Works Director as a minor amendment.
   (C)   Form and content.  A complete submission for approval shall contain
ten paper copies of the plat and seven paper copies of the engineering
drawings. Failure to submit the plat and engineering drawings together in the
quantities as stated herein at the time of submission shall be deemed an
incomplete submission. The submission shall not be considered complete until
all required documents (plat and engineering documents) in their respective
quantities as stated herein are submitted.
      (1)   Preliminary plat.  The preliminary plat shall be prepared and
sealed by a Texas Licensed Professional Engineer or Texas Registered
Professional Land Surveyor and plotted on 22 inch by 34 inch sheets at a scale
of one inch to 100 feet or larger. The plat shall conform to the general
requirements and minimum standards of design and requirements, and shall
include the following elements as applicable:
         (a)   A cover sheet is required for all plats involving three or more
sheets. All plan sheet numbers shall be placed on the cover along with the
corresponding plan sheet titles. This cover sheet should include a listing of
all plan sheet numbers and plan sheet titles in the engineering drawings as
well. A vicinity map should always be included on the cover sheet to show the
project location;
         (b)   Title block including proposed subdivision name, phase, block
and lot numbers, current legal description (or reference thereto), acreage,
name and address of property owner, name and address of surveyor/engineer, date
of survey, date of preparation and page content title. This title block shall
be present on each page of the plat;
         (c)   Index sheet for plats with more than one sheet that shows the
entire subdivision drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet;
         (d)   Legal description, existing boundary, lot lines and right-of-way
lines of streets and easements with accurate dimensions, bearings, deflection
angles, radii and central angles of all curves;
         (e)   Phasing plan if subdivision is to be constructed in phases;
         (f)   Lot lines shall have line dimensions clearly displayed within
the lot along with the lot’s respective lot number. Groups of lots that are
considered within a block shall have the block number clearly displayed;
         (g)   All right-of-way lines and easements shall be clearly displayed
on the plat. The plat shall clearly display the location, size and purpose of
all existing and proposed easements on or adjoining the property;
         (h)   Location of existing and proposed streets, alleys, bikeways and
sidewalks on or adjoining the site. Such information shall include name, right-
of-way widths, type and width of surfacing. All private streets shall be
clearly labeled;
         (i)   Any areas reserved or dedicated for public uses;
         (j)   Easements and street stub-outs necessary to serve adjacent
properties;
         (k)   Adjacent property information including present ownership, legal
descriptions (recorded volume and page) and property lines within 100 feet;
         (l)   Primary control points or descriptions and ties to such control
points to which all dimensions, angles, bearings and similar data shall be
referred. The plat shall be located with respect to a corner of the surveyor
tract, or an original corner of the original survey of which it is a part.
Temporary benchmarks and NGS datum shall be described on each sheet;
         (m)   Scale, basis of bearing and benchmarks (datum) and description
shall all be clearly displayed on the plat; and
         (n)   A north arrow is required on all sheets and should be oriented
either upward or to the right. It is the intent of this requirement that all
stationing should start from cardinal points of the compass and proceed in the
direction of construction.
      (2)   Preliminary engineering drawings. Preliminary engineering drawings
shall be prepared and sealed by a Texas Licensed Professional Engineer and
plotted on 22 inch by 34 inch sheets at a scale of one inch to 100 feet or
larger. The preliminary engineering drawings shall match the features found on
the preliminary plat and they shall conform to the general requirements and
minimum standards of design and requirements in accordance with the most
current edition of the Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction,
North Central Texas adopted by the city, and shall include the following
elements as applicable:
         (a)   Title block including proposed subdivision name, phase(s), block
and lot numbers, current legal description (or reference thereto), acreage,
name and address of property owner, name and address of surveyor/engineer, date
of survey, date of preparation and page content title. This title block shall
be present on each page of the preliminary engineering drawings;
         (b)   Water layout plan view to include rough locations of service
connections, pipe diameters, valves, hydrants and flush assemblies;
         (c)   Sanitary sewer layout plan to include rough locations of service
connections, pipe diameters, cleanouts and manholes;
         (d)   Street and sidewalk layout plan view; and
         (e)   Storm water drainage layout plan (drainage calculations are only
necessary on major drainage structures at this step).
   (D)   Processing preliminary plat.
      (1)   Submission of preliminary plat application along with all items
required in §
154.20 (B)(3)(a).
      (2)   The preliminary plat and preliminary engineering drawings shall be
reviewed by the Planning and Development Department for conformity with the
city’s plans, thoroughfare plan, utility master plan, engineering standards and
specifications, city ordinances and other applicable city standards. Upon
completion of this review, the preliminary plat and preliminary engineering
drawings shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
      (3)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the preliminary
plat, preliminary engineering drawings and all staff’s recommendations.
Particular attention will be given to the arrangement, location and width of
streets, their relation to the topography of the land, lot sizes and
arrangement, water and sewer lines, drainage, the further development of
adjoining lands and the requirements of city ordinances, policies and plans.
      (4)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall act on the preliminary
plat and preliminary engineering drawings and may advise the developer of any
specific changes or additions they will require in the layout, or comment on
the character and extent of improvements and dedications that will be required
prior to infrastructure construction and as a prerequisite to the approval of
the final plat and final engineering drawings.
      (5)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall forward the preliminary
plat and preliminary engineering drawings with their approval to the City
Council for their consideration. The Planning and Development Director shall
inform the developer in writing of the decision of the Planning and Zoning
Commission and City Council including any conditions for approval or reasons
for disapproval. If disapproved by the Planning and Zoning Commission or the
City Council, the applicant may resubmit a preliminary plat and preliminary
engineering drawings addressing the concerns of the Planning and Zoning
Commission and the City Council for reconsideration.
      (6)   A preliminary plat and preliminary engineering drawings shall
expire 24 months after approval unless:
         (a)   An extension is applied for and granted by the Director of
Planning and Development if the city’s regulations and requirements have not
changed;
         (b)   Final plat submittal, on at least one phase, occurs within 24
months following the initial approval; or
         (c)   Preliminary plats and preliminary engineering drawings will also
expire if there is a more than a 24 month period of time between approval and
submittal of any phase of the preliminary plat.
      (7)   Submittal shall be 28 days prior to the scheduled Planning and
Zoning Commission meeting. The plat and engineering drawings shall be presented
to the Council within 30 days of action being taken by the Planning and Zoning
Commission for their consideration. The plat and engineering drawings shall be
considered approved if the Council does not act on it within 30 days after the
Planning and Zoning Commission has acted on it.
(Ord. 2010-08, passed 3-9-10; Am. Ord. 2012-21, passed 10-9-12; Am. Ord. 2014-
25, passed 10-28-14)
§ 154.22  FINAL PLAT.
   (A)   General.  The final plat and final engineering drawings shall be
substantially consistent per requirements in §
154.21(B) with the preliminary plat and preliminary engineering drawings for
the subject phase of construction. The first phase of a subdivision shall have
its final plats and final engineering drawings submitted within 24 months of
approval of preliminary plat and preliminary engineering drawings after which
time, a new preliminary plat and preliminary engineering drawings may be
required. Final plats and final engineering drawings shall be deemed approved
if no action is taken by the Planning and Development Director within 30 days
of submittal or 60 days if the final plat is referred by the Planning and
Development Director to the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council
due to substantial deviation from the preliminary plat as determined by §
154.21(B).
   (B)   Form and content.  A complete submission for approval shall contain
ten paper copies of the plat and seven paper copies of the engineering
drawings. Failure to submit the plat and engineering drawings together in the
quantities as stated herein at the time of submission shall be deemed an
incomplete submission. The submission shall not be considered complete until
all required documents (plat and engineering documents) in their respective
quantities as stated herein are submitted.
      (1)   Final plat.  Shall be prepared and sealed by a Texas Licensed
Professional Engineer or Texas Registered Professional Land Surveyor and
plotted on 22 inch by 34 inch sheets at a scale of one inch to 100 feet or
larger. The plat shall conform to the general requirements and minimum
standards of design and requirements, and shall include the following elements
as applicable:
         (a)   A cover sheet is required for all plats involving three or more
sheets. All plan sheet numbers shall be placed on the cover along with the
corresponding plan sheet titles. Cover sheet shall include all plan sheet
numbers and plan sheet titles shown in the engineering drawings as well. A
vicinity map should always be included on the cover sheet to show the project
location;
         (b)   Title block including proposed subdivision name, phase, block
and lot numbers, current legal description (or reference thereto), acreage,
name and address of property owner, name and address of surveyor/engineer, date
of survey, date of preparation and page content title. This title block shall
be present on each page of the plat;
         (c)   Legal description, existing boundary, lot lines and right-of-way
lines of streets and easements with accurate dimensions, bearings, deflection
angles, radii and central angles of all curves;
         (d)   Index sheet for plats with more than one sheet that shows the
entire subdivision drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet;
         (e)   Lot lines shall have line dimensions clearly displayed within
the lot along with the lot’s respective lot number. Groups of lots that are
considered within a block shall have the block number clearly displayed;
         (f)   All right-of-way lines and easements shall be clearly displayed
on the plat. The plat shall clearly display the location, size and purpose of
all existing and proposed easements on or adjoining the property;
         (g)   Location of existing and proposed streets, alleys, bikeways and
sidewalks on or adjoining the site. Such information shall include name, right-
of-way widths, type and width of surfacing. All private streets shall be
clearly labeled;
         (h)   Any areas reserved or dedicated for public uses;
         (i)   Notes addressing how lots with low wastewater service tolerances
will be served;
         (j)   Delineation of the Federal Emergency Management Association
(FEMA) Special Flood Hazard Area as well as any hazards from adjacent detention
facilities or as required by the city;
         (k)   Easements and street stub-outs necessary to serve adjacent
properties;
         (l)   Adjacent property information including present ownership, legal
descriptions (recorded volume and page) and property lines within 100 feet;
         (m)   Primary control points or descriptions and ties to such control
points to which all dimensions, angles, bearings and similar data shall be
referred. The plat shall be located with respect to a corner of the surveyor
tract, or an original corner of the original survey of which it is a part.
Temporary benchmarks and NGS datum shall be described on each sheet;
         (n)   Scale, basis of bearing and benchmarks (datum) and description
shall all be clearly displayed on the plat;
         (o)   A north arrow is required on all sheets and should be oriented
either upward or to the right. It is the intent of this requirement that all
stationing should start from cardinal points of the compass and proceed in the
direction of construction;
         (p)   Minimum building setback lines on all lots and other sites;
         (q)   Signature/certification blocks. All final plats shall have
affixed to the first page of the plat sheets to be recorded the following
elements as applicable:
            1.   A surveyor’s certificate, in the following format, shall be
placed on the final plat:
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS:
That I,           , do hereby certify that I prepared this plat from an actual
and accurate survey of the land and that the corner monuments shown thereon
were properly placed under my personal supervision, in accordance with the
Subdivision and Property Development Regulations of the City of Harker Heights,
Texas.
                                     
Signature
                                       
Texas Reg. No.
            2.   An original certificate of ownership and of dedication of all
streets, alleys, easements and lands to public use forever, signed and
acknowledged before a notary public by the owner of the land, shall appear on
the face of the map, containing complete and accurate description of the
property being platted and the streets dedicated;
            3.   A certificate of approval by the Planning and Zoning
Commission, in the following format, shall be placed on the final plat.
Approved this             day of       ,           , by the Planning and Zoning
Commission of the City of Harker Heights, Texas.
                                                             
Chairperson, Planning and Zoning Commission
                                                             
Secretary, Planning and Zoning Commission
            4.   A certificate of approval by the City Council, in the
following format shall be placed on the final plat:
Approved this                      day of             , by the City Council of
the City of Harker Heights, Texas.
                                           
Mayor
                                           
City Secretary
            5.   A certificate of approval by the Director of Planning and
Development, in the following format shall be placed on the final plat:
Approved this the                day of           , by the Director of Planning
and Development of the City of Harker Heights, Bell County, Texas.
                                                   
Director of Planning and Development
            6.   A tax certification block, in the following format, shall be
placed on the final plat:
The Bell County Tax Appraisal District, the taxing authority for all entities
in Bell County, Texas, does hereby certify that there are currently no
delinquent taxes due or owing on the property described by this plat.
Dated this                        day of         , A.D.       
Bell County Tax Appraisal District
By:                  
            7.   A recordation block, in the following format, shall be placed
on the final plat:
FILED FOR RECORD this           day of           ,                             
         in Cabinet                   , Slide(s)                 , Plat Records
of Bell County, Texas. Dedication instrument in Instrument #         , Deed
Records of Bell County, Texas.
      (2)   Final engineering drawings.  Engineering drawings shall be prepared
and sealed by a Texas Licensed Professional Engineer and plotted on 22 inch by
34 inch sheets at a scale of one inch to 100 feet or larger. The engineering
drawings shall match the features found on the final plat and they shall
conform to the general requirements and minimum standards of design and
requirements in accordance with the most current edition of the Standard
Specifications for Public Works Construction, North Central Texas, and shall
include the following elements as applicable:
         (a)   Title block including proposed subdivision name, phase, block
and lot numbers, current legal description (or reference thereto), acreage,
name and address of property owner, name and address of surveyor/engineer, date
of survey, date of preparation and page content title. This title block shall
be present on each page of the engineering drawings;
         (b)   Lot layout showing the area in square feet of each lot proposed;
         (c)   Water layout plan, fire flow/water design report, details;
         (d)   Sanitary sewer layout plan and profiles, a wastewater design
report, details, specifications, lift station capacity and a detailed
engineering estimate;
         (e)   Street plan and profiles, to include paving details and a
traffic control plan (if applicable);
         (f)   Street light layout;
         (g)   Display natural ground profiles of each right-of-way or easement
line. Centerline profiles will be satisfactory for right-of-way or easements,
except where there is a difference of 0.50 foot or more from one right-of-way
or easement line to the other line measured parallel at any point along the
right-of-way or easement;
         (h)   Storm water plan and profiles of culverts and channels, a
grading plan with two foot contours, a drainage report, an erosion and
sedimentation control plan, delineated drainage basins, details for all
structures, specifications and a detailed engineering estimate;
         (i)   Existing contours at intervals of two feet for grades up to 5%
and not more than five feet for grades over 5%;
         (j)   Drainage information and calculations required by Chapter 158,
including, but not limited to, drainage channel and detention pond locations
and approximate size of facilities. Flow line elevations shall be shown along
with direction of flow of all existing or proposed drainage features;
         (k)   Drainage structures, 100-year floodplain, floodway,
watercourses, railroad, structures and other physical features on or adjacent
to the site;
         (l)   Location and size of all existing and/or proposed city
utilities, and all others where known. All city utility lines six inches in
diameter or larger within the right-of-way shall be shown on the profile view.
All utility lines, regardless of size, should be shown in the plan view, where
known;
         (m)   Major thoroughfare plans and profiles shall be drawn at a scale
of one inch equals two feet vertically and one inch equals 20 feet
horizontally. Minor streets and easement plans and profiles shall be drawn at a
scale of one inch equals five feet vertically and one inch equals 50 feet
horizontally or one inch equals four feet vertically and one inch equals 40
feet horizontally. Label each plan sheet as to street widths, right-of-way
widths, pavement width and thickness, type of roadway materials, curbs,
intersection radii, curve data, stationing, existing utilities type and
location. Stationing must run from left to right, except for short streets or
lines originating from a major intersection where the full length can be shown
on a single plan and profile sheet;
         (n)   Texas Department of Transportation (TXDOT) approvals for
driveway and drainage into their jurisdiction, if applicable;
         (o)   Existing conditions such as marshes, wooded areas, buildings and
other significant features;
         (p)   Significant features on adjacent properties such as slopes,
structures and power lines;
         (q)   Grading, erosion and sedimentation control plan;
         (r)   Details of all special structures and standard details, such as
drainage features, streams and gully crossing, special manholes and the like,
shall be drawn with the vertical and horizontal scales equal to each other; and
         (s)   Station all point of curvature (P.C.’s), point of tangency
(P.T.’s) radius returns and grade change point of intersection (P.I.’s) in the
profile with their respective elevations.
      (3)   Resolution/dedication/field notes.  The applicant will furnish the
city with a signed, original copy of the dedication, resolution and field
notes, as applicable, at the same time the final plat and final engineering
drawings are submitted for approval.
   (C)   Processing final plat.
      (1)   Submission of application as provided under §
154.20(B)(3)(b).
      (2)   The final plat and final engineering drawings shall be reviewed by
the Planning and Development Department for conformity with the approved
preliminary plat and preliminary engineering drawings, city’s plans,
thoroughfare plan, utility master plan, engineering standards and
specifications, city ordinances and other applicable city standards. Upon
completion of this review, the final plat and final engineering drawings shall
be approved by the Director of Planning and Development or submitted to the
Planing and Zoning Commission for review.
      (3)   If forwarded onto the Planning and Zoning Commission, the
commission shall study the final plat and final engineering drawings and all
recommendations. Particular attention will be given to the arrangement,
location and width of streets, their relation to the topography of the land,
lot sizes and arrangement, water and sewer lines, drainage, the further
development of adjoining lands and the requirements of city ordinances, polices
and plans. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall act on the plat and
engineering drawings and may advise the developer of any specific changes or
additions they will require in the layout, or comment on the character and
extent of improvements and dedications that will be required as a prerequisite
to the approval of the final plat and final engineering drawings. The final
plat and final engineering drawings approval is the Planning and Zoning
Commission’s responsibility, unless the Commission forwards the final plat and
final engineering drawings to the Council because of a deviation from the
preliminary plat and preliminary engineering drawings as defined in §
154.21(B).
      (4)   The final plat and final engineering drawings shall not be:
approved, conditionally approved or filed for record and no permits shall be
issued until the applicant posts with the city a letter of credit/performance
bond for any infrastructure construction remaining.
(Ord. 2010-08, passed 3-9-10)
§ 154.23  GUARANTEE OF PERFORMANCE.
   (A)   General.  In order to record an approved final plat in which public
infrastructure improvements are required, the developer shall construct the
improvements to the approval of the city or file a guarantee of performance in
lieu of completing the infrastructure prior to recordation of the plat. All
such construction shall be inspected while in progress by the Public Works
Department and must be approved upon completion by the Public Works Director or
his or her designee.
   (B)   Filing a guarantee.  If the developer elects to file a guarantee of
performance in lieu of completing construction prior to recording the plat, one
of the following methods of posting security shall be used, while the city does
reserve the right to select which of the following guarantees of performance is
utilized.
      (1)   Unconditional letter of credit from a local bank, local federally
insured Savings and Loan Association or other financial institution in a form
acceptable to the city and signed by a principal officer of the institution,
agreeing to pay to the city, on demand, a stipulated sum of money to apply to
the estimated costs of completion of all required improvements, cost of
completion of the required improvements being verified by the City Engineer.
The letter of credit shall be dated to expire not less than one year from the
recordation of the final plat. If the required infrastructure is not complete
within six months of acceptance of the letter of credit, the city shall use the
funds to construct the improvements.
      (2)   Performance bond submitted with the city by a surety company
holding a license to do business in the State of Texas, in a form acceptable to
the city, in an amount equal to the estimated costs of completion of required
improvements verified by the City Engineer. It shall be dated to expire not
less than one year from the recordation of the final plat. If the required
infrastructure is not complete within six months of acceptance of the letter of
credit, the city shall use the funds to construct the improvements.
   (C)   Guarantee of performance.  For the guarantee of performance, as
described in this section, the Engineer whose stamp and signature are found on
the final plat and final engineering drawings shall prepare a detailed estimate
of outstanding infrastructure items to include the cost of each item, the cost
of installation of each item and the total cumulative cost of all outstanding
infrastructure items. This detailed estimate should be stamped and signed by
the Engineer. The city’s Engineer shall review this detailed estimate to ensure
that all items are accounted for and are valued at costs that are reasonable
given the market at the time of which the project occurs. The city may request
that the developer make modifications to the detailed estimate to reflect
comments from the city’s Engineer. Once approved by the city’s Engineer, the
city will accept the guarantee of performance, as described in this section,
for the total cumulative cost as shown on the detailed estimate, and the final
plat shall be filed with the county.
(Ord. 2010-08, passed 3-9-10)
§ 154.24  MAINTENANCE BOND REQUIRED.
   (A)   Before the issuance of any building permit, the subdivider shall
furnish the city with a maintenance bond, or other surety instrument such as a
letter of credit or escrow account. The purpose of the maintenance bond/surety
instruments is to assure the quality of materials and workmanship and
maintenance of all required improvements including the city’s costs for
collecting the guaranteed funds and administering the correction and/or
replacement of covered improvements in the event the subdivider defaults. The
maintenance bond or other surety instrument shall be satisfactory to the city
as to form, sufficiency and manner of execution. For water and sewer related
improvements, the bond or other instrument shall be in an amount equal to 20%
of the cost of improvements verified by the city Engineer and shall run for a
period of one calendar year. Bonds or other instruments for streets and
drainage facilities shall be in an amount equal to 40% of the improvements
verified by the city Engineer and shall run for a period of two calendar years.
Effective time frame for bonds or other instruments will be measured from the
date of release of the performance surely instrument, or signing and recording
of the final plat whichever is later. In an instance where a maintenance bond
or other surety instrument has been posted and a defect or failure of any
required improvement occurs within the period of coverage, the city may declare
the bond or surety instrument to be in default and require that the
improvements be repaired or replaced.
   (B)   Whenever a defect or failure of any required improvement occurs within
the period of coverage, the city shall require that a new maintenance bond or
surety instrument be posted for a period of one full calendar year, except
streets and drainage channels and structures which will be for two calendar
years. The amount of the bond or instrument will be equal to the amount
required to correct the fault or failure. Effective time frame for the new
maintenance bond or other instrument shall begin on the date the city inspects
and approves the required correction.
(Ord. 2010-08, passed 3-9-10)
§ 154.25  AS BUILT DRAWINGS.
   (A)   As built drawings.  The purpose of this requirement is to document the
subdivision improvements as they were actually built. These drawings are
required to replace the approved plans that are on file at the Director of
Public Work’s office and as such should contain all of the sheets presented in
the final plat and final engineering drawings. These plans shall be labeled “as
built” or “record drawings”. These drawings shall minimally include:
      (1)   An index sheet listing all plan sheets presented in the as built
drawings;
      (2)   Drawings shall contain information within tolerances pertinent to
the intended function of the design;
      (3)   Waterlines and appurtenances shall be field located with a
horizontal and vertical location within a tolerance of one foot, more or less;
      (4)   Gravity wastewater lines and manholes shall be field located with a
vertical location within a tolerance of 0.1 foot, more or less, and a
horizontal location within a tolerance of one foot, more or less;
      (5)   Pressure wastewater lines and appurtenances shall be field located
with a horizontal and vertical location within a tolerance of one foot, more or
less;
      (6)   Drainage facilities shall be field located with a vertical location
within a tolerance of 0.1 foot, more or less, and a horizontal location within
a tolerance of one foot more or less;
      (7)   Roadway and sidewalk paving shall be field located with a vertical
location within a tolerance of 0.1 foot, more or less, and a horizontal
location within a tolerance of one foot, more or less;
      (8)   All public facilities shall be shown to be located within public
rights-of-way or appropriate easements; and
      (9)   The as built drawings shall be prepared by a Texas Licensed
Professional Engineer and shall bear a certification from the Engineer as
follows:
         (a)   “To the City of Harker Heights: I certify that the subdivision
improvements shown on this sheet reflect any revisions of design as approved by
the city and which I authorized, and/or any and all field changes of which I am
aware.”; and
         (b)   The certification shall be executed by, and shall bear the seal
and original signature of the professional Engineer licensed in the State of
Texas at the date of such certification that directly supervised the
construction of the project pursuant to the Texas Engineering Practice Act.
   (B)   As built drawing submital requirements.  The developer shall provide
the city with a digital copy and a single set of drawings of the constructed
infrastructure. A digital copy of the as built plat and its as built
engineering drawings must be submitted. Digital as-built files should be
submitted in PDF, DXF, DWG or GIS shapefile/feature class/coverage format. This
digital format shall be an exact replica of any required and/or included data
represented on the submitted hard copy drawing/document. This data must be
provided on standard transfer media or by electronic transfer (three and one-
half inch floppy disk or CD-ROM, DVD, e-mail attachment or any other media as
approved by the city Planning Department). The submitted transfer media shall
be labeled with the project name (subdivision name) and filing date. State
Plane 83 Texas South Central Zone 4204 coordinate system should be the base of
all submissions whenever possible. Failure to do so could result in revocation
or denial of construction permits and/or certificate of occupancy.
(Ord. 2010-08, passed 3-9-10; Am. Ord. 2014-25, passed 10-28-14)
§ 154.26  SPECIAL PLATS OR PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Amending plats.
      (1)   General.  A plat may be considered an amending plat solely for the
purposes established in Tex. Loc. Gov’t. Code, § 212.016.
      (2)   Form and content.  The amending plat should depict both the current
and the proposed configuration of all altered lots. The current configuration
should be located on the left side of the plat and shall depict all information
as required for a preliminary plat as provided in this chapter. The proposed
configuration should be located on the right side of the plat and shall depict
all information as required for a final plat as provided in this chapter.
      (3)   Processing.  The Planning and Development Director, or the Planning
and Zoning Commission and the City Council (if forwarded by the Director of
Planning and Development) may approve and issue an amended plat, which may be
recorded with the County Clerk and controls over the preceding plat without
vacation of the plat, if the amended plat is signed by the applicant(s) and is
solely for one or more of the following purposes as established by Tex. Loc.
Gov’t. Code, § 212.016:
         (a)   To correct an error in a course or distance shown on the
preceding plat;
         (b)   To add a course or distance that was omitted on the preceding
plat;
         (c)   To correct an error in the description of the real property
shown on the preceding plat;
         (d)   To indicate monuments set forth after death, disability or
retirement from practice of the Engineer or surveyor responsible for setting
monuments;
         (e)   To show the proper location or character of any monument which
has been changed in location or character or which originally was shown
incorrectly as to location or character on the preceding plat;
         (f)   To correct any other type of scrivener’s, clerical error or
omission previously approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission and/or City
Council, including lot numbers, acreage, street names and identification of
adjacent recorded plats;
         (g)   To correct an error in courses and distances of lot lines
between two adjacent lots where both lot owners join in the application for
plat amendment and neither lot is abolished; provided, that such amendment does
not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions and does not have a
material adverse effect on the property rights of the other owners in the plat;
         (h)   To relocate a lot line in order to cure an inadvertent
encroachment of a building or improvement on a lot line or on an easement;
         (i)   To relocate one or more lot lines between one or more adjacent
lots where the owner(s) of all such lots join in the application for the plat
amendment; provided, that such amendment does not attempt to remove recorded
covenants or restrictions and does not increase the number of lots;
         (j)   To make necessary changes to the preceding plat to create six or
fewer lots in the plat if the changes do not affect applicable zoning and other
regulations of the city, and the changes do not attempt to amend or remove any
covenants or restrictions and the area covered by the changes is located in an
area that the Planning and Zoning Commission and/or the City Council has
approved, after a public hearing, as a residential improvement area; and
         (k)   To replat one or more lots fronting on an existing street if the
owners of all those lots join in the application for the amendment. The
amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions or
increase the number of lots; and, the amendment does not create or require the
creation of a new street or make necessary the extension of municipal
facilities.
   (B)   Minor plats.
      (1)   General.  A plat of a subdivision involving four or fewer lots
fronting on an existing street and not requiring the creation of any new street
or the extension of any city infrastructure.
      (2)   Processing.  Minor plats shall be approved by the Planning and
Development Director if they meet all of the requirements. The Director may
elect to forward the plat to the Planning and Zoning Commission for approval.
      (3)   Form and content.  Minor plats will be required in general
conformance with final plat procedures except in regards to the signature
block. The Planning and Zoning and City Council certification blocks as
described under final plat requirements should not be utilized on minor plats
(all other certification blocks should be utilized). Minor plats should utilize
the following certification block in the place of the Planning and Zoning and
City Council certification blocks:
APPROVED this the              day of           , by the Director of Planning
and Development of the City of Harker Heights, Bell County, Texas.
                                                   
Director of Planning and Development
                                                   
Attest: City Secretary
   (C)   Replat.
      (1)   General.  A replat is a revision of a previously platted
subdivision that involves vacating the prior subdivision and re-subdivides the
property that usually changes the number of lots in accordance with the Tex.
Loc. Gov’t. Code, Ch. 212. A replat shall follow the same procedures as are
required for an original plat and shall comply with Tex. Loc. Gov’t. Code, Ch.
212 of the Local Government Code, including requirements for public hearings
and notifications. Replats may be approved administratively if they qualify
under the following:
         (a)   Minor plats or replats involving four or fewer lots fronting on
an existing street and not requiring the creation of any new street or the
extension of municipal facilities; or
         (b)   A replat under Tex. Loc. Gov’t. Code, § 212.0145 that does not
require the creation of any new street or the extension of municipal
facilities.
      (2) Form and content.  The replat shall depict both the current and the
proposed configuration of all altered lots. The current configuration should be
located on the left side of the plat and shall depict all information as
required for preliminary plats as presented in §
154.21. The proposed configuration should be located on the right side of the
plat and shall depict all the information as required for final plats as
presented in Section §
154.22.
   (D)   Vacating a plat.  (Refer to Tex. Loc. Gov’t. Code, § 212.013).
Vacating a plat should follow the same procedure as prescribed for the original
plat.
(Ord. 2010-08, passed 3-9-10)
DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 154.35  DESIGN STANDARDS WITHIN CITY LIMITS.
   No plat shall be approved and no improvements shall be accepted by the city
unless they conform to or exceed the following standards and specifications and
all other applicable standards unless an exception/variance is granted.
   (A)   Conformity with zoning.  Parcels must be consistent with zoning
standards of the zoning district the parcels are located in.
   (B)   Conformity with land use plan.  The subdivision shall conform to the
plans of the city and any parts, amendments and/or supplements thereto.
   (C)   Conformity with design and construction standards for streets,
sidewalks, drainage, water and sanitary sewer construction. All construction of
infrastructure improvements shall be in accordance with the city’s design
guidelines, utility master plans and engineering standards and specifications.
   (D)   Certain detailed standards and specifications not covered herein.  In
circumstances where public health and safety issues are identified, city staff
shall specify additional requirements for a requested subdivision that are not
covered within this chapter. No such requirements shall conflict with this or
any other ordinances of the city.
   (E)   Reserve strips.  There shall be no reserve strips of property that
create unusable tracts added properties, and/or other non-conformities.
   (F)   Provision for future re-subdivision.  If a tract is subdivided into
parcels larger than ordinary building lot sizes, such parcels shall be arranged
so as to allow for the opening of future streets and future subdivisions.
(Ord. 2010-08, passed 3-9-10; Am. Ord. 2014-25, passed 10-28-14)
§ 154.36  PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Development costs.  The developer/property owner shall install, at his
or her own expense, all water lines, streets, sidewalks, sewer lines, storm
sewer lines, drainage facilities and structures within the subdivision, in
accordance with city standards governing the same, including all engineering
costs covering design, layout and construction.
   (B)   Development mains.  Developers shall pay the actual cost of water and
sewer main extensions, water towers and associated facilities and equipment,
force mains and lift stations required to serve their development area
including costs of right-of-way and easements acquisition. Required facilities
shall be extended to the edge of adjacent land along street sides or as
determined by the city.
   (C)   Street over-sizing.  Where street over-sizing in excess of 42 feet in
width is required by the city, the city shall reimburse the actual and
reasonable cost directly attributable to such over-sizing (including the cost
of additional pavement, additional subgrade and additional cross-drainage
costs) as herein provided.
      (1)   Reimbursement request.  In order to initiate a reimbursement
request, the owner must establish a per linear foot oversize cost for the
reimbursable public improvements. Requests for the reimbursement to the owner
shall include owner’s name and mailing address. The requests must include as
built drawings showing the reimbursable items with quantities and unit costs,
and other supporting or explanatory documentation. The cost for over-sizing
shall be mutually agreed upon by the city and the developer.
      (2)   Over-sizing requirements.  Upon acceptance of the infrastructure by
the city, refunds for approved over-sizing shall be scheduled as of the next
year’s capital improvements program, unless funds are available earlier. If
payment is not made within 60 days after acceptance by the city, interest will
accrue at an agreed upon rate between the developer and the city.
      (3)   Exceptions.  The City Council may modify the requirements of this
section and may elect to participate in the cost of such developments if it
finds that the circumstances taken as a whole would make it inappropriate to
require the subdivider to comply with this section, or any portion thereof, and
such modification or participation would accomplish a legitimate public purpose
which would benefit the city. Each request by a subdivider pursuant to this
section shall be considered separately in accordance with such criteria as may
be defined by the City Council, and the approval of any such request shall be
accompanied by such conditions as may be necessary to ensure that a legitimate
public purpose beneficial to the city is accomplished. Nothing in this section
is intended to authorize the use of public funds or credit for a private
purpose.
   (D)   Inadequate or substandard streets. Inadequate or substandard existing
streets shall be upgraded to city standards by the developer, including
dedication of additional right-of-way if necessary. If development is on one
side of such a street, the developer shall dedicate additional right-of-way if
necessary, upgrade the street pavement and associated infrastructure on the
side that is being platted. Sidewalks shall be constructed or upgraded (if
needed) to city standards by the builder/owner prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy.
   (E)   Inspection.  All infrastructure improvements shall meet or exceed city
design criteria and specifications to include being in accordance with the
Third Edition (or more current edition) of the Standard Specifications for
Public Works Construction, North Central Texas. The city will inspect the
construction work as it progresses and will make final inspection to assure
compliance with city standards. Upon acceptance by the city, all infrastructure
improvements constructed for subdivision within the city limits shall become
the property of the city unless otherwise noted on the plat.
   (F)   Water and wastewater service.  All subdivisions shall provide water
distribution and wastewater collection systems that are approved by the city.
Design should be consistent with the city standards of construction,
engineering standards and specifications and the utility master plans.
      (1)   Water connection.  All subdivisions shall connect with the publicly
owned water distribution and wastewater collection systems unless a waiver is
approved by the city. If the waiver is approved, the developer must submit
evidence of conformance with TCEQ, Bell County Health Department, and the city
fire flow requirements.
      (2)   Extending water distribution.  The developer shall extend water
distribution and wastewater collection lines from the nearest city-approved
point of connection to the furthest boundary line of the platted subdivision
along the right-of-way line or within an abutting dedicated easement specified
for the exclusive use of the particular utility. These municipal utilities
shall not be located in combination easements without the specific approval of
the Public Works Director. This is required in order to provide a point of
connection for adjacent properties not having access to such services. Where
the developer is not required to extend utilities to adjacent property, an
easement shall be required to accommodate future development on adjacent
property.
      (3)   Fire hydrants.  Fire hydrants shall be installed pursuant to the
most currently amended and adopted edition of the International Fire Code. In
areas not served by the city, the developer must perform a fire flow test on
the system with the city staff as witnesses to assure adequate fire protection
is provided.
      (4)   Underground conduits.  Underground conduits shall be of sufficient
size, as determined by generally accepted and good engineering principals, to
accommodate and/or deliver current and anticipated future loads and/or flows
and pressures, as the case may be, but in no case less than that specified
below for each particular application.
      (5)   Water mains.  In no case shall any water main be less than six
inches in residential areas and eight inches in nonresidential areas. Water
mains shall be sized as shown on the master water plan; in the absence of such
a plan, or when the plan does not indicate requirements for a water main in the
same location as the proposed water main, the water main shall be designed and
sized to deliver the following pressures/flows.
         (a)   At each building service, the minimum pressure set forth by the
Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, Water Supply Division.
         (b)   Private service lines shall be defined as the service line
extending from water system meter to an individual customer. Public service
lines shall be defined as the line extending from a water main to a single
meter. BULLHEADS shall be defined as a public service line with branches to
serve two or more customers.
         (c)   Public service lines will become the property of the city when
completed and will be maintained by the developer/builder at his or her expense
until accepted by the city. Public service lines will not be less than three-
quarter inch or larger than two inches in diameter. Bullheads shall be no less
than one inch in diameter. All public service lines shall be sized to deliver
the pressures required by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality. In no
case will public service lines exceed 150 feet in length without prior approval
of the Public Works Department.
         (d)   If an existing water main is within 300 feet of the boundary of
any lot or tract of land proposed for development and/or improvement through
the erection of buildings, then the water main shall be extended to the lot or
tract in question. From the point of connection with the existing main, the
water main shall be installed in accordance with all applicable regulations.
      (6)   Sewer lines.  If an existing sewer main is within 300 feet of the
boundary of any lot or tract of land proposed for development and/or
improvement through the erection of buildings, then the sewer main shall be
extended, in accordance with all applicable regulations, to the lot or tract in
question.
      (7)   Service line.  Whenever a water or sewer main is required to be
extended to a lot or tract, an appropriate service line (tap) shall be extended
to serve the lot or tract, and buildings located thereon shall be connected
thereto whether they are pre-existing or are subsequently erected. The
provisions of divisions (F)(1) and (2) above and any other ordinance
notwithstanding, any subdivision or re-subivision of a lot or tract of land
shall be required to provide water and/or sewer service to the subdivision or
re-subivision, regardless of whether a subdivision plat is required to be
prepared and approved by the city.
      (8)   Extending requirements.  All utilities shall be required to extend
across the full width of the development lot (defined by plat or lot of record)
in such an alignment that it can be extended to the next property. Properties
already served by water and sewer shall not be required to install additional
facilities unless the current lines are not of adequate capacity to serve the
proposed development in which case the developer will be required to install
adequate facilities. Once a utility meter is installed, movement required due
to changes in grade/landscape will be the responsibility of the developer/
builder.
      (9)   Other utilities.  All other utilities (i.e. electric, gas,
communications and cable TV) shall be located in perimeter lot easements. These
utilities shall not be located in a public right-of-way or a specified
easement, prohibiting its use, without the approval of the Public Works
Director.
(Ord. 2010-08, passed 3-9-10; Am. Ord. 2014-25, passed 10-28-14; Am. Ord. 2020-
12, passed 4-28-20)
§ 154.37  STREETS.
   (A)   Street layout.
      (1)   Thoroughfare plan.  Proposed streets must be in conformance with
the city thoroughfare plan. All arterial and collector street locations,
alignments, right-of-way widths, pavement widths and cross-sections shall be in
accordance with the adopted plans and standards. Streets that are not on the
thoroughfare plan and are proposed to collect traffic from residential streets
shall be designed and constructed as collectors.
      (2)   Consistency with existing streets.  The arrangement, character,
extent, width, grade and location of each proposed street shall be consistent
with streets in the immediate area. However, new streets must meet the minimum
current standards. Consideration shall be made for topographical conditions,
public safety, convenience and the proposed use of land to be served by such
streets.
      (3)   Entrances to subdivisions.  In no case shall platted lots have
their sole access through an adjacent jurisdiction. As a rule, new subdivisions
must have at least two access streets. Entrances shall be 42 feet wide with a
70-foot right-of-way for a minimum distance of 100 feet from the intersection.
A developer may request the approval of one access street if the access street
has no connecting streets, terminates in a permanent cul-de-sac or provides
access to not more than a total of 30 single-family dwelling lots or an
equivalent housing unit density comprised of duplex or multi-family structures.
In addition to the single point of access situation presented by streets that
end in permanent cul-de-sac, a single point of access may be dictated by
property configuration, safety or access management restrictions. In
determining if a new subdivision may have one point of ingress/egress,
consideration shall be given to:
         (a)   Traffic circulation and emergency vehicle access;
         (b)   Traffic and pedestrian safety with due consideration given to
school bus routes; and
         (c)   Topography and visibility distances.
      (4)   Residential streets.  Internal local streets shall be laid out so
as to discourage then-use by through traffic when possible.
      (5)   Secondary access streets.  Where a subdivision has frontage on an
arterial street, the city may require a secondary access street to facilitate
the sharing of curb cuts and/or to separate access to lots from through
traffic.
      (6)   Projection of streets.  Where adjoining areas are not subdivided,
the developer shall design and construct abutting short stub-outs or temporary
turnarounds for the projection of streets at proper block intervals into such
unsubdivided areas.
      (7)   Inadequate or substandard streets. Inadequate or substandard
existing streets and other infrastructure shall be upgraded to city standards
by the developer, including dedication of an additional right-of-way if
necessary. If development is on one side of such a street, the developer shall
dedicate an additional right-of-way if necessary, upgrade the street pavement
and associated infrastructure on the side that is being platted. Sidewalks
shall be constructed or upgraded (if needed) to city standards by the builder/
owner prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
   (B)   Street design standards.
      (1)   Street design.  Street design shall be in accordance with the
city’s standards and specifications.
      (2)   Curbs and gutters.  The developer shall install curbs and gutters
on all new streets except as provided in §
154.45, unless required in special situations determined by the city.
      (3)   Curb cuts.  Restrictions to location, design, size and/or number of
curb cuts are as required in the Zoning Code.
      (4)   Pavement standards.  Streets shall be paved in accordance with city
standards. The city may require increased right-of-way or pavement widths if
traffic impacts of the proposed development or conditions in the area merit
such changes.
   (C)   Street classification.  All streets within the city shall be located
and constructed as shown on the thoroughfare plan and, where not otherwise
shown thereon, shall be designed as follows.
      (1)   Residential streets.  Residential streets shall be 36 feet in width
back-of-curb to back-of-curb with a minimum 60 feet of right-of-way. These are
streets that serve individual residential lots. They carry low traffic volumes.
Where entrances to subdivisions are not part of a collector street, they shall
be 42 feet wide with 70 feet of right-of-way for a distance of 100 feet from
the intersection.
      (2)   Minor collectors.  Minor collectors shall be 42 feet wide, with a
minimum of 70 feet of right-of-way. These are streets generally located within
subdivisions or between subdivisions to collect traffic from minor
(residential) streets and to channel this traffic to the major collectors.
Residential lots may front on these streets.
      (3)   Major collectors.  Major collectors shall be 48 feet wide with a
minimum of 80 feet of right-of-way. These streets are generally located along
borders of neighborhoods and within commercial areas to collect traffic from
residential areas and to channel this traffic to the arterial system. These are
limited access roads on which no residential lots may front (i.e., no driveways
shall be allowed) unless there is no other reasonable and safe access to the
lot.
      (4)   Arterials.  Arterials shall be between 60 and 80 feet wide,
depending on the needs and the design as determined by the city. The right-of-
way shall be between 90 and 120 feet, depending on the design requirements as
determined by the city. These are high volume streets with five or more lanes.
These are limited access roads on which no residential lots may front.
   (D)   Miscellaneous street requirements.
      (1)   Property abutting arterials.  Where a subdivision abuts or contains
an existing or proposed arterial, the Planning and Zoning Commission may
require access streets, reverse frontage with a screening buffer containing a
non-access easement along the rear property line, deep lots with rear service
alleys or other such treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of
residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic.
      (2)   Property abutting railroads.  Where a subdivision abuts or contains
a railroad right-of-way or limited access highway right-of-way, the Planning
and Zoning Commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on the
side of such right-of-way.
      (3)   Reserve strips.  Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall
be prohibited except where their control is dedicated to the city, under
conditions approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
      (4)   Street jogs.  Street jogs with centerline off-sets of less than 125
feet shall be avoided.
      (5)   Street intersections.  Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect
at right angles, or as nearly as possible to 90 degrees. Six foot concrete
valley gutters are required at street intersections where cross drainage will
occur.
      (6)   Non-cul-de-sac designed dead-end streets.  Dead-end streets shall
be prohibited except for short stub-outs for future roadway extensions. Short
stub-out streets may require special terminus treatments for drainage concerns
and street integrity. Temporary turnarounds are required if they exceed 150
feet in length.
      (7)   Cul-des-sac design.  For subdivisions with lots of less than one
acre, cul-de-sac streets shall not exceed 800 feet in length (as measured from
the right-of-way line of the intersecting roadway to the center of the
turnaround). For single-family subdivisions with lots greater than one acre,
the length may not exceed 1,200 feet. All cul-de-sacs shall be provided at the
closed end with a turnaround having a minimum radius of 38 feet back of curb to
back of curb with a 50 foot right-of-way required.
      (8)   Street names.  No street names shall be used which will duplicate
or be confused with names of existing streets. Street extensions shall use the
existing street names. Street names shall be subject to the approval of the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
      (9)   Street signs.  The city, at the developer’s expense, shall install
all street signs. The developer shall be charged for the cost of materials
only.
   (E)   Alleys.
      (1)   Alleys shall generally be parallel to the street.
      (2)   Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be
avoided. Where two alleys intersect, or where an alley turns, additional width
may be required to allow for the turning of vehicles or guying of utility
poles.
      (3)   Easements may be required on either side of the alley or alleys for
utility placement.
      (4)   The width of an alley shall not be less than 20 feet.
      (5)   Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if
unavoidable, shall be provided with adequate turn-around facilities at the
terminus, as determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
      (6)   Alleys shall paved in the same manner as streets.
   (F)   Construction standards.
      (1)   Design.  Pavement section design shall be accomplished by a
professional engineer and shall be based upon a geo-technical analysis
performed by a qualified geo-technical professional. All construction shall
conform to Appendix A, Tables I through IV and the following adopted
regulations where applicable: §
50.02,
Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances, adoption of “Standard Specifications for
Public Works Construction”.
      (2)   Street surfaces.  All street wearing surfaces shall consist of
concrete or hot mixed asphaltic concrete (HMAC) laid over a base course of
crushed stone which has been designed, and compacted in accordance with city
standards and requirements.
      (3)   Curb and gutter.  All curb and gutter, integral curbs, valley
gutters, driveway approaches, drainage structures and the like shall be
constructed of Class “A” (3,600 PSI) Portland Cement Concrete per city
standards.
(Ord. 2010-08, passed 3-9-10)
§ 154.38  STREET LIGHTING.
   (A)   Within the city’s corporate boundaries.
      (1)   Adequate street lighting for pedestrian and traffic safety shall be
installed in all subdivisions established within the city’s corporate
boundaries, as well as those subdivisions in the extraterritorial jurisdiction
(ETJ) requesting voluntary annexation after the effective date of this section.
Street lights shall generally be limited to intersections, curves, dead ends,
cul-de-sacs and streets where pole spacing exceeds 600 feet. Installation
procedures and acceptable designs and specifications shall be established by
the electric utility company serving energy to the lights. The use of special
non-standard poles or fixtures from sources other than the electric utility is
prohibited and shall not be accepted for dedication.
      (2)   The subdivision developer shall be responsible to the power utility
provider for the cost of street lighting materials and the cost of
installation, including the cost of service lines to supply electricity to the
street lights and all associated engineering costs. Once satisfactorily
installed, approved and accepted, the ownership and maintenance of the street
lights shall be dedicated to the electric utility serving the area, per the
city’s agreement with the subject power utility provider. Electricity powering
the street lights shall be provided by the electric utility providing service
to the area. The city will pay the energy costs of street lights meeting the
requirements of this section and located in the city limits, per the city’s
agreement with the subject power utility.
   (B)   Within the city’s extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ).  Except as
provided in division (A) above, construction of street lighting shall not be
required for subdivisions located in the ETJ. However, a street lighting plan
shall be developed for subdivisions located in the ETJ in the same manner as if
the subdivision were located within the city limits. Any utility easements
required to allow construction of the street lighting shown on the plan shall
be dedicated on the subdivision plat so that the city may install the street
lighting if the subdivision is subsequently involuntarily annexed.
(Ord. 2010-08, passed 3-9-10)
§ 154.39  BLOCK LENGTHS.
   Block lengths between intersections of through streets shall not exceed
1,200 feet, except along major thoroughfares in which case such length shall
not exceed 1,600 feet. Block length in subdivisions with lots of one acre or
more shall not exceed 1,800 feet.
(Ord. 2010-08, passed 3-9-10)
§ 154.40  SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   In developments in which the original application for approval is
filed after the effective date hereof, the developer/property owner shall
construct sidewalks on both sides of all streets, private access drives,
passage easements and other circulation routes. Sidewalks shall be installed by
the developer at the time of development, and owners of lots that remain
undeveloped must construct sidewalks within two years after the date of
approval of the final plat. Sidewalks must be constructed and accepted by the
city prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
   (B)   Sidewalks shall be constructed one foot from the property line in the
rights-of-way adjacent to their lots, whether on the front, side, or rear of
the lots, with a minimum six foot buffer strip behind the back of the curb or
edge of pavement. Sidewalks shall be properly connected with existing sidewalks
and constructed according to city standards. Streets designated by the
Thoroughfare Plan for use as a collector or larger shall require a minimum six
foot wide sidewalk. All other sidewalks shall be a minimum of five feet in
width.
   (C)   The appearance of a sidewalk (scoring pattern or special paving) shall
be maintained across commercial driveways and alley access points, and
crosswalks shall be marked at all legs of the intersection. Obstructions such
as, but not limited to, fire hydrants, telephone poles, and street signs, shall
not be located within a sidewalk, unless written approval of such is obtained
from the Director of Public Works.
   (D)   Sidewalks constructed to the requirements in this section shall
include a standard sidewalk pedestrian ramp whenever a curb return or other
structure may present an architectural barrier to handicapped access within a
pedestrian path or at street/sidewalk intersections constructed in accordance
with ADA requirements.
   (E)   An alternative sidewalk design may be approved in writing by the
Director of Public Works where there are unusual and practical difficulties in
carrying out the provisions set forth by this code, provided the alternate
design will not adversely affect any adjoining property or the general public.
   (F)   Exemptions. Division (A) of this section shall not apply to:
      (1)   Large-lot residential subdivisions, where lots are one acre or
larger in size;
      (2)   Cul-de-sacs with a throat length of one lot or fewer; or
      (3)   Improvements to existing developments on streets not identified in
the sidewalk network, where the majority of the developed portions of the
street do not have sidewalks present.
(Ord. 2010-08, passed 3-9-10; Am. Ord. 2014-25, passed 10-28-14; Am. Ord. 2017-
11, passed 6-13-17)
§ 154.41  DRAINAGE AND STORM WATER MANAGEMENT.
   (A)   General.  Storm water management shall be in accordance with the city
Drainage Policy (
Chapter
158). Erosion and sediment control shall be in accordance with the Erosion and
Sedimentation Ordinance (
Chapter 156).
   (B)   Drainage easements.  Drainage easements are required where a
watercourse, drainage way, natural channel or stream traverses a subdivision.
No construction shall impede, constrict or block the flow of water in any
easement or natural watercourse. Such easement shall not be considered a part
of the lot area for purposes of minimum lot size requirements of the Zoning
Ordinance. Fifteen feet strips on both sides of earthen ditches, streams,
channels and the like, are required to provide access for city maintenance
crews and their equipment. A 15 foot strip shall be required on one side only
of a concrete drainage ditch. Additionally, drainage easements may be used for
utilities.
(Ord. 2010-08, passed 3-9-10)
§ 154.42  EASEMENTS.
   (A)   Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lots lines shall be
provided for utilities where necessary. Drainage, utility and access easements
of adequate size, as determined by the Public Works Director or other
designated staff, are required to provide for development of adjacent land.
      (1)   The width for all water and sanitary sewer utilities shall be a
minimum of 15 feet.
      (2)   Where electrical utilities will be installed, these utility
easements shall be a minimum of ten feet in width.
      (3)   Depending on services required and project design, easement width
may be increased.
      (4)   Where any public or private utility line is required by the
developer to be adjusted in location or elevation, the developer shall cause
such changes to be made with the approval of the appropriate city
representatives and the developer shall bear all costs of such changes.
      (5)   Easements with multiple utilities may require additional width.
      (6)   Additional easements may be required for the placement of guy
wires.
   (B)   Streetlight easements.  Streetlight easements of 15 feet in width
shall be provided between interior lots, where electrical service is from the
rear.
   (C)   Access easements.
      (1)   Vehicular access easements.  Vehicular access easements may be
required to facilitate the sharing of curb cuts between adjacent owners of
property fronting on collector and/or arterial streets. Vehicular access
easements 30 feet wide may also be used, if there is no other way possible, to
provide access for properties which do not have direct frontage on public
rights-of-way.
      (2)   Pedestrian access easements.  Pedestrian easements may be required
where deemed necessary by the Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council to
provide pedestrian circulation within the subdivision or access to schools,
shopping centers, recreation, transportation or other community facilities.
Such easements shall be at least 15 feet in width and include a minimum five
foot sidewalk.
(Ord. 2010-08, passed 3-9-10)
§ 154.43  LOTS.
   (A)   All lots shall meet minimum standards required by the Zoning
Ordinance.
   (B)   All lots shall be provided with adequate access to a public street.
Flag lots or access easements are permissible only where absolutely necessary
and appropriate to meet this requirement.
(Ord. 2010-08, passed 3-9-10)
§ 154.44  MONUMENTS.
   All monuments shall comply with the minimum standards for Professional Land
Surveyors as adopted by the Texas Board of Professional Land Surveyors and in
specific compliance with the Professional Land Surveying Practices Act and
Board Rule.
(Ord. 2010-08, passed 3-9-10)
§ 154.45  SPECIAL PROVISION FOR RURAL, HILLSIDE AND LARGER LOT SUBDIVISION.
   Large lot residential subdivisions consist of lots having a minimum area of
one acre or greater that are intended for single-family residential use.
Because of the larger lot size, lower population and traffic densities within
these subdivisions, sidewalks are not required (unless necessary for managing
drainage). Lay down curb is required unless the developer wants curb and
gutter. All of the other standards and requirements of the subdivision
regulations are applicable, unless indicated otherwise by the city.
(Ord. 2010-08, passed 3-9-10)
ETJ AREA
§ 154.55  APPLICATION TO THE EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION (ETJ).
   (A)   The City Council finds that to promote the health, safety, morals or
general welfare of the municipality and the safe, orderly and healthful
development of the municipality, it is necessary to extend to the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, the application of the ordinance
prescribing rules governing plats and subdivisions of land.
   (B)   Pursuant to Tex. Loc. Gov’t. Code, the city hereby extends to its
extraterritorial jurisdiction the application of this chapter which prescribes
the rules governing plats and subdivisions of land.
(Ord. 2010-08, passed 3-9-10)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 154.60  WAIVERS.
   (A)   The Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council may authorize
waivers from design standards. In granting a waiver, the city shall prescribe
only conditions that it deems necessary or desirable in the public interest.
   (B)   In making the findings required under §
154.61, the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council shall take into
account the nature of the proposed use of the land involved, existing uses of
land in the vicinity, the number of persons who will reside or work in the
proposed subdivision and the probable effect of such waiver upon traffic
conditions and upon the public health, safety, convenience and welfare in the
vicinity.
(Ord. 2010-08, passed 3-9-10)
§ 154.61  FINDINGS.
   No waiver to the findings set forth by the city shall be granted unless:
   (A)   There are special circumstances or conditions affecting the land
involved use that the strict application of the provision of standards would
deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his or her land;
   (B)   The waiver is necessary for line preservation and enjoyment of the
property;
   (C)   The granting of the waiver will not be detrimental to the public
health, safety or welfare, or injurious to other property in the area; and
   (D)   The granting of the waiver will not have the effect of preventing the
orderly subdivision of adjoining land in the vicinity in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2010-08, passed 3-9-10)
§ 154.62  CONFLICT WITH OTHER PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Public provisions.  The regulations are not intended to interfere
with, abrogate or annul any rule or regulation, statue or other provision of
law. Where any provision of these regulations imposes restrictions different
from those imposed by any other provision of these regulations or any other
ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions
are more restrictive or impose higher standards shall control.
   (B)   Private provisions.  These regulations are not intended to abrogate
any private easement, covenant or any other private agreement or restriction;
however, where the provisions of these regulations are more restrictive or
impose higher standards or regulations than such private easement, covenant or
other private agreement or restriction, the requirements of these regulations
shall govern.
(Ord. 2010-08, passed 3-9-10)
§ 154.63  ENFORCEMENT OF REGULATIONS.
   (A)   At the request of the city, the City Attorney, or his or her
designated representative, shall institute appropriate action in a court of
competent jurisdiction to enforce these regulations.
   (B)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable by a fine of up to
$2,000 and each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense and punishable accordingly.
   (C)   In the event any provision of this chapter is violated within the area
of extraterritorial jurisdiction outside its corporate limits, the city may
institute any appropriate action or proceedings in the district court to enjoin
the violation.
(Ord. 2010-08, passed 3-9-10)
APPENDIX A:  PAVEMENT DESIGN PROCEDURE
Table
   
I.   Subgrade classification groups
   
II.   Subgrade classification chart
   
III.   Pavement thickness design chart; local, minor, and major residential
street
   
IV.   Pavement thickness design chart; minor and major collector street
TABLE I: SUBGRADE CLASSIFICATION GROUPS
 
Soil Classification Tests
Group No. Liquid Limit Plasticity Index Typical Material Description
I         <35          5-15             Limestone, weathered limestone, or
                                        severely weathered limestone
II        30-40        10-25            Sandy clays, silty clays, or severely
                                        weathered limestone
III       40-50        15-30            Sandy clays, silty clays, or severely
                                        weathered limestone
IV        50-60        20-35            Clay or silty clay
V         60-70        25-40            Clay
VI        70-80        35-50            Clay
VII       >80          40-60            Clay
NOTE:   Graphical representation of these subgrade groups are shown on Table
II. Values which plot on the borderline between two groups should be assigned
the group number of the poorer soil group. Soils which have less than 40%
passing the Number 200 mesh sieve and which would plot in Groups III through
VII may be upgraded to the next better group.
(Ord. 93-06, passed 4-22-93)
TABLE II:  SUBGRADE CLASSIFICATION CHART
Please Note: To view the diagram, please see the printed version of your code
of ordinances.
TABLE III:  PAVEMENT THICKNESS DESIGN CHART; LOCAL, MINOR, AND MAJOR
RESIDENTIAL STREET
Please Note: To view the diagram, please see the printed version of your code
of ordinances.
TABLE IV:  PAVEMENT THICKNESS DESIGN CHART; MINOR AND MAJOR COLLECTOR STREET
Please Note: To view the diagram, please see the printed version of your code
of ordinances.
APPENDIX B:  RAINFALL INTENSITY CURVE
Please Note: To view the diagram, please see the printed version of your code
of ordinances.
CHAPTER 155:  ZONING CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
155.001   Title
   
155.002   Purpose
   
155.003   Definitions
   
155.004   Districts
   
155.005   Conformance with district regulations required
District Regulations
   
155.020   R-1 One-Family Dwelling District
   
155.021   R1-R Rural One-Family Dwelling District
   
155.022   R1-A Single-Family Garden Home Residential District
   
155.0221   R1-I Single-Family Infill Dwelling District
   
155.023   R-2 Two-Family Dwelling District
   
155.0231   R2-I Two-Family Infill Dwelling District
   
155.024   R-MU Mixed Residential
   
155.025   R-3 Multi-Family Dwelling District
   
155.026   R-MH Manufactured Home Park District
   
155.027   RT-1 Townhouse Single-Family Dwelling District
   
155.028   B-1 Office District
   
155.029   B-2 Neighborhood Retail District
   
155.030   B-3 Local Business District
   
155.031   B-4 Secondary and Highway Business District
   
155.032   B-5 General Business District
   
155.033   M-1 Light Manufacturing District
   
155.034   M-2 Heavy Manufacturing District
   
155.035   T District
   
155.036   PD Planned Development District
   
155.037   Reserved
   
155.038   Reserved
   
155.039   Setback requirements (Table 21-A)
   
155.040   Additional use, height, area, and lighting regulations; exceptions
   
155.041   Knight’s Way Corridor
Screening and Landscaping
   
155.050   Screening requirements
   
155.051   Landscape requirements
Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements
   
155.060   Purpose
   
155.061   General standards
   
155.062   Design standards
   
155.063   Off-site or remote parking
   
155.064   Parking for mixed use development
   
155.065   Handicapped facilities
   
155.066   Number of parking spaces required
   
155.067   Off-street loading requirements
   
155.068   Private or personal property parking areas for persons with
disabilities
Home Based Child Care
   
155.080   Home based child care regulations
   
155.081   Home based child care use restrictions
   
155.082   Pre-existing home based child care facilities
Home Occupations
   
155.084   Home occupations
Nonconforming and Prohibited Uses
   
155.100   Nonconforming use of land
   
155.101   Nonconforming use of buildings
   
155.102   Prohibited uses
Permits
   
155.200   Building permits
   
155.201   Conditional use permits
   
155.202   Certificate of occupancy
   
155.203   Temporary use permits
Administration and Enforcement
   
155.210   Notification of rezoning requests
   
155.211   Resubmission of zoning requests
   
155.212   Changes and amendments
   
155.213   Boundaries of districts
   
155.214   Interpretation, purpose, and conflict
Board of Adjustment
   
155.220   Composition
   
155.221   Appeals to the Board of Adjustment
   
155.222   Powers of the Board of Adjustment
Planning and Zoning Commission
   
155.230   Established; membership; function
   
155.231   Terms of members; filling vacancies; removal
   
155.232   Qualification of members
   
155.233   Meetings
   
155.234   Powers and duties
   
155.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 155.001  TITLE
   This chapter shall be known, and may be cited, as either the Zoning
Ordinance or the Zoning Code of the City of Harker Heights.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01)
§ 155.002  PURPOSE
   The zoning regulations and districts as herein established have been made in
accordance with a comprehensive plan for the purpose of promoting health,
safety, morals, and the general welfare of the city. They have been designed to
lessen the congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic, or
other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding
of land; to avoid concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate
provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public
requirements. They have been made with reasonable consideration, among other
things, to the character of the district and its peculiar suitability for
particular uses, and with a view to conserving the value of buildings and
encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the city.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01)
§ 155.003  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words are hereby defined.
Words used in the present tense shall include the future; the singular number
shall include the plural, and the plural the singular. The word "building"
shall include the word "structure"; the word "lot" includes the word "plot";
and the word "shall" is mandatory and not merely permissive or directory.
   ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND USE. A subordinate building or a portion of the main
building, the use of which is incidental to that of the main building or to the
main use of the premises. An accessory use is one which is incidental to the
main use of the premises.
   ALLEY. Public or private thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means
of access to property abutting thereon.
   APARTMENT. A room or suite of rooms in a multiple dwelling, or in a building
in which more than one living unit is established above or on the same floor as
non-residential uses, which room or suite is intended or designed for use as a
residence by one family and which includes culinary accommodations.
   APARTMENT HOUSE. A building or portion thereof used or designed as a
residence for three or more families living independently of each other, and
doing their own cooking in the building, including apartments and apartment
hotels.
   BOARDING HOUSE. A building, other than a hotel, where for compensation and
by pre-arrangement for definite periods, meals or lodging and meals are
provided for three or more persons, but not exceeding 20 persons.
   BREWPUB. A business required to hold a current, valid brewpub license (BP
permit) from the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission., provided that a business
that only provides tasting or retail sale of alcoholic beverages is not a
brewpub.
   BUILDING. Any structure designed or intended for the support, enclosure,
shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattels, or property.
   CLINIC. An office or group of offices for one or more physicians,
veterinarians, surgeons or dentists, or other professionals, engaged in
treating the sick or injured, but not including rooms for the abiding of
patients.
   COMMERCIAL/LARGE SCALE AGRICULTURE.  Any use or product relating to or
concerned with agriculture whose primary purpose is intended for either retail
or commercial sales production.
   COMMON AREAS. Private property owned in common by, and designated for the
private use of, the owners or occupants of townhouses in a particular project
or subdivision. COMMON AREAS uses include, but are not limited to, recreation
areas, parks and plazas, ornamental areas open to the general view within the
project or subdivision, and building setbacks not otherwise required by
ordinance. The COMMON AREA does not include public streets, alleys, required
building setbacks or utility easements.
   DAYCARE CENTER. A facility that provides care for more than 12 children
under the age of 14 for less than 24 hours a day. It does not include a group
day care or drop-in care center.
   DISTRICT. A section or sections of the city for which regulations governing
the use of buildings and premises, the height of buildings, the size of yards,
and the intensity of use are uniform.
   DROP-IN CARE CENTER. A child care facility that provides care for children
under the age of 14 for part of the day. It does not provide regular care for
the same child. It does not include a group day care home or day care center.
   DWELLING. Any building or portion thereof which is designed and used
exclusively for residential purposes.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE. A building having accommodations for and occupied by
more than two families.
   DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY. A building having accommodations for and occupied
exclusively by one family.
   DWELLING, TWO FAMILY or  DUPLEX. A building having accommodations for and
occupied exclusively by two families.
   EXTERIOR LIGHTING. Exterior lighting shall include, but shall not be limited
to, all freestanding lights, ground lights, illuminated signs, lights and other
luminaries mounted on the exterior of any building. For the purposes of
regulations regarding exterior lighting, interior lighting visible from the
exterior shall be treated as exterior lighting.
   FAMILY. One or more persons occupying a premises and living as a single
housekeeping unit as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding house,
lodging house, or hotel as herein defined.
   FILLING STATION or SERVICE STATION. Any building or premises used for the
dispensing, sale, or offering for sale at retail of any automobile fuels or
oils. When the dispensing, sale, or offering for sale is incidental to the
conduct of a public garage, or retail store, the premises are classified as a
public garage or retail store.
   FRONTAGE. All the property on one side of a street between two intersecting
streets (crossing or terminated), measured along the line of the street, or if
the street is dead-ended, then all the property abutting on one side between an
intersecting street and the dead-end of the street.
   GARAGE, PRIVATE. An accessory building or portion of the main use building,
designed for or used for the housing of motor driven vehicles which are the
property of and for the private use of the occupants of the lot on which the
private garage is located. Not more than one of the vehicle may be a commercial
vehicle and of not more than one and one-half tons capacity.
   GARAGE, PUBLIC. A building or portion thereof, other than a private garage,
designed or used for equipping, repairing, hiring, servicing, selling, or
storing motor driven vehicles.
   GRADE.
      (1)   For buildings having walls adjoining one street only, the elevation
of the sidewalk at the center of the wall adjoining the street.
      (2)   For buildings having walls adjoining more than one street, the
average of the elevation of the sidewalk at the center of the walls adjoining
the streets.
      (3)   For buildings having no walls adjoining the street, the average
level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of
the building.
      (4)   Any wall approximately parallel to and not more than five feet from
the street line shall be considered as adjoining the street. Where no sidewalk
exists, the grade shall be established by the City Building Inspector.
   HEIGHT OF BUILDING. The vertical distance from the grade to the highest
point of the coping of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof, or the
mean height level between the eaves and ridge for a gable, hip and gambrel
roofs.
   HOME BASED CHILD CARE FACILITY. Any facility registered or licensed as such
by the Department of Protective and Regulatory Services.
   HOME OCCUPATION. Any occupation or profession engaged in by the occupants of
a dwelling not involving the conduct of a retail business, and not including
any occupation conducted in any building on the premises excepting the building
which is used by the occupant as his or her private dwelling. HOME OCCUPATIONS
shall include, in general, personal services such as furnished by an architect,
lawyer, musician, artist, and seamstress when performed by the person occupying
the building as his or her private dwelling and not including a partnership or
the employment of any one not residing in the home.
   HOTEL. A building in which lodging or board and lodging are provided and
offered to the public for compensation and in which ingress and egress to and
from all rooms is made through an inside lobby or office supervised by a person
in charge at all hours. As such, it is open to the public in contradistinction
to a boarding house, a lodging house, or an apartment which are herein defined.
   INDUSTRIALIZED HOUSING.
      (1)   INDUSTRIALIZED HOUSING is a residential structure that is:
         (a)   Designed for the occupancy of one or more families;
         (b)   Constructed in one or more modules, or constructed using one or
more modular components built at a location other than the permanent site; and
         (c)   Designed to be used as a permanent residential structure, when
the module or the modular component is transported to the permanent site and
erected or installed on a permanent foundation system.
      (2)   INDUSTRIALIZED HOUSING includes the structure's plumbing, heating,
air conditioning, and electrical systems.
      (3)    INDUSTRIALIZED HOUSING does not include:
         (a)   A residential structure that exceeds three stories or 49 feet in
height, as measured from the finished grade elevation at the building entrance
to the peak of the roof;
         (b)   Housing constructed of a sectional or panelized system that does
not use a modular component; or
         (c)   A ready-built home constructed in a manner in which the entire
living area is contained in a single unit or section at a temporary location,
for the purpose of selling and moving the home to another location.
   INDUSTRIALIZED BUILDING.
      (1)   An INDUSTRIALIZED BUILDING is a commercial structure that is:
         (a)   Constructed in one or more modules, or constructed using one or
more modular components built at a location other than the commercial site; and
         (b)   Designed to be used as a commercial building, when the module or
the modular component is transported to the commercial site and erected or
installed.
      (2)   An INDUSTRIALIZED BUILDING includes the structure's plumbing,
heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems.
      (3)   An INDUSTRIALIZED BUILDING includes a permanent commercial
structure, and a commercial structure designed to be transported from one
commercial site to another commercial site; but does not include:
         (a)   A commercial structure that exceeds three stories or 49 feet in
height, as measured from the finished grade elevation at the building entrance
to the peak of the roof; or
         (b)   A commercial building or structure that is:
            1.   Installed in a manner other than on a permanent foundation;
and
            2.   Either:
               a.   Not open to the public; or
               b.   Less than 1,500 square feet in total area, and used other
than as a school or a place of religious worship.
   LIGHT TRESPASS. The spilling or projecting of illumination beyond the
boundary lines of the source property so as to annoy or disturb a person of
ordinary sensibilities, or otherwise compromise or endanger the safety or
privacy of any person.
   LODGING HOUSE. A building or place where lodging is provided (or which is
equipped to provide lodging regularly) by prearrangement for definite periods,
for compensation, for three or more persons in contradistinction to hotels open
to transients.
   LODGING HOUSE. A building or place where lodging is provided (or which is
equipped to provide lodging regularly) by prearrangement for definite periods,
for compensation, for three or more persons in contradistinction to hotels open
to transients.
   LOT. A parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by use permitted in
this chapter, including one main building with its accessory buildings, the
open spaces and parking spaces required by this chapter, and having its
principal frontage upon a street or upon an officially approved place. It is
intended that one platted lot have only one owner and that subdivision of any
lot must follow appropriate ordinances.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection.
   LOT, DEPTH OF. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines.
   LUMINARY. The complete lighting fixture, including without limitation the
lamp, lens, reflector, shield, and support assembly.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. The meaning set forth in
§ 152.01.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. The meaning set forth in
§ 152.01.
   NON-COMMERCIAL/SMALL SCALE AGRICULTURE.  Any use or product relating to or
concerned with agriculture and whose use is accessory to the primary
residential use and is intended for the benefit of the individual or
individuals who reside on the land and is not intended for either retail or
commercial sales production.
   NON-CONFORMING USE. Any building or land lawfully occupied by a use at the
time of passage of this chapter or amendment thereto, which does not conform
after the passage of this chapter or amendment thereto with the use regulations
of the district in which it is situated.
   PARKING SPACE. An area enclosed or unenclosed containing not less than 160
square feet exclusive of the driveways connecting the space with a street or
alley. The PARKING SPACE and connecting driveway shall be durably surfaced and
so arranged to permit satisfactory ingress and egress of an automobile.
   PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR. The city official in charge of planning
and development.
   PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION. The appointed body designated as the city's
planning and zoning commission.
   SCREENING. Landscaping, fencing or other material erected as required by
this chapter to provide a visual and/or noise barrier from adjacent properties
and streets.
   SOURCE PROPERTY. The property on which a device designed to emit light is
installed, located or utilized.
   STORY. That portion of a building, other than a basement, included between
the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it; or if
there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling
next above it.
   STREET. A public thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to
abutting property.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS. Any change in the supporting members of a building,
such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any complete
rebuilding of the roof or the exterior walls.
   STRUCTURES. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having a permanent
location on the ground, including, but without limiting the general
inclusiveness of the foregoing, advertising signs, billboards, poster boards,
and pergolas.
   TOURIST COURT (AUTO COURTS, MOTELS, OR MOTOR LODGES). A group of attached,
semi-detached, or detached buildings containing individual sleeping or living
units, designed for or used temporarily by automobile tourists, or transients,
with garage attached or parking space conveniently located to each unit, and
offering to the public daily as well as for other longer term rental rates, and
maintaining a register of guests and/or their vehicles.
   TOWNHOUSE. One of a series of single family dwelling units which are either
structurally connected, or which are constructed immediately adjacent to each
other without side yards between the dwelling units. The terms TOWNHOME and ROW
HOUSE are similarly defined and may be used interchangeably.
   TOWNHOUSE GROUP. Two or more townhouses as an integral part of a townhouse
project.
   TOWNHOUSE PROJECT. One or more townhouse groups, together with commonly
owned structures or areas.
   TOWNHOUSE SUBDIVISION. One or more townhouse projects.
   WINERY. A business required to hold a current, valid winery permit (G
permit) from the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission, provided that a business
that only provides tasting or retail sale of alcoholic beverages is not a
winery.
   YARD. An open space on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and
unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as
otherwise provided herein. In measuring a YARD for the purpose of determining
the width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard, or the depth of a rear
yard, the horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall
be used.
   YARD, FRONT. A yard extending across the front of a lot between the side
yard lines, and being  the minimum horizontal distance between the street line
and the main building or any projections thereof other than the projection of
the usual steps, unenclosed balconies or open porch.
   YARD, REAR. A yard extending across the rear of a lot, measured between the
side lot lines, and being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot
line and rear of the main building or any projections other than steps,
unenclosed balconies or unenclosed porches. On corner lots, the REAR YARD shall
be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least
dimension. On both corner lots and interior lot the REAR YARD shall in all
cases be at the opposite end of a lot from the front yard.
   YARD, SIDE. A yard between the main building and the side of the lot, and
extending from the front lot line to the yard line.
   ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.  A quasi-judicial board appointed by the City
Council to  hear and decide appeals, and to consider variance requests, and the
like.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 2004-06, passed 3-9-04; Am. Ord. 2006-
40, passed 10-24-06; Am. Ord. 2010-26, passed 9-14-10; Am. Ord. 2019-14, passed
5-28-19)
§ 155.004  DISTRICTS.
   (A)   For the purpose of regulating and restricting the heights and size of
buildings and other structures, the percentage of lot that may be occupied, the
size of yards, and other open spaces, the density of population, and the
location and use of buildings, structures, and land for trade, industry,
residence, or other purposes, the city is hereby divided into zoning districts,
of which there shall be 20 classes in number, and which shall be known as:
      (1)   R-1 - One-Family Dwelling District;
      (2)   R-1(M) - One-Family Manufactured Home Dwelling District;
      (3)   R1-R - Rural One-Family Dwelling District;
      (4)   R1-A - Single-Family Garden Home Residential District;
      (5)   R1-I - Single Family Infill Dwelling District;
      (6)   R-2 - Two-Family Dwelling District;
      (7)   R2-I - Two-Family Infill Dwelling District;
      (8)   R-3 - Multi-Family Dwelling District;
      (9)   R-MU - Mixed Use Residential;
      (10)   R-MH - Manufactured Home Park District;
      (11)   RT-1 - Townhouse-Single Family Dwelling District;
      (12)   B-1 - Office District;
      (13)   B-2 - Neighborhood Retail Business District;
      (14)   B-3 - Local Business District;
      (15)   B-4 - Secondary and Highway Business District;
      (16)   B-5 - General Business District;
      (17)   M-1 - Light Manufacturing District;
      (18)   M-2 - Heavy Manufacturing District;
      (19)   PD - Planned Development; and
      (20)   T - Tavern.
   (B)   The boundaries of the districts, described above, are shown on a map
maintained by the city and which map is designated as the Zoning District Map,
except, however, the T Districts shall not be shown on the Zoning District Map
but shall be identified only by descriptions either in lot and block numbers or
metes and bounds prepared by a registered surveyor registered within the state.
   (C)   Whenever any street, alley, or other public way is lawfully vacated by
the City Council, the zoning district adjoining each side of such street, alley
or public way shall be automatically extended to the center of such vacated
area and shall be subject to all applicable regulations of the extended
districts.
   (D)   All territory hereafter annexed to the city shall be classified as R1-
R Rural One-Family Dwelling District, until permanently zoned by the governing
body of the city. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall, as soon as
practicable after annexation of any territory to the city, institute
proceedings on its own motion to give the newly annexed territory permanent
zoning, and the procedure to be followed shall be the same as is provided by
law for the adoption of original zoning regulations.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 2016-24, passed 10-11-16; Am. Ord.
2017-28, passed 10-10-17)
§ 155.005 CONFORMANCE WITH DISTRICT REGULATIONS REQUIRED.
   Except as hereinafter provided:
   (A)   No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or
structurally altered, and no building or land shall be used for any purpose,
that is not permitted in the district in which the building or land is
situated.
   (B)   No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or
structurally altered to exceed the height limit herein established for the
district in which the building is situated.
   (C)   The minimum yards and other open spaces, including lot area per
family, required by this chapter for each and every building existing at the
time of the passage of this chapter, or for any building hereafter erected,
shall not be encroached upon or considered as yard or open space requirements
for any other building, nor shall any lot area be reduced to an area less than
the district requirements of this chapter.
   (D)   Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be on a
lot as herein defined, and in no case shall there be more than one main
building on one lot except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
   (E)   Non-HUD approved manufactured housing shall be prohibited from
entering the corporate limits of the city for other than through transportation
purposes. Additionally, non-HUD approved manufactured housing built prior to
June 15, 1976, shall not be permitted to relocate within the city.
   (F)   Any building use that has been closed or abandoned for 12 months or
more shall not be used thereafter unless it complies with current regulations,
standards and requirements.
   (G)   All lots must meet all applicable requirements of
Chapter 154, and shall comply with the area regulations in each respective
zoning classification. Variance in setbacks may be given in inches not to
exceed one foot by the Building Official if it is determined such variance is
in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter and will not
impair the public health, safety, comfort, morals, and welfare of the city.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 2006-40, passed 10-24-06; Am. Ord.
2020-07, passed 4-14-20)
DISTRICT REGULATIONS
§ 155.020  R-1 ONE FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT.
   (A)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted by right:
      (1)   Site-built, single-family dwellings and industrialized housing.
      (2)   Church or other place of worship.
      (3)   Municipal buildings, non-profit libraries or museums, police and
fire stations, public utilities (without outside storage yards or electric
substations), public parks, playgrounds, municipal golf courses, public
recreation facilities, and community buildings.
      (4)   Customary home occupations as defined in §
155.003.
      (5)   Accessory structure.
         (a)   One small accessory building (not exceeding 144 square feet) per
residence customarily incident to the above uses (not involving the conduct of
a business) subject to the following requirements:
            1.   Structure must be built upon a moveable foundation;
            2.   Structure cannot exceed 12 feet in height;
            3.   Structure must set behind the rear facade of the main
residence building and must be setback five feet from the rear property line
and six feet from the side property line; and
            4.   Materials, building design, and construction must comply with
the requirements of
Ch. 150.
         (b)   Large accessory buildings customarily incident to the above uses
(not involving the conduct of a business) subject to the following
requirements:
            1.   Building materials and facade must be consistent with the main
residence building materials and facade;
            2.   Large accessory building must be behind the front facade of
the main residence;
            3.   The height of the large accessory building cannot exceed that
of the main residence building;
            4.   Number, size, setbacks and height requirements based on the
size of the lot as follows:
 
                Number of Large Maximum Aggregate
Lot Size        Accessory       Size of All       Setbacks       Maximum Height
                Structures      Accessory
                Allowed         Structures
< 10,000 square                                   Front: 25 feet
feet            1               250 square feet   Side: 6 feet   15 feet
                                                  Rear: 10 feet
> 10,000 square                                   Front: 25 feet
feet            1               500 square feet   Side: 6 feet   15 feet
< .5 acre                                         Rear: 10 feet
> .5 acre                                         Front: 25 feet
< 1 acre        2               1,000 square feet Side: 6 feet   24 feet
                                                  Rear: 20 feet
                                                  Front: 25 feet
> 1 acre        4               1,500 square feet Side: 6 feet   24 feet
                                                  Rear: 20 feet
 
      (6)   Private garage.
      (7)   Home based child care.
      (8)   Real estate sales office, or temporary living quarters to provide
security during the development of residential subdivisions, but not to exceed
two years.
      (9)   Low impact telecommunication towers.
      (10)   Public schools.
   (B)   Conditional uses.  The following require conditional use permits:
      (1)   Private schools having a curriculum equal to a public elementary,
high school, or institution of higher learning (except home schooling).
      (2)   Neighborhood association facilities.
      (3)   Farms, nurseries, truck gardens and greenhouses, provided no sales
offices are maintained and no livestock are kept within 250 feet of a residence
of any person other than the farm owner.
      (4)   Accessory dwelling for a relative or servant (not for rent).
      (5)   Accessory structure as provided by §
155.040.
   (C)   Height regulations.  No building shall exceed two and one-half stories
or 35 feet in height.
   (D)   Front yard, side yard, and rear yard.  As per Table 21-A.
   (E)   Intensity of use.  Every lot or tract of land shall have an area of
not less than 8,400 square feet and an average overall width of not less than
70 feet and a minimum lot frontage of not less than 45 feet.  Except that if a
lot or tract should have less area or width than is herein required and its
boundary lines along their entire length should touch lands under other
ownership on the effective date of this chapter and shall not have changed
since the date, such parcel of land may be used for a single family dwelling.
   (F)   Additional use, height, and area regulation.  Additional use, height,
and area regulations and exceptions are found in §
155.040.
   (G)   R-1(M) zoning designation.  R-1(M) is a one family residential lot
that also allows manufactured homes. All manufactured housing structures
installed after December 31, 1999, must be installed on a permanent foundation,
as that term is defined in §
152.01.
      (1)   In order to be approved, the manufactured home must be found to
have design compatibility with other dwellings in the neighborhood.
      (2)   The following standards apply to any placement of a manufactured
home on a lot after December 31, 1999:
         (a)   Roofing shall be similar in color, material and appearance to
the roofing material commonly used on residential dwellings within the
community or comparable to the predominant materials used on dwellings within
the neighborhood.
Materials shall include asphalt composition, shingle, tile, crushed rock,
standing seam metal or similar materials (except all other metal). Roof pitch
shall be a minimum of 3/12.
         (b)   Exterior siding shall be similar in color, material, and
appearance to the exterior siding material commonly used on residential
dwellings within the community or comparable to predominant materials used on
dwellings within the neighborhood. Exterior siding shall be of brick, wood,
stucco, plaster, concrete or other material which is finished in a non-glossy
and non-reflective manner.
         (c)   If a garage/carport is constructed, it must be similar in
appearance to others in the neighborhood and constructed of like materials as
that of the primary home.
         (d)   Two all-weather surface off street parking spaces meeting the
requirements of §
155.061 shall be provided.
      (3)   Every manufactured home shall be placed so that the entrance or
front of the home faces or parallels the principal street frontage, except:
         (a)   In cases where the lot is one acre or greater and the home is
located more than 50 feet from the street; or
         (b)   Where the lot width is 60 feet or less.
      (4)   All entrances to a manufactured home shall be provided with
permanent steps, porch or similar suitable entry.
      (5)   The lot must meet all applicable requirements of
Chapter 154, and shall comply with the area regulations in (D) of this section.
Variance in setbacks may be given in inches not to exceed one foot at the
Building Official’s discretion.
   (H)   Signs   As per
Chapter 151.
   (I)   Parking.  As per §§
155.061 through
155.068.
   (J)   Storage.  Open storage is prohibited except for materials for the
residents’ use, such as firewood, gardening materials, and similar materials.
   (K)   Landscaping.  All yards shall have vegetative groundcover of
sufficient quality and quantity, or other city-approved groundcover, to control
dust, erosion and sediment upon final inspections. In addition, a minimum of
two six-foot-tall trees, measuring two inches or more in caliper (diameter)
when measured 12 inches from the base of the trunk, and eight three-gallon
shrubs, are required in the front yard.
   (L)   Industrialized housing.
      (1)   Industrialized housing shall be considered real property and must:
         (a)   Have a value equal to or greater than the median taxable value
for each single-family dwelling located within 500 feet of the lot on which the
industrialized housing is proposed to be located, as determined by the most
recent certified tax appraisal roll for the county;
         (b)   Have exterior siding, roofing, roof pitch, foundation fascia,
and fenestration compatible with the single-family dwellings located within 500
feet of the lot on which the industrialized housing is proposed to be located;
         (c)   Comply with city aesthetic standards, building setbacks, side
and rear yard offsets, subdivision control, architectural landscaping, square
footage, and other site requirements applicable to single-family dwellings;
         (d)   Be securely fixed to a permanent foundation; and
         (e)   Have all local permits and licenses that are applicable to site-
built housing.
      For purposes of this division, VALUE means the taxable VALUE of the
industrialized housing and lot after installation of the housing.
      (2)   Any owner or authorized agent who intends to construct, erect,
install or move any industrialized housing into the city shall first make
application to the Building Official and obtain the required permits. In
addition to any other information otherwise required for such permits, the
application shall:
         (a)   Identify each single-family dwelling located within 500 feet of
the lot on which the industrialized housing is to be located, and show the
taxable value for each such dwelling, as determined by the most recent
certified tax appraisal roll for the county;
         (b)   Describe the exterior siding, roofing, roof pitch, foundation
fascia, and fenestration for each single-family dwelling located within 500
feet of the lot on which the industrialized housing is to be located;
         (c)   Describe the permanent foundation and method of attachment
proposed for the industrialized housing; and
         (d)   State the anticipated taxable value of the industrialized
housing and the lot after installation of the industrialized housing.
      (3)   A person commits an offense if the person:
         (a)   Constructs, erects, installs or moves any industrialized housing
in the city without first obtaining a permit as required by this section; or
         (b)   Constructs, erects, installs or moves any industrialized housing
into the city unless such industrialized housing complies with this section.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 2002-28, passed 11-12-02; Am. Ord.
2006-40, passed 10-24-06; Am. Ord. 2010-32, passed 10-12-10; Am. Ord. 2011-08,
passed 4-19-11)
§ 155.021  R1-R RURAL ONE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT.
   (A)   Permitted uses. 
      (1)   Any use permitted by right in the R-1 District.
      (2)   Non-commercial/small scale agricultural related uses to include:
         (a)   1.   Farm animals kept and/or maintained for family food
production, education, or recreation but excluding retail sales or commercial
production.
            2.   All farm animals kept and/or maintained for family food
production, education or recreation shall be subject to all regulations stated
in
Chapter 90 of this code.
         (b)   The raising of and harvesting of tree crops, row crops, or field
crops for family food production but excluding retail sales or commercial
production.
         (c)   The growing of horticultural and floricultural specialties such
as flowers, shrubs, or trees intended for ornamental or landscaping purposes
but excluding retail sales or commercial production.
      (3)   Accessory buildings.
         (a)   Accessory building or buildings whose use is incidental to the
above uses (not involving the conduct of a business or to be used as a dwelling
unit), when located on the same lot, other than private garage for one or more
cars.  Accessory buildings that fall under this category shall include such
buildings as private stables, barns, farm equipment storage buildings and other
buildings incidental to small agricultural production and storage are permitted
provided they meet the following standards:
            1.   The maximum number of accessory buildings shall not exceed one
per acre;
            2.   Accessory buildings shall be no greater than 5,000 square feet
in size;
            3.   The maximum aggregate square footage of all accessory
buildings shall not exceed 1,000 square feet per acre and not to exceed a total
of 10,000 square feet on any one tract;
            4.   Materials, building design and construction must comply with
the requirements of
Chapter 150 of this code.
         (b)   Accessory buildings with metal exteriors shall be allowed in an
R1-R District provided they meet the following standards:
            1.   The accessory building shall meet all the requirements of
division (A)(3)(a) above;
            2.   Metal exteriors must be constructed using permanently painted
26 gauge or higher steel.
   (B)   Conditional uses. 
      (1)   Any conditional use permitted in the R-1 District.
      (2)   Commercial or large scale agriculture provided that the density of
the lot or tract of land is ten acres or greater and that all farm animals kept
and/or maintained shall be subject to all regulations stated in
Chapter 90 of this code.
   (C)   Height regulations.  Same as in R-1 District.
   (D)   Area regulations.  As per Table 21-A.
      (1)   Front yard.  There shall be a front yard along the front property
line of the lot. The minimum depth of such front yard shall be 40 feet.
      (2)   Side yard.  There shall be a side yard on each side of a building
of not less than ten feet. A side yard adjacent to a street shall not be less
than 25 feet.
      (3)   Rear yard.  The depth of a rear yard shall be a minimum of 25 feet.
   (E)   Intensity of use. 
      (1)   Every lot shall have an area of not less than two 
acres. The lot width shall be a minimum of 100 feet.
      (2)   If a long narrow strip of land is utilized for lot access to a
public right-of-way it shall have a minimum width of 60 feet and shall not be
included when calculating the overall density of the lot.
   (F)   Signs.  As per
Chapter 151.
   (G)   Landscaping. All yards shall have vegetative groundcover of sufficient
quality and quantity, or other city-approved groundcover, to control dust,
erosion and sediment upon final inspections. In addition, a minimum of two six-
foot-tall trees, measuring two inches or more in caliper (diameter) when
measured 12 inches from the base of the trunk, and eight three-gallon shrubs,
are required in the front yard.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 2006-40, passed 10-24-06; Am. Ord.
2010-26, passed 9-14-10)
§ 155.022  R1-A  SINGLE-FAMILY GARDEN HOME RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Permitted uses. Any use permitted by right in the R-1 District, if it
meets required standards.
   (B)   Conditional uses. Any conditional use permitted in the R-1 District,
if it meets required standards.
   (C)   Height regulations.  Same as in R-1 District.
   (D)   Area regulations.
      (1)   Front yard.  There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less
than 20 feet. Where lots have double frontage running through from one street
to another, the required front yard shall be provided on both streets.
      (2)   Side yard.  The minimum side yard setback for any corner lot shall
be 15 feet. Other residences may be located such that one of the side yards
will be zero; that is, the building may be constructed on the property line,
provided:
         (a)   The minimum spacing between residences must be 15 feet, except
that if the "R1-A" lot is adjacent to and shares a common boundary with a lot
zoned "R-1," the required minimum spacing between structures shall not be less
than 15 feet;
         (b)   The wall located on the property line shall be constructed and
maintained in accordance with all other applicable codes and ordinances; and
         (c)   A five foot wide maintenance easement, shown on the approved
subdivision plat, shall be provided across the full depth of the adjacent lot
abutting the wall on the property line.
      (3)   Rear yard.  There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less
than 20 feet.
   (E)   Intensity of use.  All projects must contain a minimum of 1.5 acres of property. No subdivision may contain less than ten individual
lots.
      (1)   Lot area. No building shall be constructed on any lot less than
4,600 square feet of area.
      (2)   Lot width. The width of the lot shall not be less than 46 feet at
the front street building line, nor shall its average width be less than 46
feet. On corner lots, with two street frontages, the minimum width shall be not
less than 55 feet.
      (3)   Lot depth. The average depth of the lot shall be not less than 100
feet, except that a corner lot having a minimum width of not less than 55 feet
may have an average depth of less than 100 feet, provided that the minimum
depth is not less than 90 feet.
   (F)   Parking regulations. Same as in R-1 District.
   (G)   Storage.  Open storage is prohibited except for materials for the
residents' use, such as firewood, gardening materials, and similar materials.
   (H)   Floor area.  Minimum livable floor area shall be 1,500 square feet.
   (I)   Additional requirements.  All structures shall have brick veneer on
all sides.
   (J)   Landscaping.  All yards shall have vegetative groundcover of
sufficient quality and quantity, or other city-approved groundcover, to control
dust, erosion and sediment upon final inspections. In addition, a minimum of
two six-foot-tall trees, measuring two inches or more in caliper (diameter)
when measured 12 inches from the base of the trunk, and eight three-gallon
shrubs, are required in the front yard.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 2006-40, passed 10-24-06)
§ 155.0221  R1-I SINGLE-FAMILY INFILL DWELLING DISTRICT.
   (A)   Location requirements. The R1-I Single-Family Infill Dwelling District
shall be restricted to specific geographic locations as designated in the map
attached hereto as Exhibit “A” and incorporated by reference, an official copy
of which map shall be filed in the office of the City Secretary. This copy
shall be the official map and shall not be changed in any manner except as the
Council may amend from time to time. In case of any question, such copy,
together with any amending ordinances, shall be controlling. Additional copies
of the map may he placed in the offices of the Planning and Development
Director and the Public Works Director.
   (B)   Permitted uses. Any use permitted by right in the R-l District, if it
meets required standards.
   (C)   Conditional uses. Any conditional use permitted in the R-l District,
if it meets required standards.
   (D)   Height regulations. The main residence building may not exceed the
lesser of three stories or 40 feet in height.
   (E)   Design regulations.
      (1)   Materials and appearance. Building facade must be of masonry or
other cementitious materials approved by the Building Official. Varying
textures, colors, materials and architectural treatments are required on
adjacent houses to avoid repetition and add visual interests to the area.
Windows must be configured to break the line of sight between adjacent
residences.
      (2)   Fences. No masonry fences will be permitted between units that are
less than 12 feet apart as measured from wall to wall. All front facing fences
when located between units less than 12 feet apart must have a minimum three
foot wide gate.
      (3)   Spacing. If units are less than 12 feet apart, eaves between the
units may not protrude beyond 16 inches from the wall.
   (F)   Area regulations.
      (1)   Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less
than 20 feet if there is a garage in the front, or ten feet in all other
circumstances. Where lots have double frontage running through from one street
to another, the required front yard shall be provided on both streets.
      (2)   Side yard. The minimum side yard setback for any corner lot shall
be ten feet. Other residences may be located such that one of the side yards
will be zero; that is, the building may be constructed on the property line,
provided that:
         (a)   A five foot wide maintenance easement, shown on an approved
subdivision plat, shall be provided across the full depth of the adjacent lot
abutting the wall on the property line; and
         (b)   There is required a minimum ten foot separation between
neighboring residences.
      (3)   Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less
than ten feet.
   (G)   Intensity of use.
      (1)   Lot area. No building shall be constructed on any lot less than
3,500 square feet in area.
      (2)   Lot width. The minimum width of the lot shall be not less than 30
feet at the front street building line.
   (H)   Additional requirements. Additional use, height, and area regulations
and exceptions are found in §
155.040.
   (I)   Parking regulations. As per §§
155.061 through
155.068.
   (J)   Landscaping. All yards shall have vegetative groundcover of sufficient
quality and quantity, or other groundcover approved by the Director of Planning
and Development, to control dust, erosion and sediment upon final inspections.
In addition, a minimum of one six-foot-tall tree, measuring three inches or
more in caliper (diameter) when measured 12 inches from the base of the trunk
and 16 three-gallon shrubs, are required in the front yard.
   (K)   Storage. Open storage is prohibited except for materials for the
resident's use, such as firewood, gardening materials, and similar materials.
   (L)   Accessory structures. The following accessory structures are
permitted:
      (1)   Any accessory structure permitted in the R-l District;
      (2)   Detached garages and carports do not count against the number of
accessory structures permitted. Such structures must be behind the rear facade
of the main residence building, must be set back ten feet from the rear
property line, and must comply with R1-I side yard setback requirements.
Building materials and facade must be consistent with the main residence
building materials and facade.
      (3)   One garage apartment will be allowed on site provided that it is
above a detached garage and served by a paved driveway. The apartment may be
taller than the primary residence, but may not exceed the lesser of 35 feet or
two and one half stories in height. The structure may not exceed a gross floor
area of 850 total square feet, or 550 square feet on the second floor, if any.
   (M)   Zoning incentives. The Director of Planning and Development is
authorized to refund the city’s standard fees for zoning, platting, and
permitting, sewer taps, and water taps hereafter paid in connection with lots
zoned R1-I, provided that such zoning, platting or permitting is
unconditionally approved, and such taps are satisfactorily installed, not later
than September 30, 2018.
(Ord. 2016-24, passed 10-11-16; Am. Ord. 2017-27, passed 10-10-17)
§ 155.023  R-2 TWO-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT.
   (A)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Any use permitted by right in the R-1 District, or (subject to the
location requirements for such tracts) in the R1-I Districts.
      (2)   Two-family or duplex dwelling.
      (3)   Industrialized duplex dwelling, provided such dwelling complies
with all regulations applicable to industrialized single-family housing.
   (B)   Conditional uses.  Neighborhood association facilities.
   (C)   Height regulations.  No building shall exceed two and one-half stories
or 35 feet in height.
   (D)   Area regulations.  Lots in the Wildewood Subdivision, and duplex lots
platted prior to November 8, 2006, shall have six-feet-minimum side setbacks,
except when siding on a street such setback shall be a minimum of 15 feet. All
other duplex lots shall have a minimum of ten-feet-wide side  building
setbacks, except when siding on a street such setback shall be a minimum of 15
feet.
   (E)   Intensity of use.
      (1)   A lot on which there is erected a single-family dwelling shall
conform to the same intensity of use requirements as those in the R-1 (Single-
Family Dwelling District) as noted in §
155.020(E).
      (2)   The minimum lot area shall be 7,800 square feet for lots in the
Wildewood Subdivision and duplex lots platted prior to November 8, 2006. All
other duplex lots shall contain a minimum lot area of 8,400 square feet, and an
average width of not less than 70 feet.
   (F)   Parking regulations.  As per §§
155.061 through
155.068.
   (G)   Additional use, height, and area regulations.  Additional use, height,
and area regulations and exceptions are found in §
155.040.
   (H)   Signs.  Same as in R-1 district.
   (I)   Storage.  Open storage is prohibited, except for materials for the
residents’ use such as firewood, gardening materials, and similar materials.
   (J)   Landscaping.  All yards shall have vegetative groundcover of
sufficient quality and quantity, or other city-approved groundcover, to control
dust, erosion and sediment upon final inspections. In addition, a minimum of
two six-foot-tall trees, measuring two inches or more in caliper (diameter)
when measured 12 inches from the base of the trunk, and eight three-gallon
shrubs, are required in the front yard.
   (K)   Architectural design.  R-2 buildings shall be designed to avoid
repetitions of buildings or roof lines, and the same elevation may not be used
within any five lot groupings.  Primary entrances shall face the public street.
Windows shall be provided with trim or recessed, rather than flush with
exterior wall treatment.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 2006-40, passed 10-24-06; Am. Ord.
2012-01, passed 2-14-12; Am. Ord. 2012-04, passed 3-27-12; Am. Ord. 2016-24,
passed 10-11-16)
§ 155.0231  R2-I TWO-FAMILY INFILL DWELLING DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. To establish and preserve areas of low-medium intensity land
use primarily devoted to moderate density residential development.
   (B)   Location requirements. The R2-I (Two-Family Infill Dwelling District)
shall be restricted to specific geographic locations as designated in the map
attached to Ordinance 2017-28 as Exhibit “A” and incorporated by reference, an
official copy of which map shall be filed in the office of the City Secretary.
This copy shall be the official map and shall not be changed in any manner
except as the Council may amend from time to time. In case of any question,
such copy, together with any amending ordinances, shall be controlling.
Additional copies of the map may be placed in the offices of the Planning and
Development Director and the Public Works Director.
   (C)   Permitted uses. Any use permitted by right in the R-2 District, if it
meets required standards.
   (D)   Conditional uses. Any conditional use permitted in the R-2 District,
if it meets required standards.
   (E)   Height regulations. No building shall exceed three stories or 40 feet
in height.
   (F)   Design regulations.
      (1)   Materials and appearance. Building facade must be of masonry or
cementitious materials approved by the Building Official. Varying textures,
colors, materials and architectural treatments are required on adjacent houses
to avoid repetition and add visual interest to the area. R2-I buildings shall
be designed to avoid repetitions of buildings or roof lines, and the same
elevation may not be used within any five lot groupings. Windows must be
configured to break the line of sight between adjacent residences and shall be
provided with trim or recessed, rather than flush with exterior wall treatment.
      (2)   Fences. All fences shall provide a finished face to abutting
streets.
      (3)   Spacing. If units are less than 12 feet apart, eaves between the
units may not protrude beyond 16 inches from the wall.
   (G)   Area regulations.
      (1)   Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less
than 20 feet if there is a garage in the front, or ten feet in all other
circumstances. Where lots have double frontage running through from one street
to another, the required front yard shall be provided on both streets.
      (2)   Side yard. The minimum side yard setback for any corner lot shall
be ten feet. Other residences may be located such that one of the side yard
will be zero; that is, the building may be constructed on the property line,
provided that:
         (a)   A five foot wide maintenance easement, shown on an approved
subdivision plat, shall be provided across the full depth of the adjacent lot
abutting the wall on the property line; and
         (b)   There is a required minimum 12 foot separation between
neighboring residences.
      (3)   Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less
than ten feet.
   (H)   Intensity of use.
      (1)   The minimum lot area shall be 6,000 square feet.
      (2)   The minimum width of the lot shall be not less than 30 feet at the
front street building line.
   (I)   Additional requirements. Additional use, height, and area regulations
and exceptions are found in §
155.040.
   (J)   Parking regulations. As per §§
155.061 through
155.068.
   (K)   Landscaping. All R2-I lots shall have vegetative groundcover of
sufficient quality and quantity, or other city- approved groundcover, to
control dust, erosion and sediment upon final inspection. In addition, a
minimum of two six-foot tall trees, measuring two inches or more in caliper
(diameter) when measured 12 inches from the base of the truck, and eight three-
gallon shrubs are required in the front yard.
   (L)   Storage. Open storage is prohibited, except for materials for the
residents’ use such as firewood, gardening materials, and similar materials.
   (M)   Accessory structures. Any accessory structure permitted in the R-
2 District is allowed. Detached garages do not count against the number of
accessory structures permitted, provided they are behind the rear facade of the
main residence building, are set back ten feet from the rear property line, and
comply with R2-I side yard setback requirements. Building materials and facade
must be consistent with the main residence building materials and facade.
   (N)   Zoning incentives. The Director of Planning and Development is
authorized to refund the city’s standard fees for zoning, platting, and
permitting, sewer taps, and water taps hereafter paid in connection with lots
zoned (platted or zoned to meet R2-I requirements) R2-I, provided that such
zoning, platting or permitting is unconditionally approved, and such taps are
satisfactorily installed, not later than September 30, 2018.
(Ord. 2017-28, passed 10-10-17; Am. Ord. 2020-09, passed 4-14-20)
§ 155.024  R-MU MIXED RESIDENTIAL.
   (A)   Permitted uses. Any use permitted by right in the R-1, R-1(M), and R-
2 Districts. In addition, any use permitted by right in the R1-I District, and
R2-I District subject to the location requirements for such tracts.
   (B)   Conditional uses.  Any conditional use permitted in the R-1 and R-
2 Districts.
   (C)   Height regulations.  No building shall exceed two and one-half stories
or 35 feet.
   (D)   Area regulations.  As per corresponding zoning district and as per
Table 21-A for corresponding zoning district.
   (E)    Intensity of use.  Intensity of use shall be determined with
reference to the intensity of use regulations applicable in the zoning district
customarily associated with the use. For example, a single family home in this
district shall be subject to the intensity of use regulations applicable to the
R-1 District, but a duplex in this district shall be subject to the intensity
of use regulations applicable to the R-2 District.
   (F)   Parking regulations.  As per §§
155.061 through
155.068.
   (G)   Additional use, height, and area regulations.  Additional regulations
shall be determined with reference to any additional regulations applicable in
the zoning district customarily associated with the use. For example, a single
family home in this district shall be subject to the additional regulations
applicable to the R-1 District, but a duplex in this district shall be subject
to the additional regulations applicable to the R-2 District.
   (H)   Signs.  Same as in R-1 District.
   (I)   Storage.  Open storage is prohibited, except for materials for the
residents' use such as firewood, gardening materials, and similar materials.
   (J)   Landscaping.  All yards shall have vegetative groundcover of
sufficient quality and quantity, or other city-approved groundcover, to control
dust, erosion and sediment upon final inspections. In addition, a minimum of
two six-foot-tall trees, measuring two inches or more in caliper (diameter)
when measured 12 inches from the base of the trunk, and eight three-gallon
shrubs, are required in the front yard.
   (K)   Architectural design.  R-2 buildings shall be designed to avoid
repetitions of buildings or roof lines, and the same elevation may not be used
within any five lot groupings.  Primary entrances shall face the public street.
Windows shall be provided with trim or recessed, rather than flush with
exterior wall treatment.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 2006-40, passed 10-24-06; Am. Ord.
2016-24, passed 10-11-16; Am. Ord. 2017-28, passed 10-10-17)
§ 155.025  R-3 MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT.
   (A)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Any use permitted by right in the R-2 District.
      (2)   Multi-family dwellings.
      (3)   Apartment houses.
      (4)   Boarding, lodging, and rooming houses.
      (5)   Dormitories for students.
      (6)   Neighborhood association facilities.
      (7)   Institutions of a religious, educational, charitable, or
philanthropic nature, but not a penal or mental institution.
   (B)   Conditional uses.
      (1)   Fraternity/sorority house.
      (2)   Fitness center.
      (3)   Any conditional use permitted in the R-1 and R-2 Districts.
   (C)   Height regulations.  When adjacent to one or more single-family
detached homes, the height shall not exceed that of the shortest adjacent
house, except that an additional setback of one foot shall be exchanged for
each additional foot in height.  However, in no event may a building exceed
three and one-half stories or 45 feet in height.
   (D)   Area regulations.  Front building setbacks shall be a minimum of 25
feet. Side setbacks shall be a minimum of ten feet, except when siding on a
street they shall be a minimum of 15 feet. Rear setbacks shall be no less than
20 feet. See also Table 21-A.
   (E)   Intensity of use.
      (1)   A lot on which there is erected a single-family dwelling shall
conform to the same intensity of use requirements as those in the R-1 (Single-
Family Dwelling District) as noted in §
155.020(E).
      (2)   A lot for a two-family dwelling shall contain an area of not less
than 8,400 square feet, and an average width of not less than 70 feet.
      (3)   A lot for a four-plex shall contain an area of not less than 10,000
square feet. The minimum lot area shall be increased by 2,500 square feet per
additional dwelling unit.
      (4)   Where a lot or tract has less area than herein required and its
boundary lines along their entire length touches lands under other ownership on
the effective date of this chapter and have not since been changed, such parcel
of land may be used for a single-family dwelling.
      (5)   In no case shall more than 40% of the total lot area be covered by
a main building.
   (F)   Parking regulations.  As per §§
155.061 through
155.068. In addition, parking is prohibited within the front 25-foot building
setback.
   (G)   Additional use, height, and area regulations.  Additional use, height,
and area regulations and exceptions are found in §
155.040.
   (H)   Storage.  Open storage is prohibited, except for materials for the
residents' use such as firewood, gardening materials, and similar materials.
Trash shall be stored only in approved dumpsters located on private property.
   (I)   Landscaping.  All yards shall have vegetative groundcover of
sufficient quality and quantity, or other city-approved groundcover, to control
dust, erosion and sediment. For each dwelling unit, a minimum of one six-foot-
tall tree with two-inch caliper, and three three-gallon shrubs, are required.
All landscaping must be in place upon final inspection.
   (J)   Architectural design.
      (1)   Facades should be articulated to minimize the massive scale
appearance of the building. At least 25% of the facade of the wall facing the
street shall consist of doors or windows in buildings that are located within
30 feet of the property line adjacent to a front yard. Primary entrances shall
face the public street. Windows shall be provided with trim or recesses, rather
than flush with exterior wall treatment.
      (2)   The same elevation may not be used within any five lot groupings.
      (3)   Developments of 20 or more units shall have an area equal to at
least 8% of the lot area, excepting required setbacks, dedicated to open space
for recreational use by the occupants of the development.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 2006-40, passed 10-24-06; Am. Ord.
2012-01, passed 2-14-12; Am. Ord. 2012-04, passed 3-27-12)
§ 155.026  R-MH MANUFACTURED HOME PARK DISTRICT.
   (A)   Use regulations.  Any building or premises shall be used only for the
following purpose: manufactured home park as that term is defined in §
152.01.
   (B)   Landscaping.  As per §
155.051. The requirements are the same as those for R-3.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 2006-40, passed 10-24-06)
§ 155.027  RT-1 TOWNHOUSE SINGLE- FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT.
   (A)   Definitions.  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in
this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
      COMMON AREA.  Private property owned in common by, and designated for the
private use of, the owners or occupants of townhouses in a particular project
or subdivision. COMMON AREA uses include, but are not limited to, recreation
areas, parks and plazas, ornamental areas open to the general view within the
project or subdivision, and building setbacks not otherwise required by
ordinance. The COMMON AREA does not include public streets, alleys, required
building setbacks or utility easements.
      TOWNHOUSE.  One of a series of single- family dwelling units which are
either structurally connected, or which are constructed immediately adjacent to
each other. The terms TOWNHOME and ROW HOUSE are similarly defined and may be
used interchangeably.
      TOWNHOUSE GROUP.  Two or more townhouses constructed as an integral part
of a townhouse project.
      TOWNHOUSE PROJECT.  One or more townhouse groups, together with commonly
owned structures or areas.
   (B)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Townhouses.
      (2)   Townhouse group.
      (3)   Townhouse project.
      (4)   Townhouse subdivision.
   (C)   Height regulations.  No building shall exceed two and one-half stories
or 35 feet in height.
   (D)   Area regulations.  Front yard, side yard, and rear yards as per Table
21-A. Where the units do not share a common wall, there shall be a minimum of
ten feet access/maintenance easement between them.
      (1)   Project area.  Each townhouse project shall contain an area of land
consisting of not less than 5,000 square feet for each townhouse to be
constructed, including common area. Coverage of a project by impervious
surface, exclusive of the common area, shall not exceed 45% of the total
project area. Impervious surface within the common areas shall not exceed 30%
of such areas.
      (2)   Townhouse group.  There shall be not less than 25 feet of
separation between each townhouse group within a townhouse subdivision. No
townhouse group shall exceed five contiguous lots along the same side. The same
elevation may not be used within any five lot groupings.
      (3)   Facades.  Facades should be articulated to minimize the massive
scale appearance of the building. At least 30% of the facade of the wall facing
the street shall consist of doors or windows. Primary entrances shall face the
street on street side structures unless there is a minimum of 6-foot brick,
rock, concrete panels, or masonry wall fence. Windows shall be provided with
trim or recesses, rather than flush with exterior wall treatment.
   (E)   Intensity of use.  Except as hereinafter provided, all dwellings
hereafter erected, enlarged, relocated, or reconstructed, shall be located on
lots containing the following areas:
      (1)   Townhouses.  Each townhouse shall be constructed on a privately
owned individual lot.
      (2)   Lot area.  Each townhouse lot shall have a lot area of not less
than 3,000 square feet and a width of not less than 30 feet.
      (3)   Private yard.  Each lot shall contain a private yard with not less
than 750 square feet of area. Parking area shall not be included in the
computation of the required private yard area except for a paved driveway not
more than 18 feet wide. A private back yard may contain a patio cover or roof
which does not cover more than 25% of the private yard.
   (F)   Parking regulations. As per §§ 155.61 through
155.068, with the addition of no parking allowed within the 25-foot front
building setback of the entire subdivision along public streets. Driveways to
individual lots must have a minimum separation of 12 feet. Such driveways shall
be connected to private roads or common drives, not public streets.
   (G)   Additional use, height, and area regulations. Additional use, height
and area regulations and exceptions are found in §
155.040.
   (H)   Signs.  Same as in the R-1 district.
    (I)   Storage.  Open storage is prohibited, except for materials for the
residents' use such as firewood, gardening materials, and similar materials.
   (J)   Landscaping.  The requirements are the same as R-3.
   (K)   Dumpsters.  Appropriate size dumpsters shall be used (no hand pickup).
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 2006-40, passed 10-24-06; Am. Ord.
2007-27, passed 10-2-07)
§ 155.028  B-1 OFFICE DISTRICT.
   (A)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Office, general business.
      (2)   Offices of practitioners of the recognized professions, as herein
defined:
         (a)   Professional building.  Any structure used solely for the
housing of professional offices of recognized professions.
         (b)   Recognized professions.  Members of a recognized profession
include those persons and customary staff normally considered as professional
and shall be deemed to include doctors, veterinarians, dentists, lawyers,
architects, certified public accountants, registered engineers and surveyors,
and professions providing personal services, and the like.
      (3)   Uses customarily incidental to the primary use.
      (4)   Coffee shop.
      (5)   Barber shop; beauty shop; beauty parlor.
      (6)   Public schools.
      (7)   Public parks, municipal golf courses, public recreation facilities,
and community buildings.
      (8)   Municipal buildings, public libraries or museums, police and fire
stations.
      (9)   Construction field office and yard on the job site for the duration
of construction only.
      (10)    An on-premises residential use or living quarters associated with
the business provided both uses are in compliance with appropriate building
codes, and the proprietor or employee of the business is a resident of the
living quarters.
      (11)    Low impact telecom towers.
      (12)   Churches or places of worship.
   (B)   Conditional uses.
      (1)   Private schools.
      (2)   Civic clubs.
      (3)   Fitness centers.
   (C)   Height regulations.  No building shall exceed three and one-half
stories or 45 feet in height.
   (D)   Area regulations.  Front yard, side yard, and rear yards as per Table
21-A.
   (E)   Landscaping requirements.  As per §
155.051.
   (F)   Intensity of use.  There are no minimum lot area or lot width
requirements.
   (G)   Parking regulations.  As per §§
155.061 through
155.068.
   (H)   Additional use, height, and area regulation.
      (1)   Conditions for use.  Buildings may be used for one or more of the
uses prescribed in division (A)(2) hereof only under the following conditions:
         (a)   The total area of a professional building devoted to any single
incidental use shall not exceed 15% of the gross floor area of the building.
         (b)   The total area of a professional building devoted to incidental
uses in the aggregate shall not exceed 25% of the gross floor area of the
building.
         (c)   Public access to such incidental uses shall be from the interior
of the building.
      (2)   Parking.  No parking space shall occupy any part of the required
front yard, except as provided in division (G) of this section.
      (3)   Visibility of interior.  No building in this district shall be
constructed or altered to produce a store front, show window or display window,
and there shall be no merchandise visible from the exterior of the building.
      (4)   Storage.  No outside storage shall be permitted in this district.
      (5)   Signage.  As per
Chapter 151.
      (6)   Screening requirements.  As per §
155.050.
      (7)   Building facade.  As per §
155.040.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 2004-01, passed 1-13-04)
§ 155.029  B-2 NEIGHBORHOOD RETAIL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Any use permitted in the B-1 District that is permitted by right.
      (2)   Household appliance sales.
      (3)   Bakery shop (retail sales only).
      (4)   Cleaning or laundry (pickup station).
      (5)   Cleaning or laundry (self service) using fully automatic equipment,
as follows:
         (a)   Washer, capacity of not more than 40 pounds.
         (b)   Dryers or extractor, capacity of not more than 60 pounds.
         (c)   Dry-cleaning machines.
      (6)   Custom personal service shops, such as health studio, answering
service, typing service, tailor, employment agency, FM piped music service,
letter or mailing service, secretarial service, or pharmacy.
      (7)   Drugstore or pharmacy.
      (8)   Florist (retail): Retail sales of flowers and small plants. No
flower or plant raising or outside display or storage.
      (9)   Home for the aged or nursing home.
      (10)    All child care facilities except commercial boarding homes.
      (11)    Real estate office.
      (12)    Restaurant or café (no drive-in service).
      (13)    Retail store, (other than listed):  Offering all types of
personal consumer goods for retail sales.
      (14)    Studio for photography, interior decoration, fine arts
instruction, or sales of art objects.
      (15)    Low impact telecommunication tower.
   (B)   Conditional uses.
      (1)   Any use permitted in a more restricted district that is permitted
by a conditional use permit.
      (2)   Electric utility substation.
      (3)   Grocery store (drive-in).
      (4)   Ice retail distributing station, no manufacture, and capacity not
to exceed five tons storage.
   (C)   Height regulations.  No building shall exceed three and one-half
stories or 45 feet in height.
   (D)   Area regulations.  As per Table 21-A.
   (E)   Intensity of use.  There are no minimum lot area or lot width
requirements.
   (F)   Parking regulations.  As per §§
155.061 through
155.068.
   (G)   Signage.  As per
Chapter 151.
   (H)   Screening requirements.  As per §
155.050.
   (I)   Building facade.  As per §
155.040.
   (J)   Landscaping requirements.  As per §
155.051.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01)
§ 155.030  B-3 LOCAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   (A)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Any use permitted in the B -2 District that is permitted by right.
      (2)   Bakery or confectionery:  Engages in preparation, baking, cooking,
and selling of products at retail on the premises, with six or less employees.
      (3)   Bank, savings and loan or other financial institutions.
      (4)   Cleaning, pressing and drying plants not employing more than six
persons.
      (5)   Florist, garden shop, greenhouse or nursery office (retail):  No
growing of plants, shrubs or trees out of doors on premises; no outside display
or storage unless behind the required front yard fine or the actual setback of
the principal building, whichever is greater.
      (6)   General food products, retail sales, such as supermarkets, butcher
shops, dairy stores, sea food sales, or health food sales.
      (7)   Cafeteria or catering service.
      (8)   Hospital, home o r center for the acute or chronically ill.
      (9)   Mortuary or funeral chapel.
      (10)     Job printing, provided total mechanical power used in operation
of such printing plant shall not exceed five horsepower.
      (11)     Lodge halls and private clubs.
      (12)     Hotels.
      (13)    Restaurants or cafes with drive-in or pick-up service.
      (14)     Restaurants serving alcoholic beverages (in wet areas only)
subject to TABC regulations and the following:
         (a)   A restaurant which desires to sell alcohol for on premises
consumption, under the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, and the rules and
regulations promulgated by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission, all of
which are adopted hereby and made apart hereof as if fully set out herein.
         (b)   During any consecutive four-month period, a restaurant serving
alcoholic beverages must produce at least 51% of its total revenues, exclusive
of tips and gratuities, from the provision of food service. Documentation of
this requirement may be by affidavit of a certified public accountant or by
examination of the books by the city at the city's option. No more than two
requests for such documentation shall be made of any restaurant serving alcohol
during any calendar year by the city, unless good cause is shown as determined
by the City Council in a hearing before the Council requested by the City
Manager asking that a restaurant provide the city with the documentation
request on more than two occasions during one calendar year. The restaurant
must be given 14 days notice of such hearing.
         (c)   The failure of any such restaurant to allow its books to be
inspected by the city or provide an affidavit of compliance from a certified
public accountant within 14 days of a request being made by the city to verify
that the provisions of this section are being complied with, as well as the
failure to obey any other provision of the Code of the city or the laws of the
state concerning the sale of beer, wine and/or alcoholic beverages, or the
operation of a private club, shall result in the following:
            1.   Notification in writing mailed to the owner/operator that a
violation exists, and what such violation is.
            2.   The notification shall give the owner/operator 15 days in
which to correct the violation.
            3.   If the violation is not corrected within 15 days, a fine of up
to $250 shall be assessed for each violation. Each day the violation shall
exist shall be considered as a separate violation.
      (15)     Moving picture house or theater.
      (16)     Tennis or swim club.
      (17)     Auto laundry or car wash.
      (18)     Auto parts sales, new, at retail.
      (19)   Any retail business and typical accessory uses not included in the
neighborhood retail district, provided that such use is not noxious or
offensive by reason of vibration, smoke, odor, dust, gas, light or noise.
      (20)     Radio studios, repair and sales shops (only).
      (21)     Low impact telecommunication tower (as defined in
Chapter 157).
      (22)     Filling station, service station, convenience store, subject to
the following requirements:
         (a)   All service must take place in the interior (service bays) of
the building. No tents may be used for repair or service, except during times
of urgent public necessity as declared by the Mayor or the Planning and
Development Director and posted as such at the main entrance to the City Hall.
         (b)   Oil storage facilities and refuse containers shall be screened
from the view of travelers along public streets.
         (c)   There shall be no vehicle storage longer than 30 days, or auto
sales including vehicles belonging to the owner.
         (d)   There shall be no dismantling or wrecking on premises.
         (e)   The use shall be operated in accordance with all applicable
regulations including licensing from all government agencies that have
jurisdiction.
         (f)   Gasoline storage tanks must be underground.
      (23)     Beer and wine sales for off premises consumption (in wet areas
only) subject to TABC and city regulations.
   (B)   Conditional uses.  Any use permitted in a more restricted district
that is permitted by a conditional use permit.
   (C)   Height regulations.  No building shall exceed three and one-half
stories or 45 feet in height.
   (D)   Area regulations.  The same as prescribed for B-2 District.
   (E)   Intensity of use.  There are no minimum lot area or lot width
requirements.
   (F)   Parking regulations.  As per §§
155.061 through
155.068.
   (G)   Signage.  As per
Chapter 151.
   (H)   Screening requirements.  As per §
155.050.
   (I)   Building facade.  As per §
155.040.
   (J)   Landscaping requirements.  As per §
155.051.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 2006-40, passed 10-24-06)
§ 155.031  B-4 SECONDARY AND HIGHWAY BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   (A)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Any use permitted in the B-3 Local Business District that is
permitted by right.
      (2)   Automobile parking lots.
      (3)   Bakery (wholesale).
      (4)   Dance hall and skating rink.
      (5)   Frozen food locker plant.
      (6)   Garage, public.
      (7)   Drive-in theater.
      (8)   Bowling alley.
      (9)   Tourist court or motel.
      (10)     Antique shop.
      (11)     Secondhand goods store: (No outside display, repair or storage.)
      (12)     Automobile and marine sales and re-pair, provided that:
         (a)   All service must take place in the interior (service bays) of
the building. No tents may be used for repair or service, except during times
of urgent public necessity as declared by the Mayor or the Planning and
Development Director and posted as such at the main entrance to the City Hall.
         (b)   Oil storage facilities and refuse containers shall be screened
from the view of travelers along public streets;
         (c)   There shall be no vehicle storage longer than 30 days, or auto
sales including vehicles belonging to the owner (except for sales lots);
         (d)   There shall be no dismantling or wrecking on premises;
         (e)   The use shall be operated in accordance with all applicable
regulations including licensing from all government agencies that have
jurisdiction; and
         (f)   Gasoline storage tanks must be underground.
      (13)     Building material or lumber sales (no outside storage without
screening).
      (14)     Cleaning, pressing and dyeing.
         (a)   No direct exterior exhaust from cleaning plant permitted.
         (b)   Dust must be controlled by either bag or filter and separator or
precipitator so as to eliminate the exhausting of dust, odor, fumes or noise
outside the plant.
      (15)     Florist, garden shop, greenhouse, or nursery (retail).
      (16)    Ball park, stadium, athletic field (private).
      (17)    Philanthropic institutions (not else-where listed).
      (18)    Cabinet, upholstery, woodworking shop.
      (19)     Plumbing, electrical, air conditioning service shop (no outside
storage without screening).
      (20)     Trade or business school.
      (21)     Any retail business not included in the Local Business District,
provided that such use is not noxious or offensive by reason of vibrations,
smoke, light, odor, dust, gas or noise.
      (23)     Package liquor store (in wet areas only and subject to TABC
regulations). The property, if located outside the commercial zone of Business
Hwy 190, must:
         (a)   Be part of a commercial development containing a minimum of
12,000 square feet of leaseable retail floor space (for example, a shopping
center or mall); and
         (b)    Be located a minimum of 300 feet, measured from the front door
to the establishment, from any R zoned property by the most commonly traveled
public roadway.
      (24)   Brewpub or winery (in wet areas only and subject to TABC
regulations). The property, if located outside the commercial zone of Business
Hwy 190 or I-14, must be located a minimum of 300 feet from any R zoned
property, measured from the front door of the establishment by the most
commonly traveled public roadway. All manufacture, blending, fermentation,
processing, and packaging of alcoholic beverages must take place wholly inside
a building.
   (B)   Conditional uses.  Any use permitted in a more restricted district
that is permitted by a conditional use permit.
   (C)   Height regulations.  No building shall exceed three and one-half
stories or 45 feet in height.
   (D)   Area regulations. The same as provided for B-2 District.
   (E)   Intensity of use.  There are no minimum lot area or lot width
requirements.
   (F)   Parking regulations.  As per §§
155.061 through
155.068.
   (G)   Signage.  As per
Chapter 151.
   (H)   Screening requirements. As per §
155.050.
   (I)   Building facade. As per §
155.040.
   (J)   Landscaping requirements. As per §
155.051.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 2019-14, passed 5-28-19)
§ 155.032  B-5 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   (A)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Any use permitted in the B-4 District that is permitted by right.
      (2)   Storage in bulk, or warehouse for such material as household goods,
clothing, drugs, glass, dry goods, furniture, hardware, groceries, millinery,
and shop supplies.
      (3)   Wholesale sales room.
      (4)   Building material and lumber sales (outside storage permitted).
      (5)   Newspaper or job printing.
      (6)   Railroad or bus passenger terminal.
      (7)   Auto parts sales, used:  No outside storage, display or
dismantling.
      (8)   Any commercial use not included in any other district, provided
such use is not noxious or offensive because of odors, dust, noise, fumes, or
vibrations.
      (9)   Installation of vehicle electronics (no outside storage of vehicles
without screening).
      (10)     Trailer rental or sales.
   (B)   Conditional uses.
      (1)   Any use permitted in a more restricted district that is permitted
by a conditional use permit.
      (2)   Kennel (small pets).
      (3)   Tire re-capping or retreading.
      (4)   Electroplating.
      (5)   High impact telecommunication tower (as defined in
Chapter 157).
   (C)   Height regulations.  No building hereafter erected or structurally
altered shall exceed six stories or 75 feet in height.
   (D)   Area regulations.  As per Table 21-A.
   (E)    Intensity of use.  There are no minimum lot area or lot width
requirements.
   (F)   Parking regulations.  As per §§
155.061 through
155.068.
   (G)   Signage.  As per
Chapter 151.
   (H)   Screening requirements. As per §
155.050.
   (I)   Building facade.  As per §
155.040.
   (J)   Landscaping requirements.  As per §
155.051.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01)
§ 155.033  M-1 LIGHT MANUFACTURING DISTRICT.
   (A)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Any use permitted in the B-5 District that is permitted by right.
      (2)   Wood, paper, plastic container manufacture.
      (3)   Stone monument works.
      (4)   Foundry, forge plant, rolling mill, metal fabrication plant.
      (5)   Feed mill.
      (6)   Planing mill.
      (7)   Railroad yard, roundhouse, shop.
      (8)   Textile or garment manufacture.
      (9)   Automobile and equipment manufacture.
      (10)     Electrical equipment or appliance manufacture (large).
      (11)     Furniture, cabinet, kitchen equipment manufacture.
      (12)    Oil well tools, oil well equipment manufacture.
      (13)    Aircraft, aircraft hardware, or parts manufacture.
      (14)     Wholesale beer and malt liquor ware-housing (in wet areas only).
   (B)   Conditional uses.
      (1)   Any use permitted in a more restricted district that is permitted
by a conditional use permit.
      (2)   Paper products manufacture.
      (3)   Petroleum products wholesale storage.
      (4)   Processing of chemicals or mineral extractions, not elsewhere
classified
      (5)   Food processing.
      (6)   Petroleum or chemical products manufacture (indoors).
      (7)   Sewage treatment plant.
   (C)   Height regulations.  No building shall exceed a height of six stories
or 75 feet.
   (D)   Area regulations.  As per Table 21-A.
   (E)   Intensity of use.  There are no minimum lot area or lot width
requirements.
   (F)   Parking regulations.  As per §§
155.061 through
155.068.
   (G)   Signage.  As per
Chapter 151.
   (H)   Screening and buffering.  As per §
155.050.
   (I)   Landscaping requirements.  As per §
155.051.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01)
§ 155.034  M-2 HEAVY MANUFACTURING DISTRICT.
   (A)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Any use permitted in the M-1 District that is permitted by right.
      (2)   Grain elevator.
      (3)   Clay products manufacture.
      (4)   Cotton or cottonseed processing or storage.
      (5)   Distillation of bones.
      (6)   Boiler works.
      (7)   Salvage or reclamation of products (outside).
      (8)   Stone, sand, gravel or mineral extraction.
      (9)   Junk yards or automobile wrecking yards.
      (10)    Any building or premises which may be used for any purpose not
now or hereafter prohibited by any provision of law; provided, however, that no
building shall be erected, reconstructed, or structurally altered for
residential purposes, except for resident watchmen and caretakers employed on
the premises; and provided further that no building or occupancy permit shall
be issued for any of the following uses until and unless the location of such
use shall have been approved by the City Council following a recommendation by
the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Council shall consider the application
and request the advice and recommendation of the Fire Marshal and the Director
of Public Health or other person discharging the duties of health officer of
the city. If the Council finds that the location desired and the use requested
will not be dangerous to the health, safety and public welfare of the city in
general and its residents in particular, it shall approve the application. If,
on the other hand, the Council finds that the location desired and the use
requested will gravely endanger the safety of the city or its residents by
reason of fire or explosion or that the use desired at such location will
seriously affect the health, welfare and comfort of the city and the
surrounding neighborhood by reason of the emission of foul, offensive odors and
gases or the discharge of smoke or dust, it may deny the application for
approval of the use at that location.
   (B)   Conditional uses.
      (1)   Any use permitted in a more restricted district that is permitted
by a conditional use permit.
      (2)   Yeast plant.
      (3)   Petroleum or chemical products bulk storage.
      (4)   Galvanizing, hot-dip metal process.
      (5)   Cement or lime manufacture.
      (6)   Paper manufacture.
      (7)   Poultry raising or processing.
      (8)   Stockyards, feed pens, livestock sales with barns and/or shipping
facilities.
      (9)   Slaughter of animals or meat packing.
      (10)    Fertilizer manufacture.
      (11)    Fat rendering.
      (12)    Garbage, offal or dead animal incineration, reduction or dumping.
      (13)    Petroleum refinery.
      (14)    Wholesale storage of gasoline or other petroleum products in
carload lots or more above ground.
      (15)    Fireworks and ammunition manufacture or storage.
   (C)   Height regulations.  No building shall exceed a height of six stories
or 75 feet.
   (D)   Area regulations.  As per Table 21-A.
   (E)   Intensity of use.  Same as in M-1 District.
   (F)   Parking regulations.  As per §§
155.061 through
155.068.
   (G)   Signage.  As per
Chapter 151.
   (H)   Screening and buffering.  As per §
155.050.
   (I)   Landscaping requirements.  As per §
155.051.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01)
§ 155.035  T DISTRICT.
   (A)   Definition.  The T District shall be for the sale of alcoholic
beverages to include beer and wine for on premises consumption. The following
requirement shall apply to the T zoning: T zoning shall be for the sale of
alcoholic beverages to include beer and wine for on-premises consumption or for
any use permitted in the B zoning of that property. Any premises zoned T shall
comply with the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code and the rules and regulations
promulgated by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission, all of which are
adopted hereby and made a part hereof as if fully set out herein.
   (B)   Use regulations. A building or premises in this zoning district shall
be used for the purpose as in division (A) above and the following:
      (1)   General regulations.  All areas zoned T shall be described by metes
and bounds and shall be restricted to indoor areas, unless in the application a
request is made for outdoor area zoning. Outdoor areas zoned T shall:
         (a)   Be enclosed by a fence or wall six feet in height.
         (b)   Be lighted when in use. Lighting shall be sufficient to
illuminate the area in use but shall not be less than 100 watts of light for
every 500 square feet.
         (c)   Have all required fire extinguisher equipment in accordance with
the city's adopted Fire Code.
      (2)   Location.  No request for T zoning may be submitted under this
chapter unless the property is located in a B-4 or B-5 zoned district.
      (3)   Height regulations.  To any legal height not prohibited by other
laws, codes, or ordinances.
      (4)   Yard regulations.
         (a)   Front yard.  There shall be a front yard having a minimum depth
of 25 feet. No storage or similar use shall be allowed in required front yard;
automobile parking will be permitted in such yards in accordance with off
street parking requirements.
         (b)   Side yard.  No side yards are required except that on a corner
lot, the side yard on a street shall be 25 feet. A lot abutting an R District
shall have a side yard of not less than 25 feet.
         (c)   Rear yard.  A rear yard is not required except when it abuts
upon an R District in which case there shall be a rear yard of not less than 25
feet.
      (5)   Intensity of use.  There are no minimum lot areas or lot width
requirements, except that all parking regulations as prescribed herein shall be
followed
      (6)    Parking regulations.  As per §§
155.061 through
155.068.
      (7)   Signs.  As per
Chapter 151.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01)
§ 155.036  PD -PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose and definition. The Planned Development District accommodates
planned associations of uses developed as integral land use units such as
industrial districts, offices, commercial or service centers, shopping centers,
residential developments of multiple or mixed housing including attached
single-family dwellings or any appropriate combination of uses which may be
planned, developed or operated as integral land use units either by a single
owner or a combination of owners. A Planned Development District may be used to
permit new or innovative concepts in land utilization not permitted by other
zoning districts in this chapter. While greater flexibility is given to allow
special conditions or restrictions which would not otherwise allow the
development to occur, procedures are established herein to insure against
misuse of increased flexibility.
   (B)   Permitted uses.  Any use or combination of uses authorized by the
Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council is permitted in a Planned
Development District if the use is consistent with the following categories:
      (1)   Planned Development - Residential  (PD-R).  All uses permitted in
the residential zoning districts are permitted in a PD-R development.
      (2)   Planned Development - Business (PD-B).  All uses permitted in the
B-l through B-5 zoning districts (except sexually-oriented businesses) are
permitted in a PD-B development. Alcoholic beverages sale and service are
allowed in the wet area only, subject to applicable regulations.
      (3)   Planned Development - Industrial (PD-I).  All uses permitted in the
M-l and M-2 zoning district are permitted in a PD-I development.
      (4)   Planning Development - Mixed Use (PD-M).  All uses permitted in all
zoning districts (except sexually-oriented businesses) are permitted in a PD-
M development. Alcoholic beverages sales and service are allowed in the wet
area only.
   (C)   Minimum requirements.  All planned developments shall comply with the
following standards:
      (1)   Unless otherwise specified in the approved development plan, the
minimum requirements for each development shall be those stated in the
subdivision and zoning requirements of the most restrictive zoning district in
which designated uses are permitted.
      (2)   The minimum acreage for a planned development shall be five acres.
      (3)   Open space landscaped buffers and/or screening shall be required to
separate land uses within the planned development from land uses adjacent to
the planned development. No structure, parking lot, equipment pad, or other
man-made construction not approved by the city shall be placed in an open space
buffer. The size and location of these buffers shall be determined by the City
Council, upon receiving the Planning and Zoning Commission’s recommendations
after review of the development plan for the proposed development. The minimum
size of an open space buffer shall be 25 feet, measured from the exterior
property line. Screening and/or landscaping may be required within the buffer,
based on the location of existing development, the type of development,
topography, or other criteria established by the City Council.
      (4)   Where structures within the planned development that exceed 35 feet
in height are proposed to be erected on lots adjacent to R-1 and R-2 zoning
districts, such structures shall be located one foot from the boundary of the
open space buffer for each two feet of height over 35 feet.
      (5)   Planned developments designated as PD-B, PD-I, PD-M are prohibited
on local and minor streets.
      (6)   An owners' association will be required if other satisfactory
arrangements have not been made for providing, operating, and maintaining
common facilities including streets, drives, service and parking areas, common
open spaces, and common recreational areas at the time the development plan is
submitted. If an owners' association is required, the articles for
incorporation of an owners' association shall be reviewed by the city to assure
compliance with the provisions this section.
   (D)   Requests for PD approval. Requests for a PD designation shall be
processed as a rezoning request unless otherwise specified in this section. A
development plan for the proposed planned development shall be filed with the
Director of Planning and Development showing the location of the planned
development and the relationship of the various land uses included in the
development.
      (1)   The form and content of the site development plan shall consist of
a site plan showing the proposed land uses, landscaping, parking, height of
buildings, driveways, screening, setbacks, project phasing, and other items
that may be required by the Planning and Development Director.
      (2)   Preliminary and final plats for the development shall be prepared
in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 154, with any modifications to the development plan approved by the
City Council and Planning and Zoning Commission.
   (E)   Review of request.  Each proposed development shall be reviewed to
determine the compatibility of the development with surrounding land uses. No
planned development should be approved if it is found that the proposed
development:
      (1)   Adversely impacts existing or permitted uses on abutting sites that
cannot be mitigated;
      (2)   Adversely affects the safety and convenience of vehicular and
pedestrian circulation in the vicinity, including traffic reasonably expected
to be generated by the proposed use, and other uses reasonably anticipated in
the area considering existing zoning and land uses in the area;
      (3)   Fails to reasonably protect persons and property from erosion,
flood or water damage, fire, noise, glare, and similar hazards or impacts; or
      (4)   Adversely affects traffic control or adjacent properties by
inappropriate location, lighting, or type of signs.
   (F)   Administration.  All planned development districts approved in
accordance with the provisions of this section shall be referenced on the
zoning map, and a list of such planned development districts, together with the
category of uses permitted therein, shall be maintained in the Table of Special
Ordinances. An ordinance granting a PD District shall include a statement as to
the purpose and intent of the planned development granted therein.
   (G)   Developer's responsibilities following approval.
      (1)   A PD designation shall be deemed nullified, and the property shall
automatically revert to its previous zoning designation, if development does
not commence within 12 months of the date of City Council approval.
      (2)   The granting of a PD designation shall not relieve the developer
from responsibility for complying with all other applicable codes and
ordinances of the city except to the extent expressly specified in the approved
development plan.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 2006-40, passed 10-24-06; Am. Ord.
2013-19, passed 8-13-13)
§ 155.037  RESERVED.
§ 155.038  RESERVED.
§ 155.039  SETBACK REQUIRED (TABLE 21-A).
 
Table 21-A: Setback Requirements (Minimum)
District Front Side Rear
                                        6 feet except lots
                                        platted 50 feet
                    20 feet except for  wide shall have 5
R-1 One Family      front-entry garages feet setbacks       20 feet
Dwelling District   and carports which  15 feet adjacent to
                    shall be 25 feet*   a side street
                                        20 feet for garages
                                        on a side street
R1-R Rural One      40 feet*            10 feet
Family Dwelling     25-feet-around cul- 25 feet adjacent to 25 feet
District            de-sacs             a side street
R1-A Single Family  20 feet* or 15-
Garden Home         feet-around cul-de- See §155.022       20 feet
Residential         sacs
District
R-2 Two Family                          10 feet
Dwelling District   25 feet*            15 feet adjacent to 20 feet
                                        a side street
R-MU Mixed          Same as corresponding Zoning District*
Residential
R-3 Multi-family                        10 feet
Dwelling District   25 feet*            15 feet adjacent to 20 feet
                                        a side street
R-MH                35 feet between each home in the park*
R-1M Manufactured
Single-family       25 feet*            6 feet              20 feet
Dwelling District
                                                            10 feet, but no
RT Townhouse                            10 feet             closer than 25 feet
Single-family       25 feet*            15 feet adjacent to to any rear lot
Dwelling District                       a side street       line of any R-
                                                            1 zoned property.
                                        No side yard
                                        required, except 20 No rear yard
                                        feet adjacent to a  required, except 10
B-1 Office District 25 feet*            side street and 10  feet on rear of lot
                                        feet on side of lot adjoining an R
                                        adjoining an R      District
                                        District***
                                        No side yard
                                        required, except 20 No rear yard
B-2 Neighborhood                        feet adjacent to a  required, except 10
Retail District     25 feet*            side street and 10  feet on rear of lot
                                        feet on side of lot adjoining an R
                                        adjoining an R      District
                                        District
                                        No side yard
                                        required, except 20 No rear yard
B-3 Local Business                      feet adjacent to a  required, except 10
District            25 feet*            side street and 10  feet on rear of lot
                                        feet on side of lot adjoining an R
                                        adjoining an R      District
                                        District
                                        No side yard
                                        required, except 20 No rear yard
B-4 Secondary &                         feet adjacent to a  required, except 10
Highway Business    25 feet*            side street and 10  feet on rear of lot
District                                feet on side of lot adjoining an R
                                        adjoining an R      District
                                        District
                                        No side yard
                                        required, except 20 No rear yard
B-5 General                             feet adjacent to a  required, except 10
Business District   25 feet*            side street and 10  feet on rear of lot
                                        feet on side of lot adjoining an R
                                        adjoining an R      District
                                        District
                                        No side yard
                                        required, except 25 No rear yard
M-1 Light                               feet adjacent to a  required, except 10
Manufacturing       25 feet**           side street and 25  feet on rear of lot
District                                feet on side of lot adjoining an R
                                        adjoining an R      District***
                                        District
                                        No side yard
                                        required, except 25 No rear yard
M-2 Heavy                               feet adjacent to a  required, except 10
Manufacturing       25 feet**           side street and 50  feet on rear of lot
District                                feet on side of lot adjoining an R
                                        adjoining an R      District***
                                        District***
Overlay zoning      As is in underlying As is in underlying As is in underlying
                    district            district            district
* No open storage is allowed in front yards except for firewood (18 inches
above ground) and gardening materials
** No parking, storage or similar use is allowed
*** No parking, storage, or similar use allowed within 25 feet of property line
where adjoining an R or B District
 
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 2006-40, passed 10-24-06; Am. Ord.
2011-08, passed 4-19-11)
§ 155.040  ADDITIONAL USE, HEIGHT, AREA, AND LIGHTING REGULATIONS; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Use regulations.
      (1)   Accessory buildings and metal exteriors.
         (a)   Buildings with metal exteriors are prohibited within all
residential districts, with the exception of small accessory structures meeting
the requirements of §
155.020; government-owned structures, facilities and uses; mobile and
manufactured homes where permitted for residential purposes (not for storage);
and temporary structures for uses incidental to construction work on the
premises, provided the structures are in compliance with an approved temporary
use permit.
         (b)   Noncommercial greenhouses may exceed the size limits established
in this subdivision with the approval of the Planning and Development Director.
         (c)   No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until the
construction of the main use building has been actually commenced. No accessory
building shall be used unless the main use building on the lot is also being
used.
      (2)   Facades.
         (a)   Exterior walls of buildings used for commerce/office use shall
be of architectural block, brick, stone, hardiboard, concrete masonry units
and/or architectural glass (less than 25% reflectance). Tilt-up concrete
construction are permitted, provided the exterior surface (except windows and
doors, and the like) is textured or covered with brick, stone, or material
fabricated to simulate brick or stone. Stucco and EIFS (Exterior Installation
Finished System) are permitted when a minimum of three feet above the slab
level is of stone, brick, and/or split-face cinder block. Smooth concrete
block, prefabricated corrugated-ribbed metallic panels, exposed aggregate,
reflective glass (greater than 75% reflectance), roof shingles, aluminum,
plastic and/or wood siding are prohibited. Temporary structures for uses
incidental to construction work on the premises are not required to abide by
the facade regulations.
         (b)   Exterior walls should be articulated to reduce the massive scale
and the uniform, impersonal appearance of large buildings and provide visual
interest.
         (c)   Standards.  Architectural features on exterior walls shall
address the visual impact of long uninterrupted walls by providing a minimum of
three of the following elements (No uninterrupted length of any facade shall
exceed 60 feet):
            1.   Variation in color and materials;
            2.   a.   For walls between 60 feet and up to 100 feet in length
wall plane projections or recesses having a depth of at least one foot and
extending at least 1-1/2 feet of the length of the facade between projections
and recesses;
               b.   For walls between 100 and up to 200 feet in length wall
plane projections or recesses having a depth of at least two feet and extending
at least three feet of the length of the facade between projections and
recesses;
               c.   For walls greater than 200 feet in length wall plane
projections or recesses having a depth of at least three feet and extending at
least five feet of the length of the facade between projections and recesses.
            3.   Variation of a minimum of two feet in height of parapets.
Variation to parapet height may include pilasters and projecting raised
entrance features;
            4.   Pilasters projecting from the plane of the wall by a minimum
of 16 inches;
            5.   Canopies projecting a minimum of six feet from the plane of
the primary facade walls; and
            6.   Repetitive ornamentation including decorated applied features
such as wall-mounted light fixtures or applied materials. Repetitive
ornamentation shall be located with a maximum spacing of 60 feet.
            7.   Banding should be complimentary to scale with the building
(approved by the Planning and Development Director).
         (d)   The Director of Planning and Development may grant
administrative approval to use materials not listed when the intent of the
regulations is met, or when special situations arise regarding the rear of
buildings.
      (3)   Railroad rights of way. On all existing rights of way of railroad
companies, regardless of the zoning district in which such rights of way are
located, railroad trackage and accessories to railroad movement may be
constructed or maintained.
   (B)   Height regulations:
      (1)   Public, semi-public or public service building, hospitals,
institutions or schools, when permitted in a district, may be erected to a
height not exceeding 60 feet, and churches and temples may be erected to a
height not exceeding 75 feet if the building is set back from each yard line at
least one foot for each two feet additional height above the height limit
otherwise provided in the district in which the building is located.
      (2)   Unless authorized by a valid conditional use permit, the heights of
chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, grain elevators,
flour mills, monuments, stacks, scenery lofts, tanks, water towers, ornamental
towers, spiral church steeples, radio or television towers, necessary
mechanical appurtenances, and other structures shall not exceed the maximum
height, if any, established for buildings in the district in which such
structures will be located.
      (3)   For purposes of this section, the word HEIGHT shall mean and refer
to the elevation or the highest or uppermost point of the structure above
ground level.
   (C)   Area and density regulations:
      (1)   In a district in which commercial or industrial buildings are built
with one or more stories for residential purposes above the commercial or
industrial uses, no side yards will be required for the residential portions of
the building, provided that the part of the building intended for residential
use is not more than two rooms deep from front to rear.
      (2)   No yard or other open space provided about any building for the
purpose of complying with the provisions of these regulations shall again be
used as a yard or an open space for another building. Every part of a required
yard shall be open to the sky and unobstructed by buildings except for
accessory buildings in the rear yard and except the ordinary projections of
skylights, sills, belt courses, cornices, and other ornamental features which
may project into such yards a distance of not more than two feet.
      (3)   Open, unenclosed porches, platforms, and landing places not covered
by roof or canopy may extend or project into the front yard for a distance not
exceeding six feet.
      (4)   Uncovered terraces, porches, platforms, and patios which do not
extend more than three feet above the floor level of the ground (first) story
may project into a required side yard, provided these projections be distant at
least two feet from the adjacent side lot lines.
      (5)   Front yard.
         (a)   Where 40% or more of the frontage on one side of a street
between two intersecting streets is developed with buildings that have observed
(with a variation of five feet or less) a front yard greater in depth than
therein required, new buildings shall not be erected closer to the street than
the front yard so established by the existing buildings.
         (b)   Where 40% or more of the frontage on one side of a street
between two intersecting streets is developed with buildings that have not
observed a front yard as described above, then:
            1.   Where a building is to be erected on a parcel of land that is
within 100 feet of existing buildings on both sides, the minimum front yard
shall be a line drawn between the two closest front corners of the adjacent
buildings on the two sides; or
            2.   Where a building is to be erected on a parcel of land that is
within 100 feet of an existing building on one side only, such building may be
erected as close to the street as the existing adjacent building.
            3.   In determining such front yard depth, buildings located
entirely on the rear one-half of a lot shall not be counted.
         (c)   On any corner lot on which a front or side yard is required, no
wall, fence, sign, or other structure, or any plant growth shall be permitted
or maintained higher than two feet above the curb level within 15 feet of the
intersection of the property lines.
      (6)   Side yards.
         (a)   The minimum width of a side yard of a corner lot in the R-1 and
R-2 Districts shall be not less than 15 feet; however, if the street side line
of a corner lot is in the same block frontage with a lot or lots whose street
line is a front of such lot or lots, the side yard shall be 25 feet from the
property line.
         (b)   A side yard of not less than 25 feet on the side of the lot
adjoining an R-1 or R District shall be provided for all schools, libraries,
churches, community houses, clubs, and other public or semi-public buildings
hereafter erected or structurally altered.
         (c)   Garages detached or attached to the main use building entering
on the side street of a corner lot shall maintain a side yard of 20 feet in the
front of the garage.
      (7)   Rear yard.
         (a)   In computing the depth of a rear yard where such yard opens into
an alley, one-half of the width of such alley may be assumed to be a portion of
the required yard.
      (8)   Multiple adjacent lots owned by same owner(s). A side or rear
property line of an unimproved adjacent lot may be encroached upon by a primary
structure or accessory structure, if the lots are owned by the same owner(s)
and a primary structure exists or is being constructed on one lot. The two
platted lots will be considered as one lot, with all the rights and
restrictions/regulations that govern a single platted lot. No building permits
will be issued for construction of a primary building on the encroached upon
lot unless it is replatted to meet the minimum requirements.
   (D)   Lighting regulations.
      (1)   Any person wishing to install or use exterior lighting for non-
residential and multi-family uses shall first request a site plan review and
obtain approval for such lighting, unless waived by the Building Official. The
site plan shall fully comply with the general regulations of this section and
shall specify the location, height and type of all exterior lighting.
      (2)   The height of luminaries, except streetlights in public rights-of-
way, shall not exceed 32 feet.
      (3)   Light trespass is found to be a nuisance and declared to be
unlawful. All exterior lighting in all zoning districts shall be shielded or
oriented in a manner that ensures that all illumination is contained on the
source property. All exterior lighting shall be directed away from adjoining
streets and residential properties in such a manner that the light emission
shall not cause light trespass or objectionable glare observable from adjoining
streets and other properties.
      (4)   Exterior lighting situated in such a manner as to be mistaken for
traffic signals or presenting any hazard to safe driving is prohibited.
      (5)   Externally lit signs, display, building and aesthetic lighting
shall be lit from the top and shine downward. Such lighting shall be shielded
to prevent light trespass or the creation of a driving hazard. However, up-
lighting of signs is permitted, provided that the light does not create light
trespass or a hazard to safe driving.
      (6)   Up-lighting is prohibited, except:
         (a)   Up-lighting may be installed adjacent to flagpoles to illuminate
a flag if the lighting is installed and directed in such a manner that the
illumination is targeted directly at the flag and does not otherwise cause a
light trespass or a driving hazard.
         (b)   Up-lighting of sculptures, buildings and landscape features for
ornamental purposes that enhance the character of the area is permitted
provided that the lighting does not create light trespass or a hazard to safe
driving.
         (c)   Up-lighting of signs is permitted, provided that the light does
not create light trespass or a hazard to safe driving.
      (7)   Canopy lighting shall be fully shielded or recessed so that the
lenses of the lights are flush with the bottom surface of the canopy.
      (8)   This section shall not apply to the following types of lighting if
the use thereof is approved in writing by the Building Official:
         (a)   Unshielded lighting may be used if it can be shown that the
luminary will not cause a light trespass or a driving hazard.
         (b)   Lighting for special activities where the lighting need is
temporary rather than lighting utilized continuously.
      (9)   This section shall not apply to:
         (a)   Lighting used by governmental or public safety personnel in the
performance of their official duties.
         (b)   Holiday, traditional, or seasonal lighting may be used for a
period not exceeding 40 days per year, provided the lighting does not create
light trespass or a hazard to safe driving conditions.
         (c)   Approved public streetlights.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 2004-06, passed 3-9-04; Am. Ord. 2004-
27, passed 8-10-04; Am. Ord. 2006-40, passed 10-24-06; Am. Ord. 2008-17, passed
6-10-08; Am. Ord. 2010-32, passed 10-12-10)
§ 155.041  KNIGHT’S WAY CORRIDOR.
   The Development District No. 1 - The Knight’s Way Corridor - Design Goals,
Guidelines, and Standards Manual is hereby adopted by reference as though fully
copied herein, and shall apply to all property fronting Knight’s Way (FM 2410)
from the intersection at U.S. Highway 190 to the eastern city limits.
(Ord. 2013-36, passed 12-10-13)
SCREENING AND LANDSCAPING
§ 155.050  SCREENING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Screening shall be installed and maintained as provided in §§
150.30 through
150.38, with the exception that perimeter fencing around subdivisions, or
between zoning districts, may be increased to seven feet in height
   (B)   Landscaping, fencing or other material shall be erected to a height
not less than six feet, to provide a visual barrier from adjacent properties
and streets. Such screening shall be permanently and adequately maintained by
the owner of the property on which the screening is required. Except for the
landscape buffer, no screening fence or wall shall have more than 40 square
inches of openings over any one square foot of fence or wall surface.
   (C)   Fencing may consist of solid wood panel or a galvanized metal chain
link fence with all-weather slats interwoven into the metal fabric. Such
fencing shall be constructed on metal posts and placed in concrete footings
with bracing.
   (D)   Fencing may be constructed of native stone, brick, precast concrete
panels with decorative finish, or decorative masonry units; constructed with
the finish side out. In no case shall more than 25% of the area of the wall be
erected with common smooth-faced masonry units.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 2006-40, passed 10-24-06)
§ 155.051  LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Applicability.  This section applies to all nonresidential property
developed or redeveloped, and to all land uses expanded or changed, after the
effective date hereof. For purposes of this section, development,
redevelopment, and expansion are deemed to occur if the initial application for
a building permit is filed or required to be filed after the effective date
hereof. For purposes of this section, a change in use is deemed to occur if the
initial registration for a business is filed or required to be filed after the
effective date hereof.
      (1)   Each phase of a new multi-phase development shall comply with the
requirements of this section as such phase is developed. The portion left for
subsequent phases shall remain of developable size and quality. No building
permit shall be issued for a subsequent phase of a project until all
requirements of this section have been met in the preceding phase.
      (2)   An existing use that is damaged by fire, explosion, wind,
earthquake, or other calamity or act of God or the public enemy to the extent
of 50% or more of its fair market value must thereafter comply with this
section.
      (3)   When the requirements of this section conflict with requirements of
other provisions of this code, this section shall prevail; provided however,
that the provisions of this section shall be subordinate to regulations
pertaining to traffic and pedestrian safety.
   (B)   Plan required.
      (1)   The owner or developer shall file with the Director of Planning and
Development a landscape plan containing the information required by this
division. The landscape plan shall be filed along with an application for a
building permit in the case of new development, redevelopment, or expansion of
an existing use. The landscape plan shall be filed with a business registration
in the case of a change in use. The plan shall contain the following:
         (a)   The location, quantity, size, common name, and/or scientific
name of all existing trees on the site;
         (b)   The location, size and common name of each tree, shrub, and
grass planting proposed to comply with this section;
         (c)   The location of the proposed irrigation system or hose
connections to serve the landscaping; and
         (d)   Such additional information as may be requested by the Director
of Planning and Development to verify compliance with this section.
      (2)   Persons wishing to utilize special or unusual arrangements of
plants and other landscaping materials as part of an overall site design shall
prepare an alternative landscaping plan including information supporting the
need for an alternative plan.
      (3)   The Director of Planning and Development shall review all
landscaping and landscaping plans for compliance with this section.
      (4)   Landscaping shall be completed in accordance with the landscape
plan approved by the Director of Planning and Development. In the event
placement of landscaping materials is not practicable within the time specified
in the plan, the Director of Planning and Development or the Building Official
may grant an extension.
   (C)   Landscaping required.
      (1)   The owner of a lot or building shall place and maintain landscaping
in compliance with this section. The minimum required amount of landscaping
shall be determined as follows (for R-1, R-2 and R-3, see corresponding
sections):
         (a)   Number of trees.  The number of trees shall be calculated by
dividing the lot frontage (i.e., the length in feet of lot lines abutting
public rights-of-way) by 25. The resulting quotient shall be the total number
of trees required. The length of the lot lines for irregular lots shall be the
average width or length of the lot. A reduction in the required trees would
apply to lots with more than one lot line abutting public right-of-way: two lot
lines would be divided 30; three lot lines would be divided by 34; four lot
lines would be divided by 40.
            1.   A minimum of one-half of the total number of trees required
shall be canopy trees, and the remainder may be either canopy or non-canopy
trees. CANOPY TREES shall mean those species whose mature crown height is 20
feet or more. NON-CANOPY TREES shall mean those species whose mature crown
height is less than 20 feet.
            2.   Trees planted adjacent to residential property to act as a
buffer shall count as 1.25 trees each. No more than 50% of the total number of
trees required may be planted adjacent to residential property.
         (b)   Number of shrubs.  The number of shrubs shall be calculated by
dividing the lot frontage by five. The resulting quotient shall be the number
of shrubs required.
            1.   Each two square feet of planting beds used and maintained for
the purpose of rotating live decorative planting materials shall count as one
shrub.
            2.   Each canopy tree maintained in excess of the total number of
trees required by this section shall reduce the number of shrubs required by
ten. Each non-canopy tree maintained in excess of the total number of trees
required by this section shall reduce the number of shrubs required by six.
         (c)   Other groundcover.  Complete coverage by grass, live
groundcover, or nonvegetative groundcover approved by the city is required in
those areas not covered by trees, shrubs, pavement or other improvements.
      (1)   When applied to an expansion of an existing use, the requirements
of this section shall be calculated for the expansion only.
      (2)   Where development occurs in phases on parts of lots or tracts, lot
frontages may be considered to be the width of the impervious surfaces plus
required setbacks.
      (3)   Existing landscaping that otherwise complies with this section may
be used to satisfy the minimum requirements of this division.
      (4)   Landscaping placed in the public right-of-way may count towards the
minimum requirements of this division only with the approval of the city and,
in the case of right-of-way controlled by the state, the approval of the Texas
Department of Transportation.
   (D)   Approved landscaping and materials.
      (1)   Trees. Trees shall be six feet or more in height and measure a
minimum of two inches in caliper (diameter) when measured 12 inches from the
base of the trunk or top of the ball.
      (2)   Shrubs and planting beds. Shrubs shall be not less than three
gallons in size.
      (3)   Grasses and live groundcovers. Where live plant materials are used,
100% groundcover is required, whether by solid sod overlay, preplanting and
successful takeover of grasses, or planting of live groundcover.
      (4)   Approved nonvegetative groundcovers include washed gravel, bark
mulches, lava rock, sand, rock, or other decorative covers generally used in
landscaping. Where approved nonvegetative groundcovers are used they shall form
a uniform appearance free from weeds and grasses.
      (5)   Artificial plant materials may not be used to meet the requirements
of this section.
      (6)    Among the permitted landscaping materials, the use of native
vegetative species that conserve water and require less maintenance
requirements is suggested.
   (E)   Placement and maintenance.
      (1)   Landscaping shall be on private property except as otherwise
provided in this section, and not less than 50% of the required tree and shrub
landscaping must front on public roadways.
         (a)   If there is insufficient land available for landscaping upon a
redevelopment, expansion or change in existing use (such as when all land area
is paved), then the landscaping required by this section may be planted in the
right of way upon approval of the Director of Planning and Development and/or
the Texas Department of Transportation. If such approval cannot be obtained,
then the requirements of this section may be reduced or waived accordingly by
the Director of Planning and Development.
         (b)   Landscaping placed in the public right-of-way shall not create a
safety hazard, and maintenance thereof is the responsibility of the developer
and adjacent property owner.
      (2)   All landscaping shall comply with the sight distance requirements
as defined.
      (3)   All required landscaping other than nonvegetative groundcover shall
be irrigated by either an underground sprinkler system, or hose attachment
within 150 feet of all landscaping.
      (4)   All required vegetative landscaping shall be maintained in good
health. Dead, damaged or diseased landscaping must be promptly replaced, and in
any event within the time required by the Building Official. Replacement
landscaping must be of substantially the same type.
      (5)   It shall be an offense for a person to park a vehicle on a
landscaped area. It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under this
division  that at the time of the alleged offense the vehicle was parked or
left standing due to a mechanical defect which made it unsafe to move, provided
that the person having ownership or control of the vehicle obtained consent
from the property owner to park the vehicle in that location, and as soon as
reasonably possible completed emergency repairs or summoned tow removal
equipment, as appropriate.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 2004-06, passed 3-9-04; Am. Ord. 2006-
40, passed 10-24-06)
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
§ 155.060  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to secure safety from fire, panic and
other dangers; to lessen congestion in the streets; to facilitate the adequate
provisions of transportation; to conserve the value of property and buildings;
and to encourage the most appropriate use of land, minimum off-street parking
and loading areas shall be provided as set forth in the following schedules and
provisions.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01)
§ 155.061  GENERAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   Parking spaces and loading berths required herein, together with
aisles and maneuvering areas, enclosed or unenclosed shall be surfaced and
maintained with an all weather surface such as asphalt, concrete or other
similar permanent hard surface material sufficient to prevent mud, dust, loose
material, and other nuisances. Required spaces and berths shall be connected by
an all weather hard-surfaced driveway to a public street or alley.
   (B)   In determining the required number of parking spaces, fractional
spaces shall be rounded to the next higher whole space. Parking spaces located
in buildings used for repair garages or auto laundries shall not be counted as
meeting the requirements of minimum off-street parking.
   (C)   The floor area of buildings already devoted to off street parking of
vehicles shall be excluded from the total floor area when computing
requirements for off-street parking.
   (D)   For sites with more than one use, or for adjacent sites served by a
common parking facility, the parking requirements shall be the composite or sum
of the requirements for each use or site except as adjusted pursuant to this
subchapter.
   (E)   Off street parking facilities complying with these regulations shall
be provided for any new building constructed and for any new use established.
Off-street parking facilities complying with these regulations shall be
provided for any addition or enlargement of an existing building or use or any
change in occupancy or manner of operation that would result in additional
parking spaces being required. If sufficient parking does not exist on a lot or
site, the number of spaces required to meet the needs of both the existing and
new building or use shall be provided.
   (F)   Parking facilities being used for off-street parking on the effective
date of this chapter shall not be reduced in capacity to less than the number
of spaces prescribed, or altered in design or function to less than the minimum
standards prescribed herein.
   (G)   All required parking facilities shall be maintained for the duration
of the use requiring such areas. Those facilities shall be used for the
temporary parking of passenger automobiles, motor vehicles, or light trucks not
exceeding one ton in capacity, exclusively. They shall not be used for the
sale, display, or storage of merchandise, or for the storage, display, or
repair of vehicles or equipment.
   (H)   All required parking facilities shall be located on the same site as
the use for which such facilities are required, except as authorized pursuant
to §
155.063.
   (I)   No use shall be required to provide more spaces than prescribed by
these regulations. Where parking spaces in excess of such requirements are
provided, the spaces may be considered as meeting the provisions for another
use pursuant to division (D) of this section.
   (J)   Compact vehicle spaces may be provided in any parking facility
required by this regulation; however, no more than 25% of the total parking
spaces required may be designed for compact vehicles and they must be signed
and marked for compact vehicles.
   (K)   The following provisions for off street parking shall apply to all
parking adjacent to a public thoroughfare:
      (1)   Parking spaces so situated that the maneuvering of a vehicle in
entering or leaving such space is done on a public street or alley shall not be
classified as off street parking in computing any parking requirements herein,
except in districts zoned: R-1, R-2, R-1(M), or RT-1.
      (2)   The construction of parking spaces as described in division (J)(1)
shall be prohibited hereafter. All such parking facilities in existence at the
time of the enactment of these regulations are hereby declared to be
nonconforming use of land and subject to the provisions of §
155.100.
   (L)   No off street parking space or loading berth shall be located either
in whole or in part on any public street, sidewalk, parkway, alley, or other
public right-of-way, or within any fire lane required by ordinance or code of
the city. Maneuvering areas located adjacent to a public street shall be
computed from the property line (maneuvering must take place on private
property).
   (M)   Lighting, to the maximum extent, shall be so arranged as to be
reflected away from property zoned or used for residential purposes.
   (N)   No publicly owned property may be considered in determining whether or
not any private property meets the parking and loading requirements of this
chapter.
   (O)   No entrance or exit to any parking facility for any property in a
business or manufacturing zoning district shall be located within 50 feet of
any intersection of any public street (measurement shall be from the right-of-
way line). Driveways within business and manufacturing zoning districts shall
be located at the following minimum distances from street intersections (right-
of-way lines): on arterials, 70 feet; on collectors, 60 feet; and on other
streets, 50 feet. These minimums apply only to city streets, not Texas
Department of Transportation facilities.
   (P)   Number of driveways allowed:
      (1)   Lot frontage of 100 feet or less: one access point;
      (2)   Lot frontage of 100 feet - 300 feet: two access points;
      (3)   Lot frontage of 300 feet - 600 feet: three access points.
   (Q)   Spacing of driveways is determined by the functional classification of
the street as follows: arterials: 70 feet; collectors: 60 feet; others: 50
feet. These minimums apply only to city streets, not Texas Department of
Transportation facilities. In the event that particular parcels lack sufficient
frontage to maintain adequate spacing, the owner may:
      (1)   Establish a common driveway with an adjacent property owner by a
perpetual joint use agreement filed in the public records of Bell County, the
driveway midpoint being the property line between the two parcels; or
      (2)   Request a written approval from the city for alternative spacing.
   (R)   One-way access driveway widths shall be a minimum of 15 feet.
   (S)   Two-way access driveway widths shall be 24-40 feet within multi-family
zoning districts and B-1 through M-2.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 2006-40, passed 10-24-06)
§ 155.062  DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   Generally.  The following design standards shall be observed for off
street parking spaces and loading berths.
      (1)   Each space shall consist of a rectangular area designed in
accordance with
Table 21-C. Each space shall have a vertical clearance of not less than 7.5
feet and each space shall be independently accessible. Single family residence
parking spaces are exempt from independent access (such as in-line parking is
acceptable.)
      (2)   Each parking space designed for use by the handicapped shall
consist of a rectangular area of not less than 12.5 feet wide and 20 feet long,
with a vertical clearance of 7.5 feet, shall be located on a grade not to
exceed a 2% slope, and shall be located near and convenient to a level or
ramped entrance to the building. Parking spaces for the handicapped shall be
signed and restricted for use by the handicapped only.
      (3)   Each off-street loading berth shall consist of a rectangular area
not less than 10 feet wide and 40 feet long, with a vertical clearance of not
less than 15 feet.
      (4)   Each parking space or loading berth shall have adequate drives,
aisles, turning and maneuvering space for access and usability, and shall at
all times be connected to a public street or alley.
   (B)   Drainage.  All parking and loading areas shall be graded and provided
with permanent storm drainage meeting the city's construction specifications.
Curbing and drainage shall be sufficient to preclude the free flow of water
onto adjacent property, and to provide adequate drainage in accordance with
city standards or codes.
   (C)   Safety features.  Parking and loading facilities shall meet the
following standards:
      (1)   Safety barriers, protective bumpers, or curbing, and directional
markings shall be provided to ensure safety, promote efficient utilization,
protect landscaping, and prevent encroachment onto adjoining public or private
property.
      (2)   Visibility of and between pedestrians, bicyclists, and motorists
shall be assured for those entering or exiting individual spaces, circulating
within a parking facility, and entering or exiting a parking facility.
      (3)   Internal circulation patterns and the location and direction of all
access drives shall be designed and maintained in accordance with accepted
principles of traffic engineering and traffic safety.
   (D)   Noise.  Areas used for primary circulation, for frequent idling of
vehicle engines, or for loading or unloading activities, shall be designed and
located to minimize the noise impact on adjoining properties, including
provisions for screening or sound baffling when required.
   (E)    Adjustments. The requirements of this section may be adjusted in
their application, provided such change is determined by the Planning and
Development Directorto alleviate undue burden associated with atypical business
parking needs, or to provide improved design, usability, attractiveness, and
protection to the adjoining uses, in a manner equal to or greater than the
specific requirements of this section.  Such adjustments must not increase any
potential adverse impacts on adjacent properties or streets.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 2005-07, passed 4-12-05)
§ 155.063  OFF-SITE OR REMOTE PARKING.
   (A)   The Director of Planning and Development may approve locating a
portion of the required parking for a use on another site when both the primary
use and the remote parking are located in an area zoned, used, or platted for
commercial use.
   (B)   Off site parking shall be located within 300 feet of the use for which
it serves, measured as the shortest practical walking distance from the nearest
off-site parking space to the nearest entrance of the building or use it
serves.
   (C)   In determining whether to approve off-site parking, the Director of
Planning and Development shall consider all relevant factors including but not
limited to:
      (1)   The location of the use and the proposed off site parking.
      (2)   Existing and potential parking demand created by other uses in the
vicinity.
      (3)   The characteristics of the use, including employee and customer
parking demands, hours of operation and projected convenience and frequency of
use of the off site parking.
      (4)   Adequacy, convenience, and safety of pedestrian between off-site
parking and the use.
      (5)   Traffic patterns on adjacent streets, and proposed access to the
off-site parking.
      (6)   The report and recommendations of the city staff.
   (D)   The Director of Planning and Development may require a written
agreement of the owner or owners of the off-site parking area authorizing the
use of the off-site parking in such a manner as to assure the continued
availability and usability of any off site parking area.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01)
§ 155.064  PARKING FOR MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   The Director of Planning and Development may authorize an adjustment
in the total parking requirements for separate uses located on the same site,
or for separate uses located on adjoining sites, and served by a common parking
facility, pursuant to this section. A request for such adjustment shall require
the submission of a site plan and a detailed report addressing the relevant
factors listed in division (C) below.
   (B)   All parking spaces subject to adjustment under this section shall be
located in a common, contiguous parking facility, intended to meet the needs of
all users. When any adjustment is authorized, off-site parking pursuant to §
155.063 shall not be permitted.
   (C)   In determining whether to approve an adjustment for mixed used
development, the Director of Planning and Development shall consider all
relevant factors including but not limited to:
      (1)   The characteristics of each use and the differences in projected
peak parking demands, including days and/or hours of operation.
      (2)   Potential reduction in vehicle movements afforded by multi-purpose
use of the parking facility by employees, customers, or residents of the uses
served.
      (3)   Potential improvements in parking facility design, circulation and
access afforded by a joint parking facility.
      (4)   The report and recommendation of the city staff.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01)
§ 155.065  HANDICAPPED FACILITIES.
   Exclusive of one and two family residential uses, and multi-family uses
under six units, in each parking facility a portion of the total parking spaces
shall be specifically designed, located, and reserved for vehicles licensed by
the state for use by the handicapped, according to the latest adopted addition
of the Standard Building Code.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01)
§ 155.066  NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES REQUIRED.
   (A)   Parking facilities for each use shall be provided in accordance with
the minimum requirements as set forth in
Table 21-D.
   (B)   The off street parking requirements for a use not specifically listed
herein shall be the same as required for a use of a similar nature as
determined by the Director of Planning and Development.
   (C)   All commercial or manufacture uses shall provide parking spaces, in
addition to those provided herein, to accommodate all trucks and other vehicles
used in connection therewith.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01)
§ 155.067 OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Any use that receives or distributes materials or merchandise by
vehicle shall provide off-street loading spaces in accordance with the
following requirements.
      (1)   In districts zoned B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4 and B-5, one loading space
shall be provided for the first 15,000 square feet of net floor area in the
building, and one additional space for each 15,000 square feet or fraction
thereof of net floor space.
      (2)   In districts zoned M-1 and M-2, one off-street loading space shall
be provided for each 10,000 square feet or fraction thereof of net floor space
in the building.
   (B)   The following shall be applied in computing the number of off-street
loading spaces that are required.
      (1)   Off-street loading spaces shall be provided for any new building
constructed and for any new use established exclusive of residential use. Off-
street loading spaces shall be provided for any addition or enlargement of an
existing building or use or any change in occupancy or manner of operation that
would require the additional loading spaces.
      (2)   The required loading space shall be located on the same lot or
tract as the use that requires the loading space. All required loading spaces
shall be maintained for the duration of the use requiring such areas. They
shall not be used for the sale, display, or storage of merchandise, or for the
storage, display or repair of vehicles or equipment.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01)
§ 155.068  PRIVATE OR PERSONAL PROPERTY PARKING AREAS FOR PERSONS WITH
DISABILITIES.
   (A)   A person who owns or controls private property used for parking may
designate one or more parking spaces or a parking area for the exclusive use of
vehicles transporting persons with disabilities.
   (B)   When designating a parking space or area for persons with
disabilities, the person who owns or controls the property must conform to the
standards and specifications adopted by the Commissioner of Licensing and
Regulation pursuant to Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. Art. 9102, § 5(c), as amended,
relating to the identification and dimensions of parking spaces for persons
with disabilities.
   (C)   The provisions of Texas Transportation Code § 681.011 and its
successor legislation shall apply to a parking space or area on private
property that is designated for persons with disabilities in compliance with
the identification requirements set forth herein.
 
Table 21-C:  Parking Facilities Design
Parking Pattern Maneuvering Lane Width Parking Space   Total Width of Two Tiers
                                                       of Spaces
                One Way Two Way        Width* Length** One Way Two Way
Parallel 12 feet 20 feet 8.5 feet   25 feet     29 feet   37 feet
                                    (22 feet)             (34 feet)
45°     12 feet 20 feet 9 feet     21 feet     54 feet   60 feet
                         (8.5 feet) (16.5 feet) (45 feet) (53 feet)
60°     13 feet 22 feet 9 feet     20 feet     53 feet   62 feet
                         (8.5 feet) (16.5 feet) (46 feet) (55 feet)
90°     15 feet 24 feet 9 feet     20 feet     55 feet   64 feet
                         (8.5 feet) (16.5 feet) (48 feet) (57 feet)
Notes:  Compact car spaces are listed in parentheses where applicable
*Measured perpendicular to length of vehicle
**Measured perpendicular to length of maneuvering lane
 
 
Table 21-D:  Parking Requirements
Uses Number of Spaces Required for Each Additional Requirements
Residential
                                                              9 feet x 20 feet
Single-Family                          2    Dwelling unit     (minimum) open or
                                                              enclosed
                                                              1 additional
Single-Family Infill Dwelling          2    Main dwelling     space permitted
                                            unit              with a detached
                                                              garage apartment
Two-Family Infill Dwelling             2    Dwelling unit     Open or closed
Multi-Family                           2.5  Dwelling unit     Open or enclosed
Boarding or Rooming House              1    Rooming unit      Plus 2 spaces for
                                                              owner
Hotel, Motel, or Tourist Court         1.2  Guest room or      
                                            residence unit
Mobile Home Park                       2    Lot, stand, or    Spaces shall 9
                                            space             feet x 20 feet
                                            Two occupants per
Private Dormitory                      1.5  designated         
                                            occupancy
Institutional and Special
                                            200 square feet
Community or Welfare Center            1    of gross floor
                                            area
                                            Staff members     One extra space
                     Elementary        1    including cooks   for each 50
                                            and custodial     students for
                                                              visitors
                                            Staff members     One extra space
School — Public or Middle School     1    including cooks   for each 50
Private                                     and custodial     students for
                                                              visitors
                                            Staff members     One extra space
                     Senior High       1    including cooks   for each 5
                                            and custodial     students for
                                                              visitors
College or University                  1    4 day students     
                                            350 square feet
Kindergarten, Day Care, Day Nursery    1    of gross floor
                                            area
                                            3 seats in
Church                                 1    sanctuary or       
                                            auditorium
Hospital                               1    4 beds             
Sanitarium, Convalescence Home or Home 1    4 beds             
for the Aged
Retirement Center                      1    Residence or      One space per
                                            apartment         employee
Library                                1    350 square feet    
                                            of net floor area
Fraternity or Sorority                 1.50 2 members or       
                                            residents
Student Religious Center               1    250 square feet    
                                            of net floor area
Mortuary, Funeral Chapel               1    3 seats in chapel  
Recreational and Entertainment
Place of Assembly                      1    3 seats            
Theater                                1    3 seats            
                                                              One per 200
                                                              square feet of
Bowling Alley                          6    Lane              net floor area
                                                              exclusive of lane
                                                              area
Tavern, Night Club, Dance Hall         1    30 square feet of  
                                            net floor area
                                            250 square feet
Commercial Amusement (Outdoor)         1    of site area       
                                            exclusive of
                                            buildings
                     Bingo Hall        1    20 square feet of  
                                            net floor area
Commercial Amusement Video Arcade      1    75 square feet of  
(Indoor)                                    gross floor area
                     Billiard or Pool  1    75 square feet of  
                     Halls                  net floor area
Ballpark, Stadium                      1    3 seats            
                                            200 square feet
Lodge, Fraternal Organization          1    of gross floor     
                                            area
Personal Service and Retail
                                            250 square feet
Personal Service Shop                  1    of gross floor     
                                            area
                                            250 square feet
Retail Stores or Shops (Inside)        1    of gross floor     
                                            area
                                            800 square feet
Furniture Store                        1    of gross floor     
                                            area
                                            400 square feet
Retail Stores or Shops (Outside)       1    of site area       
                                            exclusive of
                                            building
Food and Beverage Service
                     Inside Service to      75 square feet of One space per
                     Include Carry Out 1    gross floor area  employee per
                                                              shift
                                            200 square feet
Restaurants          Carry Out Only    1    of gross floor    Minimum 4 spaces
                                            area
                     Service to Auto        100 square feet
                     Only              1    of gross floor    Minimum 12 spaces
                                            area
Business Service
                                            300 square feet   Three linear
Bank                                   1    of gross floor    spaces per drive-
                                            area              through bay
Savings and Loan or Similar                 300 square feet   Three linear
Institution                            1    of gross floor    spaces per drive-
                                            area              through bay
                                            200 square feet
Medical, Dental Clinic or Office       1    of gross floor
                                            area
Other Office, Business or Professional 1    200 square feet
                                            of net floor area
                     Full Service           200 square feet
                     Convenience Store 1    of gross floor    Minimum 20 spaces
Service Station                             area
                     Self-                  350 square feet
                     Service Fuel Only 1    of gross floor
                                            area
Auto Repair Garage or Shop (Inside)    1    500 square feet   Minimum 5 per bay
                                            of net floor area
Auto Parts Sales                       1    800 square feet   Minimum 10 spaces
                                            of net floor area
Vehicle or Machinery Sales (Indoor)    1    400 square feet
                                            of net floor area
                                            1,000 square feet
Vehicle or Machinery Sales (Outdoor)   1    of site area
                                            exclusive of
                                            building
Car Wash                               4    Service lane
                                                              Plus spaces to
                                            4,000 square feet accommodate all
Lumber or Brick Yard or Similar Area   1    of yard area      trucks and other
                                            exclusive of      vehicles used in
                                            building          connection
                                                              therewith
                                                              Plus spaces to
                                                              accommodate all
Open Storage of Sand, Gravel, or       1    4,000 square feet trucks and other
Petroleum                                   of site area      vehicles used in
                                                              connection
                                                              therewith
                                                              Plus spaces to
                                                              accommodate all
Warehouse and Enclosed Storage         1    2,000 square feet trucks and other
                                            of net floor area vehicles used in
                                                              connection
                                                              therewith
                                                              Plus spaces to
                                                              accommodate all
Wholesale or Manufacture Operation     1    1,000 square feet trucks and other
                                            of net floor area vehicles used in
                                                              connection
                                                              therewith
                                                              Plus spaces to
                                                              accommodate all
Freight Docks                          1    1,000 square feet trucks and other
                                            of net floor area vehicles used in
                                                              connection
                                                              therewith
Note: Floor area in this table refers to the net floor area of a building with
each story measured separately.
 
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 2005-07, passed 4-12-05; Am. Ord.
2006-14, passed 6-13-06; Am. Ord. 2006-40, passed 10-24-06; Am. Ord. 2016-24,
passed 10-11-16; Am. Ord. 2017-28, passed 10-10-17)
HOME BASED CHILD CARE
§ 155.080  HOME BASED CHILD CARE REGULATIONS; CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   Certificate required.  Prior to accepting children for care, a home
based child care facility must secure a Certificate of Occupancy issued by the
City Manager or his designee. A copy of the appropriate Texas Department of
Protective and Regulatory Services certification (registration or license) must
be attached to the request for the certificate of occupancy inspection. The
applicable Minimum Standards, referenced above, and applicable, fire, safety,
health, and building regulations and codes shall serve as a guideline in the
decision whether to issue the certificate. Any variance allowed by the
applicable Minimum Standards shall be accepted as a valid variance by the City
Manager or his designee, in determining compliance with fire, safety, health,
or sanitation requirements. The applicant for such certificates shall reside on
the premises as his/her principal dwelling place.
   (B)   Fee.  The administrative and inspection fee, as set by the City
Council, must be tendered with the complete application. Should a home not pass
inspection, it will receive a second inspection after 10 to 15 business days.
Any further inspection will require an additional tender of the fee per
inspection. The fee is not refunded if the premises fails the inspection will
require an additional tender of the fee per inspection. The fee is not refunded
if the premises fails the inspection or application is withdrawn.
   (C)   Revocation.  The City Manager may revoke the Certificate of Occupancy
if the person holding the Certificate refuses or fails to comply with
requirements of:
      (1)   This chapter;
      (2)   Certificate of occupancy;
      (3)   Fire codes and regulations;
      (4)   Health and safety codes and regulations;
      (5)   Building codes and regulations; or
      (6)   Any law governing, or any standard pertaining to the operation of a
home based child care facility.
   (D)   Appeal provision.  If the City Manager denies the issuance of a
Certificate of Occupancy or revokes a Certificate of Occupancy issued
hereunder, the City Manager shall, the next business day after the action, send
to the applicant or holder of the Certificate of Occupancy a certified letter
(return receipt requested) giving notice of the denial or revocation, stating
the reasons) therefore and the right to appeal. Further, the City Manager shall
physically post a complete and legible copy of the notice to the front public
door of the premises of the home based child care facility and shall document
the time and date of this posting. The applicant or holder of the Certificate
of Occupancy may appeal the denial or revocation of a Certificate of Occupancy
to the City Council subject to the following:
      (1)   The appeal must be in writing and filed with the City Manager's
office within ten business days after the posting of the written notice of
denial, or revocation;
      (2)   The appeal must clearly set out the basis of such appeal;
      (3)   A hearing shall be scheduled for the next regular City Council
meeting no earlier than ten business days after receipt of the appeal;
      (4)   The City Council shall formally act upon the appeal at the meeting.
During the hearing, the Mayor or other presiding officer may receive any
information which he or she deems to be relevant and material, but at a minimum
shall hear the appealing party and the City Manager. If the decision of the
City Manager is overturned, the Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued. If
the decision of the City Manager is upheld, the applicant or permittee shall
have the right to appeal to the state district court. An appeal to the state
district court must be filed within 30 days after the date of the decision of
the City Council. The applicant or permittee shall bear the burden of proof in
the Council hearing and in court as to all issues.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01)
§ 155.081  HOME BASED CHILD CARE USE RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Home based child care facilities may be located in any residential
area subject to the following:
      (1)   Maximum number of children in care in addition to the children
residing at that address may not exceed:
 
Type of Business                                      Number of Children
Single family structure (includes Garden, Modular and 6
Manufactured Homes)
Duplex (includes 2-unit Townhouse)                    3
      (2)   In no event shall the number of children in care exceed the state
published staff-child ratio standards.
      (3)   A Certificate of Occupancy for the operation of a home based child
care facility may not be issued to an applicant with an address on a lot or
parcel within or less than a 200 foot radius from a property line of a lot on
which an existing home based child care facility is located.
   (B)   Home based child care facilities shall comply with the following
conditions:
      (1)   Hours of operation shall be not more than 20 consecutive hours in a
24-hour period. However, under extenuating circumstances (such as military
orders or family medical emergency), a child(ren) may be retained in care for
longer than the 20-hour period.
      (2)   A fence, not less than four feet in height, shall be placed around
any outdoor play area. Outdoor play equipment shall not be placed in the front
yard.
      (3)   A parking area shall be provided for off street loading and
unloading of children on a concrete or paved surface. No loading or unloading
of children on the street shall be allowed. The front yard shall not be
utilized or converted into a paved parking lot.
      (4)   Staffing.
         (a)   No persons other than occupants of the premises shall be engaged
in the operation of the home based child care facility.
         (b)   The preceding subsection (4)(a) does not preclude the home based
child care provider from acquiring the services of an independent contractor to
function as a substitute provider to be present in the occasional absence of
the home based child care provider.
      (5)   Home-based child care facilities shall not involve the use of
advertising signs or window displays on the premises or any other local
advertising media which call attention to the fact that the home is being used
for business purposes. A telephone number may be included in a directory
listing or an advertisement; however; no business address may be published or
advertised.
      (6)   The outside appearance of the residential dwelling shall not be
altered from its residential character in any way. The front yard shall not be
converted into a paved parking lot.
      (7)   The home based child care use shall not increase the number of
vehicles parked on the premises by more than two additional vehicles at a time.
All customer/client parking shall be off-street and in a paved area.
      (8)   The home based child care use shall not generate noise, vibration,
glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference beyond what normally occurs in
the applicable zoning district.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01)
§ 155.082  PRE-EXISTING HOME BASED CHILD CARE FACILITIES.
   (A)   A home based child care facility that was legally registered or
licensed and permitted, as appropriate, on the date of passage of this chapter
may continue to operate in that classification, in compliance with the Texas
Department of Protective and Regulatory Services regulations and standards, by
the current care giver at the current address. If the current home based
childcare provider ceases to operate the facility for a period of 90 days (or
longer) it is deemed an abandoned use, any reestablished facility must be in
full compliance with this chapter.
   (B)   Currently registered and licensed child care facilities that do not
possess a Certificate of Occupancy, shall have 30 days from the effective date
of this chapter to make application for such certificates in order to qualify
for protection under these preexisting provisions.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01)
HOME OCCUPATIONS
§ 155.084  HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   (A)   Definition. A HOME OCCUPATION is an incidental use of a dwelling unit
(not an accessory structure) for gainful employment, involving the provision of
limited goods and/or services.
      (1)   Persons conducting a home occupation are required to comply with,
and are subject to, any other laws, rules and regulations affecting the
occupation and the property.
      (2)   Home occupations are permitted incidental uses only so long as all
the following conditions are observed:
         (a)   The Texas tax identification number must be provided with the
application.
         (b)   A sign not larger than 324 square inches (e.g., 18 inches by 18
inches) affixed to the wall or door is permitted. The home occupation shall not
involve the use of advertising signs or window displays on the premises or any
other local advertising media which call attention to the fact that the home is
being used for business purposes; except that, for such purposes, a telephone
number, but no business address, may be published.
         (c)   In no way shall the outside appearance of the dwelling be
altered from its residential character;
         (d)   Performance of the occupation activity shall not be visible from
the street (curtains or blinds may be used to accomplish this purpose);
         (e)   The use shall not increase vehicular or pedestrian traffic flow
beyond what normally occurs in the applicable zoning district. Additionally,
except as provided in division (g), there shall be no more than two  additional
cars parked on the premises or adjacent to it for non-residents, including
clients and employees. Parking shall not be permitted in the front or side
yards, unless paved according to city standards;
         (f)   There shall be no outside storage (to include trailers) or
display related to the home occupation;
         (g)   One commercial vehicle, not for advertising, having a capacity
of one  ton or less (excluding attached trailers), may be used or parked on
appropriate pavement on the property in connection with the home occupation;
         (h)   No mechanical or electrical equipment shall be employed other
than the quality and quantity of machinery or equipment customarily found in a
home associated with a hobby or avocation not conducted for gain or profit; and
         (i)   The home occupation use shall not generate noise, vibration,
glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference beyond what normally occurs in
the applicable zoning district.
   (B)   Occupations included.  Home occupations may include, but are not
necessarily limited to, the following:
      (1)   Office facility of an accountant, architect, attorney, engineer,
consultant, insurance agent, real estate broker or member of similar
professions;
      (2)   Author, artist or sculptor, photographer;
      (3)   Dressmaker, seamstress or tailor;
      (4)   Music/dance teacher or other type of instruction;
      (5)   Individual tutoring;
      (6)   Home crafts such as rug weaving, model making;
      (7)   Office facility of a salesman, sales representative, manufacturer's
representative, or service provider, for sale of goods or services, whether
such individual or individuals are self-employed or otherwise; and provided
that no retail or wholesale transactions or provision of services are made on
the premises;
      (8)   Repair shops for small electrical appliances (such as irons,
portable fans and the like), typewriters, cameras and other similar small
items; provided the item does not have an internal combustion engine;
      (9)   Food preparation establishments such as cake maker, provided there
is compliance with all state health laws and no consumption of food items by
customers on the premises;
      (10)   Personal grooming with one customer at a time, by appointment
only.
   (C)   Occupations not included.  Permitted home occupations shall not in any
event be deemed to include:
      (1)   Animal hospitals or clinics, commercial stables or commercial
kennels;
      (2)   Restaurants;
      (3)   Automobile, boat or trailer paint or repair shops (major or minor);
      (4)   Doctor, dentist, veterinarian, sex therapy, massage therapy or
other medically related offices;
      (5)   On-premise retail sales, except garage sales as otherwise provided
in this code:
      (6)   Mortuaries;
      (7)   Private clubs;
      (8)   Trailer rentals;
      (9)   Carpentry work;
      (10)   Photo developing using chemicals;
      (11)   Gift shops;
      (12)   Repair shops for any item with an internal combustion engine; and
      (13)   Those home occupation uses which, without regard to principal or
accessory use conditions, would be classified as assembly, factory-industrial,
hazardous, institutional or mercantile occupancies as defined by the 1988
Standard Building Code, as amended.
   (D)   Application of provisions.  The provisions of this section shall apply
to all home occupations, regardless of the date of inception, unless previously
authorized in writing by the city.
   (E)   Home occupations not listed in this section.
      (1)   Persons wishing to operate home occupations which are not expressly
permitted or prohibited by this section may make written request to the
Planning and Development Director for a formal review of the proposed home
occupation.
      (2)   The Planning and Development Director shall review the request to
determine the appropriateness within the established general guidelines. If the
Director makes a favorable determination, the request shall be forwarded to the
Planning and Zoning Commission for hearing.
      (3)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall, in accordance with
applicable law, review all requests forwarded by the Director, and submit a
final report and recommendation to the City Council.
      (4)   The City Council shall then, in accordance with applicable law,
review and consider action on the request.
      (5)   Any person requesting a formal review to permit a particular use
not otherwise permitted shall, at the time such request is submitted, pay a
non-refundable fee established by the City Council.
   (F)   License revocation.  Home occupations are subject to review by the
city, should violations be reported or observed. Licenses shall be revoked for
noncompliance.
(Ord. 2006-40, passed 10-24-06)
NONCONFORMING AND PROHIBITED USES
§ 155.100  NONCONFORMING USE OF LAND.
   The nonconforming use of land where no building is involved may be continued
for a period of not more than two years therefrom; provided that no such
nonconforming use of land shall in any way be expanded or extended, either on
the same or adjoining property, and that if such nonconforming use of land or
any portion thereof is discontinued or changed, any future use of such land
shall be in conformity with regulations of the district in which it lies. Any
nonconforming use which has been discontinued for 12 months or longer shall be
considered abandoned, and any subsequent use of the land or building shall
comply with then-current regulations and requirements.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 2006-40, passed 10-24-06)
§ 155.101  NONCONFORMING USE OF BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, the nonconforming use
of a building may be continued and the use of a nonconforming building may be
changed to another use of the same or more restricted classification, but where
such use is changed to a more restricted classification it shall not thereafter
be changed back to a use of a less restricted classification. A nonconforming
building which is or may hereafter become vacant and which shall remain
unoccupied or its nonconforming use discontinued for a continuous period of one
year shall not thereafter be occupied except by a use which conforms to
regulations of the district in which it is located. A nonconforming building
may be maintained or kept in good repair except as otherwise provided in this
section.
   (B)    No existing nonconforming building may be enlarged, reconstructed, or
altered unless its use is changed to a use permitted in the district in which
such building is located except in the event such enlargement, extension,
reconstruction or alteration is required by court decision, law, or ordinance.
   (C)    No nonconforming building shall be moved in whole or in part to any
other location on the lot unless every portion of such building is made to
conform to all the regulations of the district in which it is located.
   (D)   A nonconforming building which is damaged by fire, explosion, flood,
wind, earthquake, or other calamity or act of God or the public enemy to the
extent of 50% or more of its reasonable value may not be restored except in
conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01)
§ 155.102  PROHIBITED USES.
   The following uses now in existence and not in a strict conformity with the
provisions of the district in which it is located are hereby prohibited and
such uses now in existence in the city shall be altered, replaced, or removed
to conform to the provisions of this chapter on or before the date shown in the
following schedule.
   (A)   Billboards and poster boards: Six months from the date of enactment.
   (B)   Junk yards and automobile wrecking yards: Six months from the date of
enactment.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01)
PERMITS
§ 155.200  BUILDING PERMITS.
   No permit for the erection, alteration, or enlargement of any building shall
be issued by the Building Official unless there first be filed in his office by
the applicant therefore a plot, drawn to scale, and in such form as may be
prescribed by the Building Official, correctly showing the location and actual
dimensions of the lot to be occupied, the dimensions and location on the lot of
the building to be erected, altered, or enlarged, together with a true
statement in writing, signed by the applicant, showing the use for which such
building is arranged, intended, or designed, and furnishing such other
information as the Building Official may require in the enforcement of the
provisions of this Code, and any failure to comply with the provisions of such
Code shall be good cause for the revocation of any such building permit by the
Building Official. A record of such application and plots shall be kept in the
office of the Building Official.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01)
§ 155.201 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the conditional use permit process is to
identify those land uses which may be appropriate within a zoning district but,
due to either their location, function or operation could have a harmful impact
on adjacent properties or the surrounding area, and to provide a procedure
whereby such uses may be permitted by further restricting or conditioning them
so as to mitigate or eliminate such potential adverse impacts. The conditional
use permit remains with land, regardless of ownership, until termination
thereof.
   (B)   Planning and Zoning Commission consideration.
      (1)   Application. Only the property owner may apply for conditional use
permits. The application for a conditional use permit shall be submitted on a
form approved by the Planning and Development Director and shall be accompanied
by a site plan in a form acceptable to the Planning and Development Director.
The application shall be filed with the Planning and Zoning Commission,
together with the application fee and all required attachments, not less than
30 days prior to the meeting at which the applicant wishes to have his or her
request considered.
      (2)   Notice and hearing.  For purposes of giving notice and conducting a
public hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall treat the application
as a rezoning request.
      (3)   Report by Planning and Zoning Commission.  Following proper
application, notice to affected landowners and public hearing, the Planning and
Zoning Commission shall make a report to the City Council which shall recommend
approval or denial of the application for a conditional use permit, and which
shall further specify such restrictions or conditions of approval as the
Planning and Zoning Commission may deem appropriate.
      (4)   Criteria for approval.  The Planning and Zoning Commission may
recommend approval of a conditional use permit by majority vote, but should
recommend disapproval of application if it finds one or more of the following
to be true:
         (a)   The proposed use does not conform with applicable regulations
and standards established by this chapter;
         (b)   The proposed use will be inconsistent with the objectives and
purposes of the zoning district in which the development is located, or the
goals, objectives and policies set forth in the city's current Comprehensive
Zoning Plan;
         (c)   The proposed use will be incompatible with existing or permitted
uses on abutting sites because of use, building height, bulk and scale,
setbacks and open spaces, coverage, landscaping and screening, drainage, or
access and circulation features;
         (d)   The proposed use is not suitable to the premises or structure(s)
in which it will be conducted;
         (e)   The proposed use potentially creates greater unfavorable effects
or impacts on existing or permitted uses on abutting sites than those which
might reasonably result from the use of the site for a use permitted by right;
         (f)   The proposed use will be detrimental to the public health,
safety or welfare, or will materially injure property or improvements in the
vicinity in a manner specified by the Commission;
         (g)   The proposed use fails to reasonably protect persons and
property from erosion, flood or water damage, fire, noise, glare, odors, or
similar hazards or impacts;
         (h)   The proposed use will materially and adversely affect the safety
and convenience of vehicular and pedestrian circulation in the vicinity,
including traffic reasonably expected to be generated by the proposed use and
other uses reasonably anticipated in the area under existing zoning
regulations;
         (i)   The proposed use will materially and adversely affect traffic
control or adjacent properties by inappropriate location, lighting or types of
signs; or
         (j)   The proposed use fails to provide adequate and convenient off-
street parking and loading facilities.
   (C)   City Council consideration.
      (1)   Generally. The City Council shall consider the application at the
first regular meeting scheduled after it has received the final report of the
Planning and Zoning Commission. The Council may vote to approve the
application, vote to deny the application, table matter for future
consideration, or refer the application back to the Planning and Zoning
Commission for further study and a new recommendation. In the event that an
application for a conditional use permit is not approved by the City Council
within 180 days after the date it was first considered by the Planning and
Zoning Commission, such application shall be deemed to have been denied on the
180th day after such first day of consideration.
      (2)   Vote required. The application may be approved by a majority vote
of the Council, provided that the Council may not approve an application for a
conditional use permit except by three-fourths approval vote if a written
protest against such permit has been filed with the Building Official and such
protest has been duly signed and acknowledged by the owners of at least 20% of
the area of the lots or land immediately adjoining the area covered by the
requested permit and extending 200 feet from that area.
      (3)   Conditions of approval.  Regardless of whether such conditions have
been recommended by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the City Council may
establish such conditions of approval as are reasonably necessary to insure
compatibility with surrounding uses and to preserve the public health, safety
and welfare. Such conditions may ;include, without limitation, a limited term
or duration of the permit; requirements for special yards, lot sizes, open
spaces, buffers, fences, walls or screening; requirements for the installation
and maintenance of landscaping or erosion control measures; requirements for
street improvements, regulation of vehicular ingress or egress and traffic
circulation regulation of signs; regulation of hours or other characteristics
of operation; establishment of development schedules for performance or
completion; and such other reasonable conditions as the City Council may deem
necessary to preserve the health, safety, and welfare of the applicant and the
public. In any event, no conditional use permit shall be granted unless and
until the recipient thereof shall agree in writing to comply with such
conditions of approval as may be imposed by the City Council.
      (4)   Ordinance required. If the application is duly approved by the City
Council, an ordinance authorizing its issuance shall be promptly thereafter
executed by the Mayor. The ordinance shall set forth the conditions of
approval, and may provide that any person or legal entity found guilty of
violating such ordinance may be feed an amount not exceeding $2,000 for each
day during which a violation is committed.
      (5)   Submission of application following disapproval.  If an application
for a conditional use permit has been disapproved by the City Council, whether
such disapproval results from formal Council action or the failure to approve
the application within the specified time, the same or substantially identical
application shall not be filed with the Planning and Zoning Commission for a
period of at least 180 days after the date of such disapproval. Upon
disapproval of any subsequent identical or substantially identical application,
the same or substantially identical application shall not be filed for a period
of 12 months from the date of the last disapproval. However, the provisions of
this division shall not operate to prohibit the filing of an application after
legal title of record has been transferred to a new owner.
   (D)   Record of permits. The Planning and Development Director shall
maintain a record of all conditional use permits granted by the city.
   (E)   Term.
      (1)   A conditional use permit shall continue in full force and effect
until the earliest occurrence of any of the following events of termination, at
which time it shall immediately become void and shall have no further effect:
         (a)   The building or premises is not put to the permitted use for a
period of one year or more from the effective date of the ordinance authorizing
issuance of the permit;
         (b)   The permit expires by its own terms;
         (c)   The property is rezoned;
         (d)   Another conditional use permit is approved for the site;
         (e)   The building or premises is substantially enlarged, extended,
reconstructed or altered;
         (f)   The use of the building or premises is materially expanded,
increased or otherwise altered; or
         (g)   The violation of any one or more of the conditions of approval.
      (2)   For purposes of this section the City Manager shall have the
authority, subject to review by the Zoning Board of Adjustment, to determine
whether an event of termination has occurred. Whenever the City Manager shall
make a formal determination as to whether an event of termination has occurred,
he shall promptly make and forward to the Planning and Zoning Commission and
Zoning Board of Adjustment a written report describing the facts surrounding
such determination and the reasons for such determination.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01)
§ 155.202  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   No vacant land shall be occupied or used, except for agricultural
uses, until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the Building
Official.
   (B)   No premises shall be used and no buildings hereafter erected or
structurally altered shall be used, occupied, or changed in use, until a
certificate of occupancy and compliance shall have been issued by the Building
Official subject to the laws and the provisions of these regulations and other
applicable regulations.
   (C)   Certificates of occupancy and compliance shall be applied for
coincident with the application for a building permit and shall be issued
within ten days after the erection or structural alterations of such buildings
shall have been completed in conformity with the provisions of these
regulations. A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office
of the Building Official.
   (D)   No permit for excavation for any building shall be issued before
application has been made for certificate of occupancy and compliance.
   (E)   A certificate of occupancy shall be required of all nonconforming
uses. Application for a certificate of occupancy for nonconforming uses shall
be filed within 12 months from the effective date of this chapter, with the
Building Inspector.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01)
§ 155.203  TEMPORARY USE PERMITS.
   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of the temporary use permit process is to
identify those land uses which may be appropriate on a temporary basis in a
zoning district but, due to either their location, function, or operation are
considered inappropriate as permanent primary or accessory uses, and provide a
procedure whereby such uses may be permitted for a defined period of time
within parameters established herein.
   (B)   Permit required.  Prior to the commencement of a temporary use
permitted in this section, an individual must secure a permit issued by the
City Manager or his or her designee. Sufficient documentation to show
compliance with the provisions of this chapter as determined by the City
Manager or his or her designee must be attached to the request prior to review
of the application. The applicable minimum standards, referenced herein, and
applicable fire, safety, health, and building regulations and codes shall serve
as a guideline in the decision whether to issue the permit.
   (C)   Fee.  The administrative and inspection fee, as set by the City
Council, must be tendered with the complete application. Should a site not pass
inspection, it will receive a second inspection upon notification by the
applicant that all discrepancies had been resolved. Any further inspection will
require an additional tender of the fee per inspection. The fee is not refunded
if the premises fails the inspection or application is withdrawn.
   (D)   Permitted uses.  The following uses are permitted upon issuance of a
temporary use permit in the associated zoning district and pursuant to the
applicable regulations.
      (1)   Long term seasonal sales.  The sale, barter, lease, or rental
conditionally or otherwise in any manner or by any means whatsoever of tangible
property for a consideration, and such transactions taking place on a temporary
basis outside of a dedicated structure that does not meet the definition of a
GARAGE SALE in §
111.01 of the code of ordinances of the City of Harker Heights, pursuant to the
following conditions:
         (a)   Hours of operation in residential areas will be limited to 8:00
a.m. to dusk or 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. hours of operation for commercial
areas;
         (b)   On-site parking will be required for all events at one parking
space for 800 square feet of outside event area. This parking will be in
addition to any required parking for any existing use per §
155.066;
         (c)   Restroom facilities are provided or an explanation as to why
they are not required with staff approval;
         (d)   The duration of the sale will not exceed 60 days; and
         (e)   A permit for a seasonal sale has not been issued on the site in
the last 90 days.
      (2)   Short term seasonal sales.  The sale, barter, lease, or rental
conditionally or otherwise in any manner or by any means whatsoever of tangible
property for a consideration, and such transactions taking place on a temporary
basis outside of a dedicated structure that does not meet the definition of a
GARAGE SALE in §
111.01 of the code of ordinances of the City of Harker Heights, pursuant to the
following conditions:
         (a)   Hours of operation in residential areas will be limited to 8:00
a.m. to dusk or 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. hours of operation for commercial
areas;
         (b)   On-site parking will be required for all events at one parking
space for every 800 square feet of outside event area. This parking will be in
addition to any required parking for any existing use per §
155.066 unless the use is not currently open;
         (c)   Restroom facilities are provided or an explanation as to why
they are not required with staff approval;
         (d)   The duration of the sale will not exceed three days; and
         (e)   A permit for a seasonal sale has not been issued on the site in
the last 30 days.
      (3)   Construction trailers.  Mobile structures used to accommodate
temporary offices, dining facilities and storage of building materials pursuant
to the following conditions:
         (a)   Hours of operation would be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
unless a noise permit pursuant to §
95.08 is issued;
         (b)   On-site parking will be required at one parking space for every
200 square feet of gross floor area of any office space;
         (c)   Restroom facilities are provided or an explanation as to why
they are not required with staff approval; and
         (d)   The trailer will be removed ten days after issuance of the final
certificate of occupancy for the development or expiration of the building
permit.
      (4)   Temporary storage containers.  Mobile structures or containers used
to store and transport household and commercial goods or waste stored on a
property for more then seven days pursuant to the following conditions:
         (a)   The container is stored wholly on the applicant’s property;
         (b)   The container shall not occupy the required parking spaces per §
155.066;
         (c)   The container does not block the sight triangle of corner
streets or adjacent properties;
         (d)   The container shall be kept on the property a maximum of 60
days;
         (e)   One thirty-day extension to the maximum allowable time with
sufficient evidence of need;
         (f)   There has not been an active permit for a temporary storage
container for the subject tract in the previous 90 days; and
         (g)   Temporary storage containers lawfully placed prior to September
28, 2010 on a property may remain providing that they be painted in a
complementary color to their surroundings, there is no visible rust or damage
on the containers and that they remain secure at all times.
   (E)   Revocation.  The City Manager may revoke the temporary use permit if
the person holding the certificate refuses or fails to comply with requirements
of:
      (1)   This chapter;
      (2)   Fire codes and regulations;
      (3)   Health and safety codes and regulations;
      (4)   Building codes and regulations; or
      (5)   Any law governing, or any standard pertaining to the operation of
temporary use.
   (F)   Appeal provision.  If the City Manager denies the issuance of a
temporary use permit or revokes a temporary use permit issued hereunder, the
City Manager shall, within three business days after the action, send to the
applicant or holder of the temporary use permit a certified letter (return
receipt requested) giving notice of the denial or revocation, stating the
reasons therefor and the right to appeal. Further, the City Manager or his or
her designee shall post a complete and legible copy of the notice on a
conspicuous place on the site of the temporary use and shall document the time,
date, and location of this posting. The applicant or holder of the temporary
use permit may appeal the denial or revocation of a temporary use permit to the
City Council subject to the following:
      (1)   The appeal must be in writing and filed with the City Manager’s
Office within ten business days after the posting of the written notice of
denial, or revocation;
      (2)   The appeal must clearly set out the basis of such appeal;
      (3)   A hearing shall be scheduled a next regular City Council meeting as
soon as practicable;
      (4)   The City Council shall formally act upon the appeal at the meeting.
During the hearing, the Mayor or other presiding officer may receive any 
information which he or she deems to be relevant and material, but at a minimum
shall hear the appealing party and the City Manager.  If the decision of the
City Manager is overturned, the temporary use permit shall be issued.
(Ord. 2010-27, passed 9-28-10)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 155.210  NOTIFICATION OF REZONING REQUESTS.
   Public notification of meetings on rezoning requests will be sent to owners
of property within 400 feet radius. Notifications will be made using available
ownership records and addresses. Lack of proper address or unavailability of
owner which prevents timely notification will not act to bar or delay action on
rezoning requests.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01)
§ 155.211  RESUBMISSION OF ZONING REQUESTS.
   When a zoning request has been disapproved by the City Council, the same
request shall not be resubmitted for a period of 180 days after disapproval by
the City Council. Upon disapproval of a second identical request, the same
request shall not be resubmitted for a period of 12 months from the date of the
last disapproval. Each subsequent disapproval of the identical request will
result in a new delay of 12 months. However, the provisions of this section
shall not operate to prohibit the filing of an request after legal title of
record has been transferred to a new owner.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01)
§ 155.212  CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   The City Council may from tine to time amend, supplement, or change by
ordinance the boundaries of the districts or the regulations herein
established.
   (B)   Before taking any action on any proposed amendment supplement, or
change the City Council shall submit the same to the City Planning and Zoning
Commission for its recommendation and report after a public hearing.
   (C)   One public hearing shall be held by each of the Planning and Zoning
Commission and City Council before adopting any proposed supplement, amendment
or change. Notice of such hearings shall be given by publication one time in a
newspaper of general circulation in Harker Heights, Texas, stating the time and
place of such hearing, which time shall not be earlier than 15 days from the
day of such publication.
   (D)   Vote required:
      (1)   If such proposed amendment, supplement, or change has been approved
by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the amendment, supplement or change
shall become effective by an approval vote of a majority of the City Council.
      (2)   If such proposed amendment, supplement, or change has not been
approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the amendment, supplement or
change shall not. become effective except by a three-fourths approval vote by
the City Council.
      (3)   The amendment, supplement, or change shall not become effective
except by a three-fourths approval vote of the City Council, regardless of
Planning and Zoning Commission recommendation, if a protest against such
amendment, supplement, or change has been filed with the city, duly signed and
acknowledged by the owners of at least 20% of either:
         (a)   The area of the lots or land covered by the proposed change, or
         (b)   The area of the lots or land immediately adjoining the area
covered by the proposed change and extending 200 feet from that area.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01)
§ 155.213  BOUNDARIES OF DISTRICTS.
   Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various
districts as shown on the Zoning District Map, the following rules apply in the
order shown:
   (A)   The district boundaries are either streets or alleys unless otherwise
shown, and where the districts designated on the Zoning District Map are
bounded approximately by street or alley lines, the street or alley shall be
construed to be the boundary of the district.
   (B)   Where the district boundaries are not otherwise indicated, and where
the property has been or may hereafter be divided into blocks and lots, the
district boundaries shall be construed to be lot lines, and where the districts
designated on the Zoning District Map are bounded approximately by lot lines,
the lot lines shall be construed to be the boundary of the districts unless the
boundaries are otherwise indicated on the map.
   (C)   In unsubdivided property, the district boundary lines on the Zoning
District Map shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the map.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01)
§ 155.214  INTERPRETATION, PURPOSE, AND CONFLICT.
   In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety,
health, convenience, comfort, morals, prosperity, and general welfare. It is
not intended by this chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any
ordinance, rules, regulations, or permits previously adopted or issued, and not
in conflict with any of the provisions of this chapter, or which shall be
adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the use of building premise, and
likewise not in conflict with this chapter; nor is it intended by this chapter
to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other
agreements between parties, except that, if this chapter imposes a greater
restriction, this chapter shall control.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01)
Board of Adjustment
§ 155.220  COMPOSITION.
   (A)   A Board of Adjustment is established by the City Council.
   (B)   The Board of Adjustment shall consist of five members and four
alternate members who are registered voters in the city and property owners in
the city. Members and alternate members shall serve for a term of two years
each or until their respective successors are qualified. Alternate members
shall serve in the absence of one or more regular members when requested to do
so. No member shall serve more than three full consecutive terms on the Board
of Adjustment.
   (C)   During the month of September of each year, or as soon thereafter as
is reasonably practicable, the City Council shall appoint members to fill all
vacancies expected to occur on the Board of Adjustment during the succeeding 12
month period. The term of each member shall begin on January 1 of the year
following in which the member was appointed.
   (D)   Vacancies on the Board of Adjustment shall be filled as follows.
      (1)   Alternate members shall take the oath of office and shall be called
to serve whenever a quorum of regular members is not expected. Alternate
members shall be called for service in the order named by the City Council.
Alternate members are encouraged to attend the Zoning Board of Adjustment
hearings when not scheduled to serve.
      (2)   If a vacancy shall occur in the regular members, the first eligible
alternate member shall proceed to serve the unexpired term of the vacant seat,
and the Chair shall thereupon send notice to the City Council, with a request
to appoint an additional alternate member.
   (E)   The Board shall adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter. Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the chairman and
at such other times as the Board may determine. Such chairman or, in his
absence, the acting chairman may administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses. All meetings of the Board will be open to the public. The Board
shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon
each question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall
keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall
be immediately filed in the office of the Board and shall be public record. The
concurring vote of four members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any
order, requirement, decision, or determination of any administrative official,
or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required
to pass under any such ordinance, or to effect any variation in such ordinance.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01)
§ 155.221  APPEALS TO THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   (A)   A person aggrieved by a decision made by an administrative official,
or any officer, department, board, or bureau of the city affected by such a
decision, may appeal the decision to the Board of Adjustment. Such appeal shall
be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the Board, by
filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the Board of
Adjustment a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof and by paying a
filing fee established by the City Council, at the time the notice is filed,
which shall be credited to the General Fund of the city. The officer from whom
the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. An
appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless
the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of Adjustment
after the notice or appeal shall have been filed that by reasons of facts
stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to
life or property. In such cases, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than
by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board of Adjustment or by a
court of record on application or notice to the officer from whom the appeal is
taken and on the cause shown.
   (B)   The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of
the appeal, giving public notice hereof, as well as due notice to the parties
in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing any
party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01)
§ 155.222  POWERS OF THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   (A)   The Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers:
      (1)   Appeals.  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is
an error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an
administrative official in the enforcement of this chapter.
      (2)   Consideration.  When a property owner can show that a strict
application of the terms of this chapter relating to the use, construction, or
alteration of buildings or structures or the use of land will impose upon him
practical difficulties or particular hardship, the Board may consider and allow
variations of the strict application of the terms of this chapter if the
variations are in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter,
and the Board is satisfied, under evidence heard by it, that a granting of the
variation will not merely serve as a convenience to the applicant but will
alleviate some demonstrable hardship or difficulty so great as to warrant a
variation from the comprehensive plan by this chapter created.
      (3)   Authorization.  The Board may authorize a variance where, by reason
of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or shape of a specific piece of
property of record at the time of the adoption of this chapter or by reason of
exception topographical conditions or other extraordinary or exceptional
situation or condition of a specific piece of property, the strict application
of a provision of this chapter would result in peculiar and exceptional
practical difficulties and particular hardship upon the owner of the property
and amount to a practical confiscation of the property as distinguished from a
mere inconvenience to the owner, provided the variation can be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing
the general purpose and intent of the comprehensive plan as established by the
regulations and provisions contained in this chapter.
      (4)   Special exceptions. When in its judgment the public convenience and
welfare will not be substantially or permanently injured, the Board of
Adjustment may in a specific case, after public notice and hearing and subject
to appropriate conditions and safeguards, authorize special exceptions to the
regulations herein established as follows:
         (a)   To permit a transitional use between a business or industrial
district and a dwelling district where the side of a lot in a one family
district or a two family district abuts upon a lot zoned for business or
industrial purposes. On a lot in a single family dwelling district which sides
upon a lot zoned for business or industrial purposes, the board may permit a
two family dwelling.
         (b)   Permit the extension of a building or use into a more restricted
district, immediately adjacent thereto, but not more than 50 feet beyond the
boundary line of the district in which such building or use is authorized.
         (c)   Permit such modification of yard, open space, lot area, or lot
width regulations as may be necessary to secure an appropriate improvement of a
parcel of land if such parcel is separately owned at the time of the original
passage of this chapter or subsequent annexation of the city and is of such
restricted area that it cannot be appropriately improved without such
modification.
         (d)   To determine in cases of uncertainty the classification of any
use not specifically named in this chapter.
         (e)   To grant a permit for the extension of a use, height, or area
regulation into an adjoining district, where the boundary line of the district
divided a lot in a single ownership at the time of the adoption of this
chapter.
         (f)   To permit as an accessory use a parking area for passenger
automobiles on a lot or lots in a single family, duplex, or apartment house
district adjoining or across a street of not more than 50 feet in width from an
R-1 or R-2 District, subject, however, to the following provisions:
            1.   The area shall be properly enclosed with a hedge, screen,
fence, wall or other suitable enclosure having a height of not less than three
feet nor more than six feet. Such fence or enclosure shall conform to the front
yard regulations of the district in which it is located.
            2.   The area shall be paved.
            3.   No parking of vehicles shall be permitted within six feet of
any adjoining lot on which is located a single family residence, duplex, or
multiple dwelling.
            4.   One sign, not exceeding two and one-half square feet in area,
may be erected identifying the lot.
            5.   No charges may be made for parking and no other business use
may be made of the lot.
            6.   Any light used to illuminate the parking area shall be so
arranged as to direct the light away from any adjoining premises used for
residential purposes.
      (5)   Any appeal or permit granted by the Board of Adjustment shall not
be valid if construction authorized by the permit is not begun within a period
of 60 days.
   (B)    In exercising the above mentioned powers such Board may in conformity
with the provisions of this subchapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or
may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and
may make such order, requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be
made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the
appeal is taken
   (C)    In considering all appeals and all proposed variations to this
chapter the Board shall, before making any finding, in a specific case, first
determine that the proposed variation will not constitute any change in the
district map and will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to
adjacent property, or materially increase the congestion in public streets, or
increase the public danger of fire and safety, or materially diminish or impair
established property values within the surrounding area, or in any other
respect impair the public health, safety, comfort, morals, and welfare of the
city.
   (D)   Every variation granted or denied by the Board shall be accompanied by
a written finding of fact, based on sworn testimony and evidence, specifying
the reason for granting or denying the variation.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01)
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
§ 155.230  ESTABLISHED; MEMBERSHIP; FUNCTION.
   There is hereby established a Harker Heights Planning and Zoning Commission
composed of nine voting members and four alternates, to be appointed by the
City Council.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01)
§ 155.231  TERMS OF MEMBERS; FILLING VACANCIES; REMOVAL.
   (A)   The term of the members of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be
for three years or until their respective successors are appointed and have
qualified. No member shall serve more than two full consecutive terms on the
Planning and Zoning Commission. Commission members may be removed at any time
upon the affirmative vote of a majority of the City Council.
   (B)   During the month of September of each year, or as soon thereafter as
is reasonably practicable, the City Council shall appoint members to fill all
vacancies expected to occur on the Planning and Zoning Commission during the
succeeding twelve month period. The term of each member shall begin on January
1 of the following year in which the member was appointed.
   (C)   The City Council shall choose from the alternates to fill vacant
positions.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01)
§ 155.232  QUALIFICATION OF MEMBERS.
   The members of the Planning and Zoning Commission must be qualified electors
within the city. A member of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall not be an
employee or an appointed or elected official of the city.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01)
§ 155.233  MEETINGS.
   (A)   A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business. Monthly meetings of the Planning and Zoning Commission
shall be held at a location open to the public; additional meetings may be held
at the call of the City Council or the Planning and Zoning Commission Chair.
Meetings shall comply with all applicable requirements of the Texas Open
Meetings Act.
   (B)   Should a member of the commission fail to attend three consecutive
regular monthly meetings of the Commission, such member shall be automatically
dropped from the Commission and a vacancy thereon declared.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01)
§ 155.234  POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Commission shall elect a chairman, vice-chairman and such other
officers as it may be deemed necessary for a term of one year. The Commission
shall adopt rules for the practical and efficient transactions, findings and
determinations, which rules shall be a public record.
   (B)   The function and the duty of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall
be to make, or cause to be made, and to recommend a Comprehensive Plan for City
Council adoption which guides the physical development of the city. Such plans
may relate to the comprehensive planning of the city. Such plans and the
accompanying maps, plats, charts, and descriptive matter shall show the
Planning and Zoning Commission's recommendations for the development of the
territory, including among other things the general locations, character and
extent of streets, alleys, ways, viaducts, bridges, railroads, terminals,
school grounds, fire station sites, or any other public grounds or public
improvements, and the removal, relocation, widening or extension of such public
work then existing. As the work of making the whole Comprehensive Plan
progresses, the Planning and Zoning Commission may from time to time amend,
extend or add to the plan.
   (C)   In the preparation of such plan, the Planning and Zoning Commission
shall make careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of present conditions
and future growth of the city, and with due regard to its relations to
neighboring territory. The plan shall be made with the general purpose of
guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of
the city and its environs which will, in accordance with present and future
needs, best promote health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity and
general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of
development; including, among other things, adequate provision for traffic, the
promotion of safety from fire and other dangers, adequate provision for light
and air, the promotion of the healthful and convenient distribution of
population, the efficient expenditures of public funds, and the adequate
provision of public utilities and other public requirements.
   (D)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall make to the City Council an
annual report, giving a statement of its work during the preceding year. In
such annual report it shall also make its recommendations as to future projects
to be undertaken, and from time to time it shall also make like recommendations
for public improvements, which in its judgment should be undertaken.
   (E)   The Commission shall exercise its authority as the Zoning Commission
in accordance with Tex. Loc. Gov't Code § 211.007 and recommend to the City
Council approval or disapproval of proposed changes in the zoning districts and
related ordinances based on the adopted Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 2006-40, passed 10-24-06)
§ 155.999  PENALTY.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Building Official to enforce the
provisions of this chapter, and to refuse to issue any permit for any building,
or for the use of any premises, which would violate any of the provisions of
this chapter.
   (B)   In case any building is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered,
repaired, or converted or any building or land is used in violation of this
chapter, the Building Official is authorized and directed to institute any
appropriate action to put an end to any such violation.
   (C)   Any person or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this chapter or fail to comply therewith or with any of the requirements
thereof or who shall build or alter any building in violation of any detailed
statement or plan submitted and approved hereunder shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be liable to a fine of not more than $2,000, and each day
such violation shall be permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
The owner or owners of any building or premises, or part thereof, where
anything in violation of this chapter shall be placed, or shall exist, and any
architect, engineer, builder, contractor, agent, person or corporation employed
in connection therewith and who may have assisted in the commission of any such
violation shall be guilty of a separate offense and upon conviction thereof
shall be fined as herein before provided.
(Ord. 2001-36, passed 11-13-01)
CHAPTER 156:  EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION
Section
General Provisions
   
156.01   Short title
   
156.02   Definitions
   
156.03   Erosion and sedimentation control required
   
156.04   Remediation required
   
156.05   Nuisance declared
Provisions Applicable to Development on One Acre or Larger
   
156.15   General principles
   
156.16   Site preparation permit
   
156.17   Surety required
Appeal, Enforcement and Penalties
   
156.90   Appeal
 
   
156.98   Enforcement
   
156.99   Offenses and penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 156.01  SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter may be cited as the Soil and Sedimentation Control Ordinance.
(Ord. 2002-31, passed 11-12-02; Am.Ord.2005-29, passed 9-13-05)
§ 156.02  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGENT .  The Public Works Director or other municipal officer designated to
administer this chapter.
   APPEAL .  A request for a review of the agent's interpretation of any
provision of this chapter.
   DENUDED .  An area that is stripped or made bare.
   DEVELOPMENT .  Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, removal of vegetation, excavation, blasting or
drilling operations.
   EROSION .  The natural wearing away of land by action of running water or
wind.
   EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN .  A set of plans prepared by a licensed
engineer indicating the specific measures and sequencing to be used in
controlling sediment and erosion on a development site both during and after
construction.
   EXCAVATION .  Any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock or
any other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed,
displaced or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
   FILL .  Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or other material is
deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved by
man to a new location and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
   GABIONS .  A flexible woven-wire basket composed of two to six rectangular
cells filled with stones.
   LAND-DISTURBING ACTIVITY .  Any land change which may result in soil erosion
from water or wind, and the movement of soil into waters or onto lands or
increased runoff of waters including but not limited to clearing, grading,
excavating, transporting and filling of land.
   NATURAL DRAINAGE .  Surface water drain channels formed in the existing
surface topography of the earth prior to changes made by unnatural causes.
   PARCEL .  All contiguous land under one ownership.
   PERMANENT VEGETATION .  Ground cover mature enough to control soil erosion
satisfactorily and survive severe weather conditions.
   PERMITTEE .  Any person to whom a site development permit is issued.
   REMEDIATE.  To remove sedimentation caused by the absence or failure of one
or more sediment barriers at a site and to restore any property (including
gutters, storm sewers, and other land) affected by such sedimentation to the
condition in which such property would have existed but for the absence or
failure of such sediment barriers.
   REMOVAL .  Cutting vegetation to the ground or leaving it as stumpage,
complete extraction or killing by spraying.
   RETAINING WALL .  A wall built to provide soil stability at the bottom of
the slope. These walls may include metal, wood and concrete cribbing, precast
structural blocks and reinforced concrete.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY.  A person required by this chapter to erect or maintain
sediment barriers, traps or other perimeter controls to prevent erosion or
sedimentation at or from a site.
   REVETMENT .  A facing of masonry or the like for protecting an embankment.
   RIPRAP .  A permanent, erosion-resistant ground cover constructed of large,
angular or sub-angular (rounded) stone.
   SEDIMENT BARRIERS .  Temporary barriers installed across or at the toe of a
slope to prevent sediment from flowing off the site.
   SEDIMENT BASIN .  A water impoundment constructed to collect and store
sediment and/or debris made by constructing a dam or embankment or by
excavating a pit or dugout pond for storage.
   SEDIMENT TRAP .  A small temporary ponding area formed by excavation and/or
building a small embankment to intercept sediment-laden runoff and to allow the
coarser sediment particles to settle out.
   SEDIMENTATION .  The process of forming and depositing of suspended matter
carried in suspension in water through the action of gravity.
   SITE .  A lot or parcel of land or contiguous combinations thereof where
grading work is performed as a single unified operation.
   SITE PLAN .  T The map or drawn representation of a proposed development
meeting the requirements of this chapter.
   SITE PREPARATION .  Altering terrain and/or vegetation, typically to
facilitate additional construction on the site.
   SOIL STABILIZATION .  Measures which protect soil from the erosive forces of
raindrop impact and flowing water to include without limitation establishment
of permanent vegetation, mulching and the early application of gravel base on
areas to be paved.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION .  The first land-disturbing activity associated with
a development, including land preparation such as clearing, grading and
filling; installation of streets and walkways; excavation for basements,
footings, piers or foundations; erection of temporary forms; and installation
of accessory buildings such as garages.
   STORM EVENT OF TEN YEARS .  Rainfall intensity of 2.50 inches per hour or
more.
   STRIPPING .  Any activity which removes the vegetative surface cover,
including tree removal, clearing and storage or removal of topsoil.
   VARIANCE .  A grant of relief from the requirements of this local law which
permits a person to undertake construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by
this local law where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.
(Ord. 2002-31, passed 11-12-02; Am.Ord.2005-29, passed 9-13-05)
§156.03  EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL REQUIRED.
   (A)   Prior to the start of construction, each person performing or causing
to be performed any development or other land disturbing activity within the
city shall erect and thereafter maintain such barriers, traps or other
perimeter controls as may be necessary to prevent a storm event of ten years or
less from causing erosion or sedimentation from the site in excess of the
amount which would occur in the site's undeveloped and undisturbed state.
   (B)   A responsible party shall ensure that all sediment barriers, sediment
traps, and other temporary sedimentation and erosion control devices are
removed as soon as reasonably possible, and in any event not later than
substantial completion of construction. Such temporary barriers and devices
shall be replaced by permanent natural vegetation, soil stabilization, or other
permanent erosion and sedimentation controls to the extent necessary to prevent
a storm event of ten years or less from causing erosion or sedimentation from
the site in excess of the amount which would occur in the site's undeveloped
and undisturbed state.
(Ord.2005-29, passed 9-13-05)
§156.04  REMEDIATION REQUIRED.
   A responsible party shall remediate any violation of this chapter. All
remediation required by this section shall be completed within 24 hours
following the deposit of the sedimentation, or within such longer period of
time as may be specified in writing by the agent in consideration of inclement
weather or other factors warranting such extension.
(Ord.2005-29, passed 9-13-05)
§156.05  NUISANCE DECLARED.
   Any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare
and is declared and deemed a nuisance.
(Ord.2005-29, passed 9-13-05)
PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO DEVELOPMENT ON ONE ACRE OR LARGER
§156.15  GENERAL PRINCIPLES.
   (A)   It is the objective of this subchapter to control soil erosion and
sedimentation resulting from development activities covering one or more acre
(s). While measures must be taken to control and guarantee that post-
development stormwater runoff from any development must not exceed that of pre-
development, additional measures must be taken to control erosion and
sedimentation ensuring that sediment is not transported from the site by a
storm event of 10-year frequency or less.
   (B)   The following principles shall apply to all development activities
covered by this subchapter and to the preparation of the submissions required
under §
156.16.
      (1)    Preserving and protecting the natural topography.  Site
development should be planned so that it is consistent with and conforms to the
topography and soils of the site so as to minimize and prevent soil erosion.
      (2)   Protection of adjacent properties.  Properties adjacent to the site
of a land-disturbing activity shall be protected from sedimentation by
preserving a permanent vegetation buffer strip around the lower perimeter of
the activity or by installing perimeter controls such as sediment barriers,
filters, straw bail dikes or sediment basins or by a combination of such
measures. Vegetative buffer strips should be at least 10 feet in width and may
be used alone only where runoff in sheet flow is expected according to the
Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan. If at any time it is determined by the
agent that a vegetated  buffer strip alone is ineffective in preventing
sediment movement on to adjacent property, additional perimeter controls must
be provided.
      (3)   Cut and fill slope.  Development shall reflect the topography and
soils of the site so as to create the least potential for erosion. Areas of
steep slopes where high cuts and fills may be required shall be avoided
whenever possible, and natural contours shall be followed as closely as
possible. In the design of cut and fill slopes, consideration must be given to
the length and steepness of the slope, the soil type, upslope drainage area,
groundwater conditions and other applicable factors. Depending on the
circumstances, acceptable design options may include:
         (a)   The use of permanent vegetation alone with special anchoring
such as netting to hold mulch on newly seeded areas. When seeding and mulching,
special care must be given to ensure land is properly fertilized, seeded,
mulched, anchored and watered.  Newly seeded areas shall be watered gently and
regularly as necessary to keep the soil sufficiently moist. Grass shall be
watered as needed until grass is at least two inches tall.
         (b)   The use of special structural materials such as riprap, gabions,
revetments, retaining walls or other methods sufficient to prevent excessive
erosion.
      (4)   Vegetation.  Natural vegetation shall be retained and protected
whenever possible. If vegetation is the developer's choice, a permanent
vegetative cover shall be established on denuded areas not otherwise
permanently stabilized.  Permanent vegetation and related structures shall be
installed as soon as practical or within the time specified in the site
preparation permit. Permanent vegetation shall not be considered established
until a ground cover is achieved which, in the opinion of the agent, is mature
enough to control soil erosion satisfactorily and to survive severe weather
conditions.
      (5)    Channel stability in both natural and man-made waterways.  A
Texas-registered engineer must design new ditches for adequate stability and
capacity. In addition, if existing natural drainage channels will be used to
convey increased volumes of stormwater from a site, the engineer may need to
provide reinforcement measures. All erosion control plans will detail how to
protect the ditches and/or natural drainage from excessive erosion and
sedimentation.
      (6)   Timing and stabilization of sediment- trapping measures.  Sediment
basins and traps, perimeter dikes, sediment barriers and other measures
intended to trap sediment on-site must be constructed as a first step in
grading and must be made functional before upslope land-disturbing activity
takes place. Soil stabilization of earthen structures such as dams, dikes and
diversions must occur within 15 days of installation of the structure.
      (7)   Stabilization of waterways and outlets.  All on-site stormwater
conveyance channels shall be designed and constructed to withstand the expected
velocity of flow from a 10-year frequency storm without erosion. Stabilization
adequate to prevent erosion must also be provided at the outlets of all pipes
and paved channels.
      (8)   Construction on slopes or adjacent to water bodies or courses.  For
channel or slope construction on slopes greater than 3:1, back-up protection
for the primary erosion control measure should be provided. Any new development
adjacent to an existing ditch should have a minimum of 15-foot drainage access
casements on each side of the ditch.  In addition, no property owner may
install a fence within 15 feet of a ditch, stream, brook or other natural
drainage channel; except where a concrete flume or concrete channel is
constructed, the abutting property owner is allowed to construct a fence up to
the edge of the concrete. However, the city reserves the right to remove the
fence in order to access the drainage structure for needed maintenance.
      (9)   Stormwater management criteria for off- site erosion.  Provision
shall be made to accommodate the increased runoff caused by changed soil and
surface conditions during and after development.  Drainageways shall be
designed so that the final gradients and the resultant velocities of discharges
will not create additional erosion.
      (10)   Aesthetics. In the design of erosion control facilities and
practices, aesthetics and the requirements of continuing maintenance shall be
considered.
(Ord. 2002-31, passed 11-12-02; Am.Ord.2005-29, passed 9-13-05)
§156.16  SITE PREPARATION PERMIT.
   (A)   Permit Required.  Except as otherwise provided by this subchapter, a
site preparation permit is required for any person performing or causing to be
performed any land-disturbing activity covering one or more acre(s) within the
territorial limits of the city. A permit issued under this subchapter is non-
transferable and any attempted or purported transfer shall immediately void the
permit.
   (B)   Exceptions.  A site preparation permit shall not be required under
this subchapter for:
      (1)   Preparation of a residential lot for home construction where the
land-disturbing activity covers less than one acre;
      (2)   Normal lawn and landscaping maintenance;
      (3)   Existing nursery and agricultural operations;
      (4)   Any emergency activity which is immediately  necessary for the
protection of life, property or natural resources.
   (C)   Application submission.  At least one landowner or land user
controlling or using the site and desiring to undertake a development or land-
disturbing activity subject to this subchapter shall make application for a
permit upon a form approved by the agent. Each application for a permit shall
be filed with the agent and accompanied by:
      (1)   A vicinity map in sufficient detail to easily locate, in the field,
the site for which the permit is sought, including the boundary line and
approximate acreage for the site and a legend and a scale;
      (2)   A site plan showing:
         (a)   Existing site conditions on a scale of 1 inch equals 100 feet or
larger;
         (b)   Existing topography of the site and adjacent land within
approximately 100 feet of the boundaries drawn at no greater than two-foot
contour intervals and clearly portraying the conformation and drainage pattern
of the area;
         (c)   The location of existing buildings, structures, utilities, water
bodies, floodplains, drainage facilities, vegetative cover, paved areas,
watershed divides and other significant natural or man-made features on the
site and adjacent land within approximately 100 feet of the boundary; and
         (d)   Proposed use of the site, including both present development and
planned utilization; areas of excavation, grading and filling; proposed
contours, finished grades and provisions for storm drainage, including the
control of accelerated runoff with a drainage area map and computations; kinds
and locations of utilities; and areas and acreages proposed to be paved,
covered and sodded or seeded, vegetatively stabilized or left undisturbed.
      (3)   An erosion and sediment control plan shall be submitted for land-
disturbing activities whenever the proposed activity covers one or more acre
(s). The plan shall show:
         (a)   All erosion control measures necessary to meet the objectives of
this local law throughout all phases of construction and permanently after
completion of development of the site. Depending upon the complexity of the
project, the drafting of intermediate erosion control plans also may be
required.
         (b)   Provisions for maintenance of control facilities, including
easements;
         (c)   Identification of the person(s) or entity which will have legal
responsibility for maintenance or erosion control structures and measures after
development is completed;
      (4)   A non-refundable application fee established by the City Council.
   (D)   Inspections. By submitting an application, the applicant authorizes
the agent and other employees of the city to enter the site for the purpose of
obtaining information required for the review of the erosion and sediment
control plan. Such inspections may take place before, during or after any land-
disturbing activity. If upon inspection existing site conditions are found to
be in conflict with an approved erosion control plan or if such activity is
being undertaken without a permit, the agent shall proceed with enforcement
under §
156.98.
   (E)   Notice of Determination.  The agent shall promptly notify the
applicant in writing of the approval or denial of the application within ten
working days by sending such notification to the applicant at the address shown
on the application.
      (1)   If the application is denied, the agent shall promptly notify the
applicant in writing of such determination, of the reasons for the denial and
of any right to appeal the determination.
      (2)   If the application is approved, the agent shall promptly issue a
permit subject to such conditions as may be necessary to serve the general
principles set forth in §
156.15.
   (F)   Effect of Approval. Approval of an Erosion Control Plan and issuance
of a site preparation permit shall not constitute an acknowledgment or warranty
by the city that the Erosion Control Plan will prevent public erosion
nuisances, and the city waives no rights to pursue any legal remedies, either
under this subchapter or any other applicable ordinances or laws. If for any
reason a public erosion nuisance occurs, the fact that a site development
permit has been issued or that an Erosion Control Plan has been accepted by the
city shall not be a defense or bar to prosecution under this subchapter.
Neither any provision of this chapter nor the issuance of a permit under this
subchapter shall be construed to authorize any act in violation of any other
applicable law or rule.
(Ord. 2002-31, passed 11-12-02; Am.Ord.2005-29, passed 9-13-05)
§156.17  SURETY REQUIRED.
   (A)   The recipient of a permit under this subchapter shall provide a surety
in the form of cash, certificate of deposit, irrevocable letter of credit
acceptable to the city or surety bond underwritten by a surety company licensed
to operate in the State of Texas to ensure that vegetative cover and/or other
permanent erosion control measures are installed, maintained and functioning
properly for not less than two years from the date of final acceptance of the
dedicated public improvements by the city. The surety shall be furnished to the
city before the final acceptance of the streets and/or utilities and shall be
in the amount of 100% of the estimated cost of constructing and/or maintaining
the permanent erosion controls for a two-year period. Such estimate shall be
signed and sealed by a registered professional engineer. Any permanent
vegetative cover which is part of a public improvement project associated with
a subdivision development will not be accepted by the city until the growth has
been established and maintained by the developer for a two-year period from the
date of final acceptance of public improvements.
   (B)   After the two-year period has elapsed, the owner of the property shall
be responsible for maintaining the erosion controls in good working order.  If
any future owner modifies or disturbs the erosion controls for the area, that
owner must restore or replace the permanent erosion controls at the conclusion
of the land-disturbing activity.
(Ord. 2002-31, passed 11-12-02; Am.Ord.2005-29, passed 9-13-05)
APPEAL, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
§ 156.90  APPEAL.
   (A)   Right of Appeal.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a
person aggrieved by the decision may appeal a decision by a city official
denying or revoking a site preparation permit or issuing a stop work order
under this chapter.
   (B)   Notice of Appeal.  Appeals pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
shall be made by filing a notice of appeal with the Director of Public Works or
his or her designee. Such notice of appeal shall contain a brief statement of
the reasons why the aggrieved person believes that the decision should be
overturned and shall set forth the relief requested by such person from such
decision.
   (C)   Hearing.  The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall conduct a public
hearing and render a decision on the matter.
(Ord. 2002-31, passed 11-12-02; Am.Ord.2005-29, passed 9-13-05)
§ 156.98  ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Stop-Work Order.  The agent may post a stop-work order at the site if:
      (1)   Any land-disturbing activity or development is performed in
violation of this chapter;
      (2)   Any term, provision or condition of a site preparation permit
issued under this chapter is not satisfied; or
      (3)   A person is found to be violating any other provision of this
chapter.
   (B)   Permit Revocation.  If a permittee does not comply with a stop-work
order, the agent may revoke the permit by posting notice of such revocation at
the permitted site and by sending a copy by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the permittee at the address shown on the permit application.
   (C)   Administrative Abatement.
      (1)   Emergency Abatement.  Notwithstanding  subsection (2) below, if the
agent determines that a condition at a site threatens a public calamity or
otherwise poses an immediate risk of serious harm to public health, safety or
comfort, such condition may be summarily abated upon order of the City Manager.
      (2)   Non-emergency Abatement. If a responsible party fails to timely
remediate a violation as required by this chapter, or otherwise creates or
allows a nuisance hereunder, the agent may initiate administrative abatement
utilizing the process set forth in § 93.04(C).  If no timely appeal is taken,
or if abatement is ordered following a hearing, the agent or his designee may
enter the site and cause the violation or nuisance to be abated or remedied.
      (3)   The agent shall keep an accurate record of all expenses incurred by
the city in performing administrative abatement, including man-hours, equipment
hours, materials and fuel. Each permittee and other responsible party shall be
liable to the city for payment of such expenses, and the city shall have a lien
against the site to secure payment of such expenses. Property classified as
homestead by the Texas Constitution shall be exempt from the provisions of this
subsection relating to the imposition of a lien.
      (4)   An administrative abatement under this section shall have no effect
upon a prosecution under §
156.99.
   (D)   Injunction.  Compliance with the provisions of this chapter may also
be enforced by injunction.
(Ord. 2002-31, passed 11-12-02; Am. Ord. 2005-29, passed 9-13-05; Am. Ord.
2012-20, passed 9-11-12)
§ 156.99  OFFENSES AND PENALTY.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be an offense
for any person to perform or cause to be performed any land-disturbing activity
covering one or more acre(s) within the territorial limits of the city unless a
site preparation permit authorizing such activity has been issued under this
chapter and is then in effect.
   (B)   It shall be an offense for any person to perform or cause to be
performed a land-disturbing activity covering one or more acre(s) within the
territorial limits of the city in a manner that does not comply with the
conditions of a site preparation permit issued for such activity under this
chapter.
   (C)   It shall be an offense for any person to perform or cause to be
performed any land-disturbing activity covering one or more acre(s) within the
territorial limits of the city at a time and place where a stop-work order
issued under this chapter prohibits such activity.
   (D)   It shall be an offense for any person to knowingly interfere with a
lawful inspection under this chapter.
   (E)   Except as provided in division (D) of this section, proof of a
culpable mental state is not required for conviction of an offense under this
chapter. It is the intent of the City Council to dispense with the requirement
of any culpable mental state in prosecutions filed under this chapter except as
provided in division (D) of this section.
   (F)   A violation of this chapter shall be punishable upon conviction by a
fine of not less than $500 nor more than $2,000 and the costs of prosecution
for each violation.
   (E)   It shall be an offense for any person to perform or cause to be
performed any development or other land disturbing activity within the city
without first having in place such barriers, traps or other perimeter controls
as may be necessary to prevent a storm event of ten years or less from causing
erosion or sedimentation from the site in excess of the amount which would have
otherwise occurred prior to the start of construction.
   (F)   It shall be an offense for any responsible person to fail, within 24
hours following the deposit of sedimentation or within such longer period of
time as may be specified in writing by the agent, to:
      (1)   Remove any sedimentation caused by the absence or failure of such
sediment barrier; or
      (2)   Restore any property affected by such sedimentation to the
condition in which such property would have existed but for such sedimentation.
   (G)   It shall be an offense for any responsible person to fail to timely
replace temporary erosion or sedimentation control devices with permanent
erosion or sedimentation control devices as required by this chapter.
   (H)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of
an offense and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed
$500. A knowing or intentional violation of this chapter shall be punishable
upon conviction by a fine of not less than $500 nor more than $2,000 and the
costs of prosecution for each violation.
(Ord. 2002-31, passed 11-12-02; Am.Ord.2005-29, passed 9-13-05)
CHAPTER 157:  BROADCASTING AND TELECOMMUNICATION TOWERS
Section
   
157.01   Purpose and application
   
157.02   Definitions
   
157.03   Zoning; approval required
   
157.04   Administrative permit application procedure
   
157.05   Conditional Use Permit application procedure
   
157.06   Code requirements
   
157.07   Co-location capability
   
157.08   Abandoned facilities
   
157.09   Facilities on public property
   
157.10   Access
   
157.11   Height
   
157.12   Setbacks
   
157.13   Illumination and appearance
   
157.14   Security and screening
   
157.15   Signage
 
   
157.99   Offenses
§ 157.01  PURPOSE AND APPLICATION.
   (A)   This chapter is adopted to:
      (1)    Allow broadcasting or reception towers or antennas that are
intended for transmitting or receiving television, radio, cellular, or
telephone communications to be situated on non-residential sites;
      (2)   Establish guidelines for the location of towers and antennas;
      (3)   Encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites;
      (4)   Balance the need of providers of telecommunications services to
provide quick, effective, and efficient service with the safety and welfare of
the public pursuant to federal law; and
      (5)   Promote the attractive installation of broadcast or reception
facilities in a manner which is in harmony with surrounding land uses.
   (B)   This chapter shall not apply to any wireless telecommunication
facility for which a permit has been properly issued prior to the effective
date hereof, unless either the facility itself or the use thereof is hereafter
discontinued or altered. Upon alteration of such facility or the use thereof or
in the event that the facility is to be used again after such use is
discontinued, the facility must first comply with all applicable provisions of
this chapter.
   (C)   The following are exempt from regulation under this chapter:
      (1)   An antenna used exclusively for dispatch communications by a public
emergency agency;
      (2)   Home use of an accessory antenna or satellite dish which receives
radio or television broadcast signals, or internet access; and,
      (3)   An amateur radio antenna not exceeding by more than five feet the
maximum permitted building height of the zoning district within which it is
located.
(Ord. 2001-14, passed 4-10-01)
§ 157.02  DEFINITIONS.
   Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions shall govern the construction of the words and phrases
used in this chapter:
   DIRECTOR.  Means the Director of Planning and Development.
   HIGH IMPACT WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY.  An exterior apparatus
designed for telephonic, radio, or television communication through the
transmission or reception of electromagnetic waves which consists of one or
more antennas mounted on a freestanding tower that exceeds five feet above the
maximum permitted building height of the applicable zoning district. The term
does not include an antenna structure used exclusively for dispatch
communications by a public emergency agency.
   LOW IMPACT WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY.  An exterior apparatus
designed for telephonic, radio, or television communication through the
transmission or reception of electromagnetic waves, and which consists of any
of the following:
      (1)   An antenna mounted as an accessory on a building, water tower,
lighting standard, electric utility transmission tower, or other tall structure
having another primary function allowed in the zoning district within which it
is located;
      (2)   An antenna mounted on an existing tower that already supports one
or more telecommunication antennas; or
      (3)   An antenna mounted on a freestanding tower, which tower does not
extend more than five feet above the maximum building height of the zoning
district within which it is located.
(Ord. 2001-14, passed 4-10-01)
§ 157.03  ZONING; APPROVAL REQUIRED.
   (A)   Except as set forth in division (C) of this section, any high impact
wireless telecommunication facility constructed after the effective date of
this chapter is permitted only in the B5, MI, and M2 zoning districts, and
shall require a Conditional Use Permit. Only monopole-type towers shall be
permitted.
   (B)   Low impact wireless telecommunication facilities are allowed in all
zoning districts upon receipt of an administrative permit from the Director as
set forth in §
157.04.
   (C)   A wireless telecommunications facility which is to be added on a
previously permitted tower, antenna, building, or other structure, which
complies with this chapter and which will not violate the height restrictions
applicable to such structure in the zoning district where the facility is
located, shall not require a Conditional Use Permit, but shall require an
administrative permit as set forth in §
157.04.
(Ord. 2001-14, passed 4-10-01)
§ 157.04  ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Where an administrative permit is required by §
157.03, the following procedures shall apply.
      (1)   An application shall be filed with the Director upon such form as
the Director may require, together with a non-refundable filing fee established
by the City Council. The Director may require the applicant to submit any
information required to be submitted in connection with an application pursuant
to §
157.05.
      (2)   The Director shall approve an application if the proposed facility
complies with the applicable provisions of this chapter and all other
applicable laws and regulations. The Director shall approve or deny the
application within 30 days after the request is filed. If the application is
not denied within the 30 day period, then it shall be deemed approved. The
Director shall promptly send written notice to the applicant if the application
is approved.
      (3)   If the application is denied, the Director shall promptly notify
the applicant in writing of such determination, of the reasons for the denial,
and of any right to appeal the determination. Any decision by the Director to
deny a request for administrative approval under this section shall be in
writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record.
      (4)   If the application is denied, the applicant may appeal the decision
of the Director to the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council by
filing a written notice of appeal with the Director within ten days of the
notice of denial. An appeal under this section shall be processed in the same
manner as a request for a Conditional Use Permit pursuant to §
157.05(B) and (C), with applicable time limits running from the date the notice
of appeal is filed with the Director.
(Ord. 2001-14, passed 4-10-01)
§ 157.05  CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Any person required by this chapter to obtain a Conditional Use Permit
(CUP) shall file a verified application with the Planning and Development
Department upon a form approved by the Director, together with a non-refundable
filing fee established by the City Council. A detailed Site Plan shall be
submitted with the CUP application for each telecommunication facility
location, and all drawings and specifications shall be prepared and sealed by a
registered professional engineer. At a minimum, the application shall contain
the following:
      (1)   Location of the proposed telecommunication facility, including the
zoning and land use of adjacent property.
      (2)   All significant structures within one half mile of the proposed
telecommunication facility location. Significant structures include all
publicly or privately owned buildings or structures (excluding utility poles),
and street or traffic light standards which are over 75 feet in height.
      (3)   Photo or architectural simulation of the proposed telecommunication
facility development site from adjacent properties and rights-of-way.
      (4)   A detailed landscape/screening plan to include the complete pad
site.
      (5)   Name, address, and telephone number of the person or entity
responsible for removal of the telecommunication facility in the event of
abandonment.
      (6)   Copies of application or approval from any applicable regulatory
body, including the Federal Aviation Administration or Federal Communications
Commission.
      (7)   Explanation justifying the requested height of the tower/antenna.
      (8)   If the application is for a new freestanding tower, the applicant
shall provide an inventory of its existing towers within the city and the
city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, including specific information about the
location, height, and design of each such tower and the number of antennas that
may be supported by these towers.
      (9)   If applicable, a statement that, despite a diligent effort, the
applicant has been unable to secure permission to co-locate on any structure
identified in division (A)(2) of this section.
      (10)   Such supplemental information which the Director shall deem
reasonably necessary in order to determine whether to approve or disapprove a
permit authorizing construction of the proposed facility.
   (B)   Once it has been properly completed, the application shall be accepted
for filing and placed on the next available meeting of the Planning and Zoning
Commission for review in accordance with its then-current procedures. Any
decision by the Commission to recommend denial of a Conditional Use Permit for
a telecommunication facility shall be in writing and supported by substantial
evidence contained in a written record.
   (C)   Upon final recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission, the
application shall be placed on the agenda for the next regularly-scheduled City
Council meeting designated for hearing zoning matters. The City Council shall
approve or deny the application for the CUP no later than 60 days after the
original filing with the Planning and Development Department. If the
application is not denied within said 60 day period, then the application shall
be deemed to be approved. Any decision by the City Council to deny a
Conditional Use Permit for a telecommunication facility shall be in writing and
supported by substantial evidence in a written record. The City Secretary shall
promptly notify the applicant in writing of the Council decision.
   (D)   To the extent the procedures set forth in this section are
inconsistent with §
155.201, the procedures set forth in this section shall control in connection
with all applications made for a permit under this chapter.
(Ord. 2001-14, passed 4-10-01)
§ 157.06  CODE REQUIREMENTS.
   Wireless telecommunication facilities of any type must comply with all
applicable laws axed regulations, including those adopted by the Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA), the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), the
Joint Airport Zoning Board of the City of Killeen, Texas, the City of Harker
Heights, Texas, and the County of Bell, Texas, and any other federal agency
having authority to govern towers/antennas. Freestanding towers and their
foundations shall meet all applicable wind, seismic, and all other design
requirements imposed by
Chapter 150. Building permits are required for new construction or alteration
of a tower, although additional antennas not increasing the height of the
structure may be added to an existing tower without permits except as may be
needed for electrical wiring.
(Ord. 2001-14, passed 4-10-01)
§ 157.07  CO-LOCATION CAPABILITY.
   (A)   A building permit for new freestanding towers shall not be approved
unless the applicant provides satisfactory evidence that there are no
alternative locations available on existing towers, buildings, or other
structures that:
      (1)   Are structurally capable of supporting the intended antenna;
      (2)   Meet the necessary height requirements;
      (3)   Provide a location free of electro-magnetic interference; and
      (4)   Can comply with the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   New freestanding towers classified as high impact wireless
telecommunication facilities shall be designed and constructed to support a
minimum of four antenna arrays from separate wireless telecommunication system
providers or users. Co-location and all other alternatives must be exhausted
before a new tower is erected. An affidavit shall be submitted with the
building permit application stating the extent to which the tower owner agrees
to allow additional equipment by other service providers to be located on the
tower and its premises on a reasonable and non-discriminatory basis.
(Ord. 2001-14, passed 4-10-01)
§ 157.08  ABANDONED FACILITIES.
   The holder of a permit and the owner of the property upon which a wireless
telecommunications facility is located shall notify the building official at
such time that a facility ceases operation. Any tower or antenna that is not
operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be conclusively deemed
abandoned, and the owner of such tower or antenna, or the owner of the
property, shall remove same (including any accessory equipment) within 60 days
of receipt of notice from the city. If the tower or antenna is not removed
within said 60 days, the city may cause removal of such tower or antenna at the
property owner's expense. After written notice to the property owner, the city
shall be entitled to a lien on the real estate to secure payment for the cost
of removal of the abandoned wireless telecommunication facility. If there are
two or more users of a single tower, this provision shall not become effective
until all antennas located on the tower cease operation for the period
specified above.
(Ord. 2001-14, passed 4-10-01)
§ 157.09  FACILITIES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   Wireless telecommunication facilities for use by commercial system providers
may be allowed in a street right-of-way or on other public property controlled
by the city only upon approval by the city council of a lease, license, or
franchise agreement, including arrangements for payment of appropriate
compensation as may be established by the City Council.
(Ord. 2001-14, passed 4-10-01)
§ 157.10  ACCESS.
   Each site of a freestanding tower shall have direct access to a public
street provided by a driveway that complies with city standards. The driveway
shall extend from the street to an appropriate location on the premises where a
maintenance truck and an emergency vehicle would need to be parked to provide
maintenance, repair or emergency response. A paved area adequate in size to
permit turnaround of a fire engine is required. If the driveway exceeds 50 feet
in length, other acceptable pavement material for the portion beyond the first
50 feet may be requested. The driveway required by this section shall be clear
at all times, and no object shall be placed or permitted to encroach upon such
driveway in a manner which impedes the free and ready use of any portion of the
driveway by emergency vehicles.
(Ord. 2001-14, passed 4-10-01)
§ 157.11  HEIGHT.
   No wireless communication facility shall encroach upon the height limits, if
applicable, of airport hazard zones. In no case shall a freestanding tower
exceed a height of 150 feet, except where a height variance is granted by the
Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with its then-current procedures
upon a demonstration of a hardship by the applicant that can only be remedied
by location of the facility on the proposed site within the city limits.
Antennas mounted as an accessory on top of a building, water tower, lighting
standard, electric utility transmission tower, or other tall structure having
another primary function shall not extend more than 15 feet above the highest
point of the structure as measured from the average ground level around the
structure.
(Ord. 2001-14, passed 4-10-01)
§ 157.12  SETBACKS.
   A nonexempt freestanding tower shall be set back from all boundaries of the
property on which it is located by a distance equal to the height of the tower,
and shall be set back from any residential dwelling or residential zoning
district a distance equal to twice the height of the tower, as measured from
the base of the main tower structure. Associated equipment enclosures or other
buildings and structures, if any, located on the same property are subject to
the otherwise-applicable building setback requirements of the district within
which the facility is located. Antennas mounted as an accessory on the side of
a building, water tower, lighting standard, electric utility transmission
tower, or other tall structure having another primary function, may extend up
to two feet into the required building setback, but in no case shall extend
closer than five feet to any property line.
(Ord. 2001-14, passed 4-10-01)
§ 157.13  ILLUMINATION AND APPEARANCE.
   Wireless telecommunication facilities shall not be artificially illuminated
except as required by the FAA or FCC, and except for motion-detector operated
security lights on any associated equipment enclosure. Freestanding towers
shall maintain a galvanized steel finish or be painted sky blue or gray, except
as otherwise required by the FAA or FCC. Unless the tower compound is screened
by any means from adjacent streets, residential dwellings, and residential
zoning districts, the design of equipment enclosures shall, to the extent
possible, use materials and colors that are compatible with the natural and
built environment of the surrounding area. Antennas mounted as an accessory on
a building, water tower, lighting standard, electric utility transmission
tower, or other tall structure having another primary function shall be
identical in color or closely compatible with the color of the adjacent portion
of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna as visually unobtrusive
as possible.
(Ord. 2001-14, passed 4-10-01)
§ 157.14  SECURITY AND SCREENING.
   The base of freestanding towers, and associated equipment enclosures, shall
be enclosed by a security fence or wall not less than six feet in height with
an access gate that is kept locked at all times except when attended by
authorized personnel. The base of the tower and associated equipment enclosures
shall also be screened and landscaped on any side facing a public street,
residential dwelling, or residential zoning district. Landscaping shall either
preserve existing dense evergreen vegetation or natural landforms that
effectively screen the tower compound, or consist of new dense evergreen
vegetation having a mature height of at least six feet. A security fence is
required to provide opaque screening consisting of materials and colors that
are compatible with the natural and built environment of the surrounding area.
A knox box is also required in order to provide access to emergency response
vehicles.
(Ord. 2001-14, passed 4-10-01)
§ 157.15  SIGNAGE.
   No sign, banner, or flag shall be placed in a visible location on the
exterior of a wireless telecommunication facility or its premises except one
required non-illuminated permanent sign not larger than two square feet for the
purpose of identifying the party to be notified in the case of an emergency,
prohibiting trespassing, or warning of any dangers associated with the
facility. No commercial advertising is permitted.
(Ord. 2001-14, passed 4-10-01)
§ 157.99  OFFENSES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, own, operate or
maintain in the city any wireless telecommunication facility for which a permit
is required by this chapter unless a valid permit authorizing such facility has
been issued and is then in effect.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally or knowingly make
any materially false or misleading statement in an application for a permit
under this chapter.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for the holder of a permit under this chapter to
fail to notify the Director in writing within ten days after the effective date
of any change in the information contained in the holder's most recent
application for a permit under this chapter.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, own, operate, or
maintain any wireless communication facility in the city in violation of any
applicable provision of this chapter.
(Ord. 2001-14, passed 4-10-01)
CHAPTER 158: STORM WATER DRAINAGE POLICY
Section
   
158.01   Definitions
   
158.02   Application
   
158.03   General
   
158.04   Drainage flow in streets
   
158.05   Street cross flow
   
158.06   Allowable flow of water through intersections
   
158.07   Drainage system
   
158.08   Computations
   
158.09   Storm water detention
   
158.10   Floodplain management
   
158.11   Lot grading
   
158.12   Erosion control
158.01  DEFINITIONS.
   This chapter represents the application of accepted principles of storm
water drainage engineering and is a working supplement to basic information
obtainable from standard drainage handbooks and other publications on drainage
design. The policy statements of this section provide the underlying principles
by which all drainage facilities shall be designed. The application of the
policy is facilitated by the technical criteria contained in the remainder of
the chapter. All terms and abbreviations used in §§
158.01-
158.12 are presented in Subchapters 2 through 8, Appendix A, Appendix B and the
Glossary of the Drainage Criteria Manual, last revised September 25, 2007. This
policy shall prevail.
(Ord. 2007-18, passed 6-26-07; Am. Ord. 2007-26, passed 9-25-07)
158.02  APPLICATION.
   (A)   The city's drainage policy shall govern the planning and design of
drainage infrastructure within the corporate limits of the city and within all
areas subject to its extra territorial jurisdiction, as required. Definitions,
formulae, criteria, procedures and data in this manual have been developed to
support this policy. If any condition requiring some additional measure of
protection is identified during design or construction, the Engineer shall make
provisions within the design.
   (B)   The Engineer for the applicant/developer may use definitions,
formulae, criteria, procedures and data not contained in this chapter if they
are applicable for use in this area and the civil engineering industry.
(Ord. 2007-18, passed 6-26-07)
158.03  GENERAL.
   (A)    Storm water runoff peak flow rates for the 10-year and 100-year
frequency storms shall not cause increased adverse inundation of any building
or roadway surface.
   (B)   Street curbs, gutters, inlets and storm sewers shall be designed to
intercept, contain and transport all runoff from the 10-year frequency storm,
without overtopping the curb.
   (C)   In addition to division (B) above, the public drainage system shall be
designed to convey those flows from greater than the 10-year frequency storm up
to and including the 100-year frequency storm within defined public rights-of-
way or drainage easements.
   (D)   When storm water detention is provided, storm water runoff peak flow
rates shall not be increased at any point of discharge for the 25-year storm.
The 100-year storm event shall be passed from the detention facility through an
emergency spillway  such that the flow from that event shall not overtop the
facility or cause damage to downstream facilities.
(Ord. 2007-18, passed 6-26-07)
158.04  DRAINAGE FLOW IN STREETS.
   (A)   No concentrated point discharges directly into streets will be allowed
unless approved by the Director of Public Works or City Engineer.
   (B)   No lowering of the standard height of street crown shall be allowed
for the purposes of obtaining additional hydraulic capacity.
(Ord. 2007-18, passed 6-26-07)
158.05  STREET CROSS FLOW.
   (A)   Whenever storm runoff, other than limited sheet flow, moves across a
traffic lane, a serious and dangerous impediment to traffic flow occurs. Cross-
flow is allowed only in case of super elevation of a curve or overflow from the
higher gutter on a street with cross-flow. When runoff is allowed to cross from
one curb line to the opposing curb line, the depth of flow shall not exceed six
inches of depth at any point within the street. This policy prohibits the use
of concrete valley gutters at points other than intersections. At points of
concentration other than intersections, cross-flows shall be contained within
underground storm conduit. The crown of the street shall not be removed to
allow cross-flow.
   (B)   In the event that underground storm drainage is not practical, cross-
flow shall be allowed. The crown shall be removed and a concrete valley shall
be required to convey the runoff across the street. Cross- flow shall not
exceed six inches of depth within the concrete valley.
(Ord. 2007-18, passed 6-26-07)
158.06  ALLOWABLE FLOW OF WATER THROUGH INTERSECTIONS.
   As the storm water flow approaches a street intersection, inlets shall be
required if the depth of  flow exceeds six inches in any portion of the street
intersection. Concrete valley gutters shall be used to convey storm water flow
through intersections. In the case of T intersections designed as sump
conditions, the Engineer shall demonstrate that the depth of storm water will
not exceed six inches at any point within the intersection. Inlets in such
cases shall not be installed within the curb radius of the intersection.
(Ord. 2007-18, passed 6-26-07)
158.07  DRAINAGE SYSTEM.
   (A)    Construction plans for proposed reinforced concrete box culverts,
bridges and related structures may be adaptations of the current Texas
Department of Transportation (TxDOT) Standards.
   (B)    For bridges and culverts in residential streets, runoff from the 100-
year frequency flow shall not produce a headwater elevation at the roadway
greater than either six inches above the roadway crown elevation or any top of
upstream curb elevation, whichever is lower.
   (C)    For bridges and culverts in streets other than a residential street,
runoff from the 100-year frequency storm shall not produce a headwater
elevation at the roadway greater than three inches above the roadway crown
elevation or three inches above any top of upstream curb elevation, whichever
is lower.
   (D)   All drainage facilities (including but not limited to headwalls, open
channels, storm sewers, area inlets, and detention, retention and water quality
controls and their appurtenances) shall comply with the following requirements,
unless otherwise noted in this section.
      (1)   Storm sewer inlets and gutter transitions shall be designed to
avoid future driveways and to avoid conflicts with standard water and
wastewater service locations. No utilities shall be allowed to cross under a
storm sewer inlet unless approved by the City Director of Public Works or City
Engineer.
      (2)   Drainage channels and detention ponds that are to be maintained by
the public (city) shall be contained within drainage easements. Adequate room
for access shall be provided for drainage channels and detention ponds. Ramps
no steeper than five feet horizontal to one foot vertical shall be provided at
appropriate locations to allow access to drainage channels and detention ponds.
The minimum bottom width for any channel with vegetative side slopes shall be
four feet.
      (3)   Detention ponds shall be designed with adequate area around the
perimeter for access and maintenance. The said area shall be a minimum of seven
feet wide for ponds with depths of five feet or less (back slopes included) and
a minimum of 15 feet wide for ponds over five feet deep or with back slopes in
excess of five feet high. The said area shall not slope more than 5%.
      (4)    Rip-rap for slope protection or velocity dissipation shall be
formed by concrete dissipaters or designed rock rip-rap. Designed rock rip-rap
shall include a D50 sizing and a gradation for the rock. Mortared rock or stone
shall not be allowed.
      (5)   Storm drains between lots (crossing blocks) shall be avoided as
much as possible. When unavoidable, such drains shall be underground storm
drains, unless underground storm drainage is not practical. Flumes will be
allowed only if approved for use by the City Engineer or Director of Public
Works. In either case, the improvements shall be contained within the dedicated
drainage easement. Storm drains along rear of residential lots (through back
yards) shall be avoided. Easements shall be a minimum of 15 feet in width.
      (6)    All bends, wyes and pipe size changes in storm sewers shall be
prefabricated or shall occur at manholes/junction boxes.
      (7)   Storm drains shall be reinforced concrete pipe (RCP), ASTM C76,
minimum 18 inches diameter. The Engineer shall provide load analysis to the
Planning and Development Department as appropriate to demonstrate that class of
pipe used is sufficient for the loading conditions as set forth in TxDOT Item
464. Higher strength pipes shall be used where loadings warrant such. Storm
drains shall have a minimum of two feet of cover in unpaved areas and a minimum
of one and five-tenths feet of cover from sub-grade in paved areas. Embedment
of RCP shall be to the spring line of the conduit.
      (8)   The use of High Density Polyethylene (HDPE) shall be allowed up to
36 inches in diameter. Pipe sizes larger than 36 inches in diameter may be used
if approved by the City Engineer or Director of Pubic Works. The use of HDPE
pipe shall be limited to unpaved areas outside of city streets. All cross
street storm drainage conduit shall be reinforced concrete pipe (RCP). All
outfall structures shall be constructed of reinforced concrete and the
connection with the outfall structure shall be accomplished using RCP. A
transition fitting from HDPE to RCP shall be made upstream of the outfall
structure. Embedment of HDPE shall be to six inches above the top of the pipe.
      (9)   Junction boxes and manholes shall be reinforced concrete. Junction
boxes in lieu of manholes shall be provided where any pipe opening exceeds 37
inches and where the distance from the outside surfaces of any two  pipes
entering a manhole is less than one foot, measured along the inside of the
manhole.
      (10)   Prefabricated wyes, mitered angle fittings and pipe size reducers
shall be allowed in lieu of junction boxes and manholes.
      (11)    Channels.
         (a)   Concrete channels. Concrete channels shall be of sufficient
cross section and slope as to fully contain design flows and facilitate self-
cleaning. Outfalls shall enter major collector drainage ways and major streams
at grade or be designed and constructed with adequate concrete aprons, energy
dissipaters or similar features to prevent erosion.
         (b)   Vegetated channels. Vegetated channels shall have sufficient
grade but with velocities that will not be so great as to create erosion. Side
slopes shall not be steeper than three feet horizontal to one foot vertical for
channels four feet or less in depth and no steeper than four feet horizontal to
one foot vertical in all other channels to allow for future growth and to
promote slope stability. All slopes shall be hydro-mulched, sodded or seeded
with approved grass, grass mixtures or ground cover as indicated in TxDOT Item
164 for use in the Waco District and season in which they are applied. All
earthen channels must have vegetation established prior to acceptance by the
City of Harker Heights. If vegetation has not been established at the time
applicant/developer requests approval of the final plat, the channel side
slopes and bottom shall be lined with erosion control matting prior to being
seeded and approval of the final plat shall be conditional to the establishment
of the vegetation.
         (c)   Major streams shall not be modified without consent of
applicable state and federal agencies and authorization from the City Engineer
or the Director of Public Works.
      (12)   Discharge from storm sewer outfalls shall not cause channel,
bluff, or stream bank erosion. If the storm drain discharges to an open
drainage facility (as determined by the city), the applicant must show
acceptable non-erosive conveyance to that drainage facility, appropriate energy
dissipation at the outfall and a stable headwall. No outfalls shall be allowed
to discharge on the slope of the receiving channel without adequate erosion
control measures.
      (13)   If the development is located such that there is considerable
drainage from potentially developable upstream areas, the developer may request
participation by the city for the cost of over- sizing of elements of the
overall drainage system. The city shall consider these requests on a case-by-
case basis.
(Ord. 2007-18, passed 6-26-07)
158.08  COMPUTATIONS.
   (A)   Computations to support all drainage designs shall be submitted to the
appropriate city departments for review. The computations shall be in such form
as to allow for timely and consistent review and also to be made a part of the
permanent city record for future reference. Computations shall include the
impact of the proposed development to the downstream properties and existing
structures adjacent to the drainage resulting from the 100-year event. All
computations submitted shall be certified by a Professional Engineer licensed
in the State of Texas. The Engineer shall provide the report to the city in
both hard copy and a scanned electronic .pdf file with the proper seal,
signature and date.
   (B)   Determination of runoff.  Numerous methods of rainfall-runoff
computation are available on which the design of storm drainage and flood
control systems may be based. The Rational Method shall be an acceptable means
of computing runoff for drainage areas of 200 acres or less when designing
streets, storm drainage systems, channels and culverts. When the drainage area
exceeds 200 acres in size, the National Resource Conservation Service (NRCS)
(formerly the Soil Conservation Service) hydrologic methods (available in TR-
20, TR-55 or HEC) should be used.
   (C)   Detention pond storage determination. A flow-routing analysis using
detailed hydrographs must be applied for all detention pond designs. The NRCS
hydrologic methods (available in TR-20, TR-55, HEC-1, HEC RAS and the
Hydrologic Engineering Center (HEC)) hydrologic methods may be used for areas
of 200 acres or more. Use of the Modified Rational Method is limited to
drainage areas less than 200 acres. If additional methods become available,
they must be approved by the city prior to submittal of plats.
(Ord. 2007-18, passed 6-26-07)
158.09  STORM WATER DETENTION.
   (A)   Pre-developed peak flows generated from the 25-year frequency storm
shall not be increased. The peak flows from the 25-year storm shall be detained
in onsite stormwater detention basins with release rates equal to, or less
than, the flows generated from the site for the 25-year storm event when the
site was in its existing (natural) state. Detention ponds must also be designed
such that the 100-year storm will not overtop the structure. The Engineer shall
design an emergency spillway system that will safely discharge the 100-year
storm without damage to the downstream property.
   (B)   The City Engineer or the Director of Public Works shall have the
authority to waive the requirement for onsite detention, provided that at least
one of the following conditions is met:
      (1)   The development is eligible to financially participate in an
approved Regional Stormwater Management Program (Facility). Under this
provision, the applicant shall demonstrate that the peak, post-developed runoff
generated from the 100-year storm can be conveyed downstream to the Regional
Facility and not impact adversely any downstream properties. An adverse impact
shall be:
         (a)   Any impact which causes an inundation, or an increased
inundation, of any building structure, roadway, or improvement.
         (b)   Downstream erosion and/or sedimentation, or an increase in
erosion and/or sedimentation.
      (2)   The development is adjacent to a defined water course that has
sufficient capacity to convey the site's post-developed peak discharge from the
100-year storm event without creating an adverse impact on any other
properties. The discharge in the water course shall be determined by using the
100-year storm event with the post-developed site and the remainder of the
watershed in an ultimate build-out state.
      (3)   The development is located within the watershed such that onsite
detention may worsen downstream conditions of the watershed. In such cases, the
developer's Engineer shall demonstrate that conveyance or a combination of
detention and conveyance will provide a safer downstream condition.
      (4)   The applicant can demonstrate that there will be no increased
adverse effect to downstream properties, or if changes made by the applicant to
downstream properties can mitigate future increased adverse effects.
(Ord. 2007-18, passed 6-26-07)
158.10  FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT.
   (A)   City of Harker Heights.
      (1)   In all cases where floodplain delineation is required, its
determination shall be based on the projected ultimate development of all
properties contributing to the point of consideration. It is the responsibility
of the developer's Engineer to determine that the ultimate developed drainage
condition is based on the most accurate information available.
      (2)   For the purposes of this policy, any concentrated flow within a
watershed that has a drainage area of 320 acres or greater, unless previously
defined by FEMA, shall be delineated as a floodplain.
      (3)   All existing floodplains created by the base flood as computed with
current, existing conditions, shall be deemed the Floodway (regulatory
floodway) and shall be wholly contained within dedicated rights-of-way or
easements. Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other development unless certification by a
Professional Engineer is provided, demonstrating that encroachments shall not
result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge.
      (4)   All new construction and substantial improvements of buildings
(structures) shall have the lowest floor (including basement) one foot above
the base flood, based upon the projected, ultimate development of all
properties (without storm water detention) contributing to the point of
consideration.
      (5)   All floodplains shall be computed utilizing the computer software
and methodologies outlined in the Drainage Criteria Manual and accepted by
FEMA.
      (6)   If land development activities are proposed which will result in
flood hazard boundary delineations different from those depicted on the current
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) issued by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA), the applicant for a development permit shall obtain a
Conditional/Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR/LOMR) from FEMA.
      (7)   All floodplain delineations for FIRM revisions shall be based upon
cross-sections developed in accordance with the accepted FEMA guidelines.
   (B)   Federal Emergency Management Agency. FEMA guidelines shall be
followed.
   (C)   Coordination of City of Harker Heights and FEMA floodplain
delineations. For all subdivisions developed adjacent to or within non-detailed
designated FEMA floodplains, the applicant/ developer shall be required to
provide a detailed study to determine the Base Flood Elevations (BFEs) for all
lots that are adjacent or within the non-detailed area. The BFEs must be
developed using approved FEMA guidelines and methods. A copy is to be furnished
to the city prior to final plat.
(Ord. 2007-18, passed 6-26-07)
158.11  LOT GRADING.
   (A)   All retail, commercial and industrial site developments must provide a
site grading and drainage plan that includes drainage computations, detention
of runoff (if required) and a detailed site grading plan that does not
adversely affect adjacent lots, property or downstream property.
   (B)   A comprehensive grading scheme including all proposed lots shall be
included with subdivision construction plans. The grading scheme will include
arrows indicating the direction of flow of runoff for each lot. The finished
floor slab elevation shall be a minimum of one foot above the average top of
curb elevation fronting the lot. Where practical, all lots shall be graded from
rear to front, at which point the drainage shall be intercepted by the street.
If the minimum one-foot requirement can not be met due to land slope,
topography or existing trees, alternate grading schemes may be utilized. In
these instances it shall be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the City
Engineer or Director of Public Works that grading from front to rear would be
more reasonably adaptable to the existing topography. All lots that fall into
this second category shall be identified on the final plat by a listing table.
   (C)   Finished floor elevations shall be shown for all lots adjacent to or
encroaching upon the FEMA- designated 100-year floodplain. Finished floor
elevations shall be a minimum of two feet above the ultimate base flood
elevations.
   (D)   The applicant for a building permit for a residential lot that is
included in the listing table described in division (B) above and is graded
from front to rear shall prepare a detailed site-grading plan that includes
elevations for all corners of the subject lot, the finished floor slab
elevation, final contours, swales, and any modifications to side yard or rear
yard fencing to facilitate removal of runoff from the subject lot.
(Ord. 2007-18, passed 6-26-07)
158.12  EROSION CONTROL.
   Rock berms, silt fences, sedimentation basins, stabilized construction
entrances/exits and similar recognized techniques shall be employed during and
after construction to prevent point source sedimentation loading of downstream
facilities. Such installations shall comply with current TCEQ requirements.
Additional measures may be required during and after construction if during
subsequent runoff events erosion or sediment damage is documented as a
violation of TCEQ Regulations or city ordinance by city staff.
(Ord. 2007-18, passed 6-26-07)
CHAPTER 159:  WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS
Section
   
159.01   Purpose and application
   
159.02   Definitions
   
159.03   General prohibitions
   
159.04   General regulations for high profile wind energy systems
   
159.05   General regulations for low profile wind energy systems
   
159.06   General regulations for all wind energy systems
 
   
159.99   Enforcement and penalties
§ 159.01  PURPOSE AND APPLICATION.
   The purpose of this chapter is to promote the safe, effective and efficient
use of wind energy systems installed for on-site production and consumption of
electricity. This chapter applies to wind energy systems located within the
territorial limits of the city.
(Ord. 2009-02, passed 1-13-09)
§ 159.02  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANSI.  The American National Standards Institute.
   dB(A).  The sound pressure level in decibels, measured using the “a”
weighted scale defined by ANSI.
   FAA.  The Federal Aviation Administration or any board, commission, agency
or other authority exercising its powers, duties or functions.
   HIGH PROFILE WIND ENERGY SYSTEM.  A freestanding, tower-based wind energy
system.
   LOW PROFILE WIND ENERGY SYSTEM.  A wind energy system attached to a primary
structure rather than a tower.
   PRIMARY STRUCTURE.  A structure that is designed and regularly occupied as a
residential dwelling unit, or to conduct business or commerce (including
agricultural use).
   SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL.  The sound pressure mapped to a logarithmic scale and
reported in decibels (dB).
   TOWER.  The monopole, freestanding, or guyed structure that supports a wind
energy system.
   TOWER HEIGHT.  The height of the tower, including the base, wind turbine and
blades.
   TURBINE.  The parts of a wind energy system including the blades, generator
and tail.
   UTILITY GRID WIND ENERGY SYSTEM.  A wind energy system designed and built
with a primary purpose to provide electricity to the electric utility grid.
   WIND ENERGY SYSTEM or SYSTEM.  A system that is designed and built with a
primary purpose to convert wind energy into electricity through the use of a
wind turbine, a tower or attached  apparatus, and associated control or
conversion electronics, and is intended for on-site production and consumption
of electricity to serve the needs of the consumer on site. Systems capable of
reversing the electric meter, as an ancillary function to on-site consumption,
shall be included in this definition.
(Ord. 2009-02, passed 1-13-09)
§ 159.03  GENERAL PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No wind energy system may be constructed, erected, installed, located,
operated or used within the city except as authorized by this chapter.
   (B)   Utility grid wind energy systems are prohibited.
(Ord. 2009-02, passed 1-13-09)  Penalty, see §
159.99
§ 159.04  GENERAL REGULATIONS FOR HIGH PROFILE WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS.
   No high profile wind energy systems may be constructed, erected, installed,
moved, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, maintained, used, operated, or
structurally altered except in accordance with the provisions of this section.
   (A)   Conditional use permit required. No high profile wind energy system
may be constructed, erected, installed, maintained, used or operated except as
authorized by a valid conditional use permit issued by the city.
   (B)   Building permit required. No person may construct, erect, install,
move, convert, enlarge, reconstruct or structurally alter a high profile wind
energy system without first obtaining a valid building permit from the city. An
application for building permit must be accompanied by:
      (1)   Payment of the appropriate permit fee as established in the city’s
fee schedule;
      (2)   A site plan of the proposed system, including:
         (a)   A survey and legal description of the property where the
proposed system is to be installed;
         (b)   A plan view layout of the proposed system clearly showing:
            1.   The location of the system;
            2.   All components of the system;
            3.   Distances to property lines;
            4.   Required setbacks;
            5.   Adjacent land uses and zoning designations;
            6.   Existing structures on the site;
            7.   Existing easements and third-party consent to encroachment, if
required by the Planning Director;
            8.   Required fencing; and
            9.   Natural features such as watercourses and trees on the
property where the proposed system is to be installed.
      (3)   Elevation drawings showing the design and height of the proposed
system.
      (4)   A manufacturer-supplied line drawing of the electrical components
of the system in sufficient detail to demonstrate that the proposed
installation conforms to the National Electric Code.
      (5)   Standard installation drawings of the wind turbine structure,
including the tower, base, and footings, together with an engineering analysis
of the tower showing compliance with all codes and certified by a licensed
professional engineer registered in the state.
      (6)   Proof of authorization from the utility company of the notice
required by §
159.06(B).
      (7)   Proof of insurance required by §
159.06(G).
      (8)   A copy of the conditional use permit required by §
159.04(A).
   (C)   Maximum height. The tower height shall not exceed 80 feet, or the
maximum tower height recommended by the manufacturer or the distributor of the
system, whichever is less.
   (D)   Setback. Except as provided in §
159.06(D), the tower shall be set back from any property line a distance equal
to twice the height of the tower, as measured between the ground at the base of
the main tower structure to the maximum height of blades when attached.
Associated equipment enclosures or other buildings and structures, if any,
located on the same property are subject to the otherwise-applicable building
setback requirements of the district within which the system is located.
   (E)   Signs. Only signs and/or logos that are permanently attached to system
components during the manufacturing process are allowed. No other signs or
markings shall be allowed on the system.
   (F)   Fencing. The system must be fully enclosed by a barrier fence or wall
that is six feet in height and installed at least six feet from the base of the
tower. There shall be no openings, holes or gaps in the enclosure large enough
for sphere four inches in diameter to pass through, except a self-closing and
self-latching gate, which shall be securely locked to prevent unauthorized
access to the system. The enclosure shall have no handholds, footholds or
horizontal members accessible from the exterior side of the enclosure. Sections
150.30 through
150.38 of this code shall apply to the enclosure except to the extent of a
conflict with this division.
(Ord. 2009-02, passed 1-13-09)  Penalty, see §
159.99
§ 159.05  GENERAL REGULATIONS FOR LOW PROFILE WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS.
   No low profile wind energy system may be constructed, erected, installed,
moved, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, maintained, used, operated, or
structurally altered except in accordance with the provisions of this section.
   (A)   Building permit required. No person may construct, erect, install,
move, convert, enlarge, reconstruct or structurally alter a low profile wind
energy system without first obtaining a valid building permit from the city. An
application for building permit must be accompanied by:
      (1)   Payment of the appropriate permit fee as established in the city's
fee schedule;
      (2)   A site plan of the proposed system including:
         (a)   A legal description or address of the property where the
proposed system is to be installed;
         (b)   A plan view layout of the proposed system clearly showing:
            1.   The location of the system;
            2.   All components of the system; and
            3.   Distances to property lines.
      (3)   Elevation drawings showing:
         (a)   The design and highest point of the roof of the primary
structure;
         (b)   The design and height of the wall where the system will be
installed;  and
         (c)   The design and height of the proposed system.
      (4)   A manufacturer-supplied line drawing of the electrical components
of the system in sufficient detail to demonstrate that the proposed
installation conforms to the National Electric Code.
      (5)   Standard installation drawings supplied by the manufacturer.
      (6)   Proof of authorization from the utility company of the notice
required by §
159.06(B).
      (7)   Proof of insurance. Proof of insurance required by §
159.06(G).
   (B)   Maximum height. The system shall not exceed the building height
limitations established for the zoning district in which it operates, or the
maximum tower height recommended by the manufacturer or the distributor of the
system, whichever is less.
(Ord. 2009-02, passed 1-13-09)  Penalty, see §
159.99
§ 159.06  GENERAL REGULATIONS FOR ALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS.
   All wind energy systems shall comply with the provisions of this section.
   (A)   Construction standards. The system must be installed according to the
manufacturer's recommendations under the seal of a professional engineer
registered in the state. Additionally, all components of the system shall
comply with applicable law.
   (B)   Notice to utility company on grid-interconnected systems. No grid-
interconnected or “meter reversing” system shall be installed until the
appropriate utility company has been informed of the customer’s intent and has
provided authorization to install a grid-connected customer-owned generator.
The applicant shall not deviate or modify the installation of any system in any
way without prior approval from the city and utility company. This division
does not apply to off-grid systems.
   (C)   Primary structure required. A primary structure must be located on the
same lot or parcel as the tower base.
   (D)   Location. No part of a system may extend beyond the boundary of the
property on which the system is located unless the property upon which the
encroachment occurs is contiguous to and under the same ownership as the
property upon which the rest of the system is installed.
   (E)   Sound pressure levels. Sound pressure levels generated by the system
shall not exceed 50 dB(A) between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., or 35
dB(A) between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., as measured from the
property line closest to the system.
   (F)   Lights. All lighting of the system not required by the FAA is
prohibited. When obstruction lighting is required by the FAA, such lighting
shall not exceed the minimum requirements of the agency. Upward lighting, flood
lights or other lighting of the system not strictly required by the FAA is
prohibited.
   (G)   Insurance required. A person may not own, operate, or use a wind
energy system, or allow a wind energy system to be located on property subject
to the person’s ownership or control, unless insured by one or more liability
insurance policies meeting the requirements of this division. Each policy must
be issued by an insurance company authorized to write policies in this state,
and be written to or for the benefit of the person named in the policy as the
insured. The policy must pay on behalf of the named insured for amounts the
insured becomes obligated to pay as damages arising out of the ownership, use
or operation of the system, or the property upon which the system is located.
The minimum coverage required by this division is $500,000 combined single
limit for bodily injury and property damage. The policy must contain an
agreement or endorsement that the insurance coverage provided is provided in
accordance with this chapter, and that the insurance company will furnish not
less than 30 days written notice to the city prior to the effective date of any
expiration, termination, cancellation, non-renewal, or modification of the
policy.
   (H)   Maintenance required. Each person who owns or uses a wind energy
system, and each person who owns property upon which a wind energy system is
located, shall maintain the system and its ancillary equipment, structures and
enclosures in good working order, and safe and sanitary condition.
   (I)   Prohibited in easements. No portion of the required setback shall
encroach upon an easement except with the written consent of the easement
holder.
   (J)   Abandonment, discontinuance and removal. A person who owns, operates
or uses a wind energy system, or the owner of the property upon which the
system is located, shall notify the city by certified mail and remove the
system to an appropriate disposal site within 30 days following the date of
abandonment or discontinuation of use. A system is deemed abandoned if it has
not operated for a continuous period of 12 months, unless the owner, operator
or user demonstrates that the system is in full compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 2009-02, passed 1-13-09)  Penalty, see §
159.99
§ 159.99  ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   Injunction. In addition to any other remedies which may be available
at law or in equity, the city may sue in the appropriate court for an
injunction to prohibit the violation of, or to enforce compliance with, any
regulation contained in this chapter. The city is not required to give bond as
a condition to the issuance of injunctive relief.
   (B)   Nuisance abatement. A wind energy system that is not timely removed
after discontinuation of use, or that is abandoned, dilapidated, unstable,
leaning significantly out-of-plumb, or generating excessive noise, or that
poses a significant risk of fire, collapse, or other hazard to safety, health,
or public welfare, is declared a nuisance, and shall be subject to the
abatement and enforcement procedures set forth in
Chapter 93 of this code.
   (C)   Offenses. Proceedings under divisions (A) and (B) of this section
shall have no effect upon a prosecution under this section.
      (1)   It shall be an offense for a person to violate any applicable
provision of this chapter.
      (2)   It shall be an offense for a person to own, use, operate,
construct, erect, install, move, convert, enlarge, reconstruct or structurally
alter a wind energy system in violation of any applicable provision of this
chapter.
      (3)   It shall be an offense for a person to permit, allow or maintain a
wind energy system in violation of any applicable provision of this chapter on
premises owned, occupied or controlled by the person.
   (D)   Penalties. Upon conviction a person who commits an offense under this
chapter shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500, except that a person
convicted of a knowing or intentional offense under this chapter shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $2,000.
(Ord. 2009-02, passed 1-13-09)
CHAPTER 160:  UNSAFE, SUBSTANDARD AND DANGEROUS STRUCTURES
Section
   
160.01   Findings and purpose
   
160.02   Definitions
   
160.03   Generally
   
160.04   Minimum standards; substandard buildings declared
   
160.05   Determination by building official
   
160.06   Public hearing for abatement of substandard buildings
   
160.07   Order of Commission regarding substandard buildings
   
160.08   Notice of order of the Commission
   
160.09   Enforcement of the order of the Commission
   
160.10   Performance of work by the city
   
160.11   Recovery of cost of securing, repair, removal or demolition
   
160.12   Additional authority to secure certain substandard buildings prior to
public hearing and secure, demolish, repair or remove certain dangerous
buildings
   
160.13   Violations
   
160.14   Civil penalty
   
160.15   Authority not limited
   
160.16   Authority of City Attorney
§ 160.01  FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   The facts and recitations contained in the preamble of the ordinance that is
the basis for this chapter are found and declared to be true and correct.
(Ord. 2011-07, passed 4-12-11)
§ 160.02  DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings as ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicated a different meaning.
   BUILDING.  Includes any building, fence, retaining wall, awning, canopy,
sign, shed, garage, house, tent or other structure whatsoever, or any portion
thereof, and the enumeration of specific types of structures shall not be
deemed to exclude other types of structures to which the sense and meaning of
the provisions hereof in context reasonably have application.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL.  The person designated by the City Council to enforce
this chapter.
   COMMISSION.  The Building and Standards Commission established pursuant to §
33.80.
   STANDARD CODES.  The codes adopted and amended by §
150.02.
(Ord. 2011-07, passed 4-12-11)
§ 160.03  GENERALLY.
   (A)   Powers of the building official.
      (1)   Administration.  The building official is hereby authorized to
enforce the provisions of this chapter. The building official shall have the
power to render interpretations of this chapter and to adopt and enforce rules
and supplemental regulations in order to clarify the application of its
provisions. Such interpretations, rules and regulations shall be in conformity
with the intent and purpose of this chapter.
      (2)   Inspections.  All buildings within the scope of this chapter and
all construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to
inspection by the building official. The building official, fire marshal and
their designees are hereby authorized to make such inspections and take such
actions as may be required to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
      (3)   Right of entry.  When it is necessary to make an inspection to
enforce the provisions of this chapter, or when the building official or his
designee has a reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a building or
upon a premises a condition which is contrary to or in violation of this
chapter which makes the building or premises unsafe, dangerous, or hazardous,
the building official or his designee may enter the building or premises at
reasonable times to inspect or perform the duties imposed by this chapter,
provided that if such building or premises be occupied that credentials be
presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such building or premises be
unoccupied, the building official or his designee shall first make a reasonable
effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the
building or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the building
official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry.
   (B)   Abatement of dangerous or substandard buildings.  All buildings or
portions thereof which are determined after inspection by the building official
to be dangerous or substandard as defined by this chapter are hereby declared
to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, vacation, demolition,
removal or securing in accordance with the procedures specified in this
chapter.
   (C)   Notice.  When notice is given in accordance with this chapter to a
property owner, lienholder, or mortgagee, and the United States Postal Service
returns the notice as "refused" or "unclaimed," the validity of the notice is
not affected, and the notice is considered delivered. On receipt of a notice
under this chapter, a manager of the affected property shall notify the owner
of the notice within 10 days.
(Ord. 2011-07, passed 4-12-11)
§ 160.04  MINIMUM STANDARDS; SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS DECLARED.
   (A)   Substandard building.  For the purposes of this chapter any building,
regardless of the date of its construction, which has any or all of the
conditions or defects hereinafter described shall be deemed to be a substandard
building, and a nuisance:
      (1)   Whenever any building is dilapidated, deteriorated, decayed or
damaged to the extent that it is unfit for human habitation, or a hazard to the
public health, safety and welfare.
      (2)   Whenever any building, regardless of its structural condition, is
unoccupied by its owners, lessees or other invitees and is unsecured from
unauthorized entry to the extent that it could be reasonably expected to be
entered or used by vagrants or other uninvited persons as a place of harborage,
or by children for any purpose.
      (3)   Whenever any building is boarded up, fenced or otherwise secured in
any manner if:
         (a)   The building constitutes a danger to the public even though
secured from entry; or
         (b)   The means used to secure the building are inadequate to prevent
unauthorized entry or use of the building in the manner described by division
(A)(2) of this section.
      (4)   Whenever any building is in such a condition as to make a public
nuisance known to the common law or in equity jurisprudence.
      (5)   Whenever any portion of a building remains on a site after the
demolition or destruction of the building.
      (6)   Whenever any building or a portion thereof is abandoned so as to
constitute an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public.
      (7)   Whenever a building used or intended to be used for indoor
workspace, dwelling, or other human occupancy is determined by the building
official to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation, or in such a condition
that is likely to cause sickness or disease for reasons including, but not
limited to, any of the following:
         (a)   Lack of, or improper lavatory.
         (b)   Lack of, or improper bathtub or shower in a dwelling unit or
lodging house.
         (c)   Lack of, or improper lavatories and bathtubs or showers per
number of guests in a hotel.
         (d)   Lack of, or improper kitchen sink in a dwelling unit.
         (e)   Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures.
         (f)   Lack of, or improper operation of, adequate heating facilities.
         (g)   Lack of, or improper operation of, required ventilating
equipment.
         (h)   Lack of minimum amounts of natural light and ventilation
required by this chapter, the standard codes, or other ordinance or regulation
of the city.
         (i)   Room and space dimensions less than required by this chapter,
the standard codes, or other ordinance or regulation of the city.
         (j)   Lack of required electrical lighting.
         (k)   Excessive dampness or mold in habitable rooms.
         (l)   Infestation of insects, vermin or rodents.
         (m)   General dilapidation or improper maintenance.
         (n)   Lack of connection to required sewage disposal system.
         (o)   Lack of adequate garbage and rubbish storage and removal
facilities.
      (8)   Whenever any building contains structural hazards, including but
not limited to the following:
         (a)   Deteriorated or inadequate foundation.
         (b)   Defective or deteriorated flooring or floor supports.
         (c)   Flooring or floor supports are insufficient to carry imposed
loads with safety.
         (d)   Members of walls, partitions or other vertical supports that
split, lean, list or buckle due to defective material or deterioration.
         (e)   Members of walls, partitions or other vertical supports that are
insufficient to carry imposed loads with safety.
         (f)   Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports, or other
horizontal members that sag, split or buckle due to defective material or
deterioration.
         (g)   Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports, or other
horizontal members that are insufficient to carry imposed loads with safety.
         (h)   Fireplaces or chimneys that list, bulge or settle due to
defective material or deterioration.
         (i)   Fireplaces or chimneys that are insufficient to carry imposed
loads with safety.
      (9)   Whenever any building has been constructed, exists or is maintained
in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to such
building provided by the building regulations of the city, as specified in any
of the standard codes, or of any law or ordinance of this state or jurisdiction
relating to the condition, location or structure of buildings.
   (B)   Dangerous and substandard building.  For the purposes of this chapter,
any building, regardless of the date of its construction, which has any or all
of the conditions or defects hereinafter described to an extent that endangers
the life, limb, health, property, safety or welfare of the public or the
occupants thereof shall be deemed and hereby is declared to be a dangerous and
substandard building, and a nuisance:
      (1)   Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of
exit is not of sufficient width or size or is not so arranged as to provide
safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic.
      (2)   Whenever the walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway or
other means of exit is so warped, worn, loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as to
not provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic.
      (3)   Whenever the stress in any materials, or members or portion
thereof, due to all dead and live loads, is more than 1" times the working
stress or stresses allowed in the standard codes for new buildings of similar
structure, purpose or location.
      (4)    Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake,
wind, flood or by any other cause to such an extent that the structural
strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was before such damage
and is less than the minimum requirements of the applicable standard codes for
new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location.
      (5)   Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance thereof is likely to
fail, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure
persons or damage property.
      (6)   Whenever any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance or
ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or
stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be
capable of resisting a wind pressure of one-half of that specified in the
applicable standard codes for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or
location without exceeding the working stresses permitted in the such codes for
such buildings.
      (7)   Whenever any portion thereof has wracked, warped, buckled or
settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have
materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case
of similar new construction.
      (8)   Whenever the building or any portion thereof is likely to partially
or completely collapse because of: (a) dilapidation, deterioration or decay;
(b) faulty construction; (c) the removal, movement or instability of any
portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building;
(d) the deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation; or (e) any other
cause.
      (9)   Whenever, for any reason, the building, or any portion thereof, is
manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used.
      (10)   Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members
list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the
center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third of the base.
      (11)   Whenever the building, exclusive of the foundation, shows 33% or
more damage or deterioration of its supporting member or members, or 50% or
more damage or deterioration of its non- supporting members, enclosing or
outside walls or coverings.
      (12)   Whenever the building has been so damaged by fire, wind,
earthquake, flood or other causes, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated
as to become (a) an attractive nuisance to children; or (b) a harbor for
vagrants, criminals or illegal activity.
      (13)   Whenever any building which, whether or not erected in accordance
with all applicable laws and ordinances, has in any non-supporting part, member
or portion less than 50%, or in any supporting part, member or portion less
than 66% of the (a) strength, (b) fire-resisting qualities or characteristics,
or (c) weather-resisting qualities or characteristics required by law in the
case of a newly constructed building of like area, height and occupancy in the
same location.
      (14)   Whenever any building or structure, because of obsolescence,
dilapidation, deterioration, damage or decay, inadequate exits, lack of
sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections
or heating apparatus, or other cause, is determined by the fire marshal to be a
fire hazard.
      (15)   Whenever any building is defined by any provision of the standard
codes or other ordinance or regulation of the city as substandard, and the
life, health or safety of the public or any occupant is endangered.
      (16)   Whenever any building is defined as dangerous to the life, health
or safety of the public or any occupant thereof by any provision of the
standard codes or other ordinance or regulation of the city.
(Ord. 2011-07, passed 4-12-11)
§ 160.05  DETERMINATION BY BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   When the building official has inspected or caused to be inspected any
building and has found and determined that the building is substandard, the
building official may take any or all of the following actions, as he or she
deems appropriate:
   (A)   Issue notice to the record owner that the building is substandard and
must be repaired or demolished;
   (B)   Issue a citation for each violation of this chapter;
   (C)   Secure the building if permitted by this chapter; or
   (D)   Commence abatement proceedings before the Commission pursuant to §
160.06.
(Ord. 2011-07, passed 4-12-11)
§ 160.06  PUBLIC HEARING FOR ABATEMENT OF SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Commencement of proceedings.  When the building official has found and
determined that a building is a substandard building, the building official may
commence proceedings to cause the repair, vacation, relocation of occupants,
removal, demolition or securing of the building.
   (B)   Public hearing to be held.  Except when the Commission finds that a
building is likely to immediately endanger persons or property, a public
hearing shall be held before the Commission to determine whether a building
complies with the standards set out in §
160.04.  If the Commission determines that the building constitutes an
immediate danger, the procedures set forth in §
160.12(B) and following shall be followed.
   (C)   Notice.  Not less than ten days prior to the date on which the hearing
is set, the building official shall issue a notice of the public hearing
directed to the record owner of the building, and to all mortgagees and
lienholders. The city shall use diligent efforts to determine the identity and
address of any owner, lienholder or mortgagee of the building through searching
the Bell County real property records, the records of the Bell County Tax
Appraisal District, records of the Secretary of State, Bell County assumed name
records, tax records of the city, and utility records of the city. The notice
shall contain:
      (1)   The name and address of the record owner;
      (2)   The street address or legal description sufficient for
identification of the premises upon which the building is located;
      (3)   A statement that the building official has found the building to be
substandard or dangerous, with a brief and concise description of the
conditions found to render the building dangerous or substandard under the
provisions of §
160.04;
      (4)   A statement that the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee will be
required to submit at the hearing proof of the scope of any work that may be
required to comply with the chapter, and the time it will take to reasonably
perform the work;
      (5)   Notice of the time and place of the public hearing; and
      (6)   A statement that if the building is found to be in violation of
this chapter, the Commission may order that the building be vacated, secured,
repaired, removed or demolished within a reasonable time.
   (D)   Additional notice of public hearing.  Prior to the public hearing; the
city may file a copy of the notice mailed pursuant to this section in the
official public records of real property in Bell County. If such notice is not
filed of record, each identified mortgagee and lienholder must be notified of
any abatement order issued by the Commission at the public hearing, prior to
any remedial action by the city. The city shall also post a copy of the notice
mailed pursuant to this section on the front door of each improvement situated
on the affected property, or as close thereto as practicable, or if there is no
front door then at a conspicuous location on the property. In addition, the
notice must be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city on
one occasion on or before the tenth day before the date fixed for the hearing.
   (E)   Burden of proof.  At the public hearing, the owner, lienholder or
mortgagee has the burden of proof to demonstrate the scope of any work that may
be required to comply with this chapter, and the time it will take to
reasonably perform the work.
   (F)   Conduct of public hearing.  All cases to be heard by the Commission
must be heard by a panel of at least five members and/or alternate members, and
a majority vote of the members voting on a matter is necessary to take action
thereon. At the public hearing, the owner of the building, and all other
interested persons may make their appearance in person or by attorney, and
shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard. Any relevant evidence may be
received and considered by the Commission, and for this purpose the chairperson
or acting chairperson shall have the authority to administer oaths and issue
orders compelling the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents.
The hearing may be adjourned from day to day or continued upon a majority vote
of the Commission, in compliance with the Open Meetings Act.
(Ord. 2011-07, passed 4-12-11)
§ 160.07  ORDER OF COMMISSION REGARDING SUBSTANDARD BUILDING.
   (A)   Findings and order of the Commission. If the Commission, by a majority
vote, finds upon evidence presented at the public hearing that the building is
in violation of the standards set out in §
160.04, the Commission may order the owner, mortgagee or lienholder to take
action as required by this section.
      (1)   Repair. If the owner, lienholder or mortgagee demonstrates that the
building can be feasibly brought into compliance with all applicable codes
within the time allowed by this section, it shall be ordered remedied or
repaired to comply with such codes. Repair shall be deemed feasible only if
less than 50% of the structure must be repaired or replaced to comply with all
applicable codes, or if the value of the structure is reduced by less than 50%
because of the violations.
      (2)   Vacate and secure. If the building is in such a condition as to
make it hazardous to the health, safety or general welfare of its occupants or
the public, it may be ordered vacated and secured, and the order may also
require the occupants to be relocated.
      (3)   Demolish or remove. In any case where the owner, lienholder or
mortgagee fails to demonstrate that the building can be feasibly brought into
compliance with all applicable codes within the time allowed by this section,
the Commission may order that the building be demolished or removed.
   (B)   Time allowed to complete work.
      (1)   The order must require the owner, lienholder or mortgagee of the
building to within 30 days:
         (a)   Secure the building from unauthorized entry; and/or
         (b)   Repair, remove or demolish the building unless the owner or
lienholder establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be
performed within 30 days.
      (2)   If the Commission allows the owner, lienholder or mortgagee more
than 30 days to repair, remove or demolish the building, the Commission shall
establish specific time schedules for the commencement and performance of the
work and shall require the owner, lienholder or mortgagee to secure the
property in a reasonable manner from unauthorized entry while the work is being
performed, as determined by the Commission.
      (3)   The Commission may not allow the owner, lienholder or mortgagee
more than 90 days to repair, remove or demolish the building or fully perform
all work required to comply with the order unless the owner lienholder or
mortgagee:
         (a)   Submits a detailed plan and time schedule for the work at the
hearing; and
         (b)   Establishes at the hearing that the work cannot be reasonably
completed within 90 days because of the scope and complexity of the work.
      (4)   If the Commission allows the owner, lienholder or mortgagee more
than 90 days to complete any part of the work required to repair, remove or
demolish the building, the Commission shall require the owner, lienholder or
mortgagee to regularly submit progress reports to the building official to
demonstrate that the owner, lienholder or mortgagee has complied with the time
schedules established for commencement and performance of the work. The order
may require that the owner, lienholder or mortgagee appear before the
Commission or the building official to demonstrate compliance with the time
schedules.
   (C)   Contents of order.  The order of the Commission must contain at
minimum:
      (1)   An identification (which is not required to be a legal description)
of the building and the property on which it is located; and
      (2)   A description of the violation of minimum standards present in the
building; and
      (3)   A description of the ordered actions, including a statement that
the owner may repair, if feasible, or demolish or remove at his option; and
      (4)   A statement that the city will vacate, secure, remove or demolish
the building or relocate the occupants of the building if the ordered action is
not taken within the time allowed, and charge the cost to the property; and
      (5)   If the Commission has determined that the building will endanger
persons or property and that the building is a dwelling with ten or fewer
dwelling units, a statement that the city may repair the building and charge
the costs to the property if the ordered action is not taken within the time
allowed.
(Ord. 2011-07, passed 4-12-11; Am. Ord. 2017-10, passed 5-23-17)
§ 160.08  NOTICE OF ORDER OF THE COMMISSION.
   (A)   Order shall be mailed.  After the public hearing, the building
official shall promptly mail, by certified mail, return receipt requested, a
copy of the order to the record owner of the building, and each identified
lienholder and mortgagee of the building.
   (B)   Order shall be filed with City Secretary.  Within ten days after the
date that the order is issued by the Commission, the building official shall
file a copy of the order in the office of the City Secretary.
   (C)   Order shall be published.  Within ten days after the date the order is
issued by the Commission, the building official shall publish in a newspaper of
general circulation within the city a notice containing:
      (1)   The street address or legal description of the property;
      (2)   The date the hearing was held;
      (3)   A brief statement indicating the results of the order; and
      (4)   Instructions stating where a complete copy of the order may be
obtained.
   (D)   Filing of order or abstract.  The order may be filed in the official
public records of real property in Bell County. An abstract or judgment shall
be ordered against all parties found to be the owners of the subject property
or in possession of that property.
(Ord. 2011-07, passed 4-12-11)
§ 160.09  ENFORCEMENT OF THE ORDER OF THE COMMISSION.
   (A)   Compliance.  If an order of the Commission under this chapter is not
complied with, the city may take action. If the building is not vacated,
secured, repaired, removed or demolished within the time specified by the
order, the city may vacate, secure, repair, remove or demolish the building or
relocate the occupants at its own expense, provided however:
      (1)   The city may not act to remove or demolish a building until after
the Commission has found:
         (a)   That such defects or conditions exist to the extent that the
life, health, property or safety of the public or the occupants of the building
are endangered; and
         (b)   The building is infeasible of repair, or there is no reasonable
probability that the building will be repaired within a reasonable period of
time if additional time is given.
      (2)   The city may only repair a building as provided herein to the
extent necessary to correct the conditions which render the building dangerous,
and may not act to repair a building unless:
         (a)   The Commission has made a determination that the building is
likely to endanger person or property; and
         (b)   The building is a residential dwelling with ten or fewer
dwelling units.
      (3)   In the event there are mortgagors or lienholders, the city may only
repair, remove or demolish the building after allowing the lienholder or
mortgagee an additional 30 days after the time prescribed in the order has
expired to complete the required work.
      (4)   Unless specifically authorized by a court order or by a written
agreement signed by all record owners, mortgagees and lienholders, the city may
not act to remove or demolish a building during the pendency of any appeal to a
court of competent jurisdiction of the Commission’s order.
   (B)   Posting of notice to vacate building.  If the order requires vacation
or if compliance is not had within the time specified therein, the building
official is authorized to require that the building be vacated. Notice to
vacate shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested to the
occupant of the building and shall be posted at or upon each entrance to the
building. The notice shall be in substantially the following form:
   "SUBSTANDARD BUILDING
   DO NOT ENTER
   UNSAFE TO OCCUPY
   It is unlawful to occupy this building or to remove or deface this notice.
The Harker Heights Building and Standards Commission has declared this building
to be substandard. To obtain a copy of this order, contact the City Secretary
at 305 Miller's Crossing, Harker Heights, Texas, (254) 953-5600.
                                                     
                  Building Official
                  City of Harker Heights"
   (C)   Remedial action by city.  Any repair or demolition work, or securing
of the building shall be accomplished and the cost thereof paid and recovered
in the manner hereinafter provided. Any surplus realized from the sale of such
building, or from the demolition thereof, over and above the cost of demolition
and cleaning of the lot, shall be paid over to the person or persons lawfully
entitled thereto.
   (D)   Permit required.  Any work of closure, repair, removal or demolition
by the property owner or any lienholder or mortgagee or their agents must be
performed pursuant to valid unexpired permits issued by the city. All permits
issued pursuant to an order of the Commission shall expire upon expiration of
the time for compliance set forth in the order.
(Ord. 2011-07, passed 4-12-11; Am. Ord. 2012-02, passed 2-14-12)
§ 160.10  PERFORMANCE OF WORK BY THE CITY.
   (A)   Procedure.  When any work of repair, removal, demolition or securing
is to be performed by the city, the work may be accomplished by city personnel
or by private contract as may be deemed necessary. Rubble and debris shall be
removed from any premises and the lot cleaned if removal or demolition is
ordered. The building or building materials may be sold if removal or
demolition is ordered, and the proceeds shall be used to offset other costs of
the work.
   (B)   Costs.  The cost of such work shall be paid from city funds and shall
constitute a special  assessment and a lien against such property to secure
payment thereof together with 10% interest on such amount from the date on
which the work is performed.
   (C)   Repair to minimum standards only.  The city may repair the building at
its own expense and assess the expenses on the land on which the building
stands or is attached to only to the extent necessary to bring the building
into compliance with the minimum standards set forth in § 160.04.
(Ord. 2011-07, passed 4-12-11)
§ 160.11  RECOVERY OF COST OF SECURING, REPAIR, REMOVAL OR DEMOLITION.
   (A)   Itemized account and notice of lien.  The building official shall keep
an itemized account of the expenses incurred by the city in the securing,
repair, removal or demolition of any building pursuant to this chapter. Upon
completion of the work, the building official shall prepare and file with the
City Secretary a sworn account and notice of lien containing the following
information:
      (1)   The name and address of the owner if that information can be
determined with a reasonable effort;
      (2)   A legal description of the real property on which the building is
or was located;
      (3)   The type of work performed; and
      (4)   The amount of expenses incurred by the city in performing the work
and the balance due.
   (B)   Notice filed in county records.  The City Secretary shall file the
notice of lien along with a copy of the order of abatement issued by the
Commission in the official public records of Bell County.
   (C)   Personal obligation of property owner.  The expenses incurred by the
city as set forth in the sworn account of the building official shall be a
personal obligation of the property owner in addition to a priority lien upon
the property.
   (D)   Lien shall be valid and privileged.  Upon filing of the notice of lien
in the official public records of Bell County, Texas, the lien shall be valid
against the property so assessed. The lien shall be privileged and subordinate
only to tax liens and existing special assessment liens, and shall be paramount
to all other liens. The lien shall continue until the assessment and all
interest due and payable thereon has been paid.
   (E)   Assessment must be paid.  No utility service, building permit or
certificate of occupancy shall be allowed on any such property until the
assessment is paid and such lien is released by the city.
   (F)   Release of lien.  After the expenses incurred by the city, as set
forth in the sworn account of the building official, have been fully paid with
interest of 10% per annum from the date the work was performed, the building
official shall execute a release of lien which shall be filed in the official
public records of Bell County.
(Ord. 2011-07, passed 4-12-11)
§ 160.12  ADDITIONAL AUTHORITY TO SECURE CERTAIN SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS PRIOR TO
PUBLIC HEARING AND SECURE, DEMOLISH, REPAIR OR REMOVE CERTAIN DANGEROUS
BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Securing of unoccupied, substandard building.  Notwithstanding any
other provisions of this chapter the city may secure a building if the building
official determines that the building:
      (1)   Violates the minimum standards set forth in §
160.04; and
      (2)   Is unoccupied or is occupied only by persons who do not have the
right of possession to the building.
   (B)   If building creates immediate danger.  Notwithstanding any other
provisions of this chapter, if the Commission finds that a building is likely
to immediately endanger persons or property the Commission may:
      (1)   Order the owner of the building, the owner's agent, or the owner or
occupant of the property on which the structure is located to repair, remove,
or demolish the structure, or the dangerous part of the structure, within a
specified time; or
      (2)   Repair, remove, or demolish the structure, or the dangerous part of
the structure, at the expense of the municipality, on behalf of the owner of
the structure or the owner of the property on which the structure is located,
and assess the repair, removal, or demolition expenses on the property on which
the structure was located.
   (C)   Notice to owner.  Before the eleventh day after the date the building
is secured pursuant to division (A) above, or action is ordered pursuant to
division (B)(1) above, or the building is repaired, removed or demolished
pursuant to division (B)(2) above, the building official shall give notice to
the owner by:
      (1)   Personally serving the owner with written notice;
      (2)   Depositing the notice in the United States mail addressed to the
owner at the owner's post office address;
      (3)   Publishing the notice at least twice within a ten-day period in a
newspaper of general circulation in the county in which the building is
located, if personal service cannot be obtained and the owner's post office
address is unknown; or
      (4)   Posting the notice on or near the front door of the building if
personal service cannot be obtained and the owner's post office address is
unknown; and
      (5)   In addition to the above, depositing notice in the United States
mail to all lienholders and mortgagees who can be determined from a reasonable
search of instruments on file in the office of the County Clerk.
   (D)   Contents of notice.  The notice must contain:
      (1)   An identification (which is not required to be a legal description)
of the building and the property on which it is located;
      (2)   A description of the violation of the minimum standards present in
the building;
      (3)   A statement that the city will secure or has secured, as the case
may be, the building, or that the city has taken or will take the action
ordered pursuant to division (B); and
      (4)   An explanation of the owner's entitlement to request a hearing
about any matter relating to the city's securing, removing, demolishing or
repairing of the building.
   (E)   Hearing.  The Commission shall conduct a hearing at which the owner
may testify or present witnesses or written information about any matter
relating to the city's securing, repairing, removing or demolishing of the
building, if, within 30 days after the date the city has taken action pursuant
to divisions (B)(1) or (B)(2) of this section, the owner files with the city a
written request for the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted within 20 days
after the date the request is filed.
   (F)   Expenses.  If the city incurs expenses under this section, such
expenses incurred shall be a personal obligation of the property owner in
addition to a priority lien upon the property, and costs shall be recovered as
provided by §
160.10 and §
160.11.
(Ord. 2011-07, passed 4-12-11)
§ 160.13  VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Generally.  Except with the valid written permission of the building
official, it shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Erect, construct or maintain any building that is deemed herein to
be a nuisance;
      (2)   Use, occupy, enter, or remain in any building that is posted with a
notice to vacate;
      (3)   Remove, damage or deface a notice to vacate posted under this
chapter; or
      (4)   Cause or permit any act to be done in violation of any provision of
this chapter.
   (B)   Compliance with order.  It shall be unlawful for any person to whom an
order of the Commission is directed to fail to comply with such order.
   (C)   Interference prohibited.  It shall be unlawful for any person to
obstruct, impede or interfere with any officer, employee, contractor or
authorized representative of the city or with any person who owns or holds any
estate or interest in the building which has been ordered repaired, vacated,
demolished, removed or secured under the provisions of this chapter; or with
any person to whom such building has been lawfully sold pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter, whenever such officer, employee, contractor or
authorized representative of the city, person having an interest or estate in
such building, or purchaser is engaged in the work of repairing, vacating and
repairing, or demolishing, removing or securing any such building pursuant to
the provision of this chapter, or in performing any necessary act preliminary
to or incidental to such work or authorized or directed pursuant to this
chapter.
   (D)   Transfer of ownership.  No person may sell, transfer, mortgage, lease
or otherwise dispose of a building or property that is the subject of a notice
of substandard building, a citation, or an order of the Commission under this
chapter until:
      (1)   The deficiencies noted in the notice, citation or order have been
corrected and a new certificate of occupancy has been issued by the city; or
      (2)   The building official receives a signed and notarized statement
from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of
the notice, citation or order, and unconditionally accepting the responsibility
for timely correcting the deficiencies noted therein.
   (E)   Separate violations.  Each building or property which is in violation
of any part of this chapter is a separate offense. Each violation in any
building or property is a separate offense. Each and every day's violation
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
   (F)   Municipal court.  Proceedings under the jurisdiction of the municipal
court are not affected by proceedings of the Commission or civil penalties
under this chapter.
(Ord. 2011-07, passed 4-12-11)
§ 160.14  CIVIL PENALTY.
   (A)   Civil penalty authorized.  In addition to any other enforcement
authority provided for by law, and without regard to any criminal prosecution
or conviction under this chapter, the Commission may at an administrative
hearing assess a civil penalty by order against a property owner for failure to
comply with an order issued by the Commission pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   Showing required.  The civil penalty may be assessed if it is shown at
the administrative hearing that:
      (1)   The property owner was notified of the contents of the order issued
pursuant to §
160.07; and
      (2)   The property owner committed an act in violation of the order or
failed to take an action necessary for compliance with the order.
   (C)   Amount of penalty.  The civil penalty may be assessed in an amount not
to exceed $1,000 a day for each violation or, if the owner shows that the
property is the owner's lawful homestead, in an amount not to exceed $10 a day
for each violation.
   (D)   Notice of administrative hearing.  Not less than ten days prior to the
date on which the administrative hearing is set, the property owner shall be
sent a notice of the hearing by certified mail, return receipt requested. The
notice shall contain:
      (1)   A copy of the order issued by the Commission pursuant to §
160.07;
      (2)   A statement that the building official has determined that the
property owner committed an act in violation of that order, or failed to take
an action necessary for compliance with that order;
      (3)   A statement that at the administrative hearing the Commission may
assess a civil penalty not to exceed $1,000 a day for each violation or, if the
owner shows that the property is the owners' lawful homestead, in an amount not
to exceed $10 a day for each violation; and
      (4)   Notice of the time and place of the hearing.
   (E)   Copy of order filed with district clerk.  After the civil penalty is
assessed, the City Secretary shall file with the Bell County District Clerk a
certified copy of the order assessing the civil penalty stating the amount and
duration of the penalty.
   (F)   Enforcement.  The civil penalty may be enforced by the city in a suit
brought by the city in a court of competent jurisdiction for a final judgment
in accordance with the assessed penalty. A civil penalty under this division is
final and binding and constitutes prima facie evidence of the penalty in any
suit.
(Ord. 2011-07, passed 4-12-11)
§ 160.15  AUTHORITY NOT LIMITED.
   Notwithstanding all other provisions of this chapter, nothing herein shall
be deemed a limitation on the duty of the city to summarily order the
demolition of any building or structure where it is apparent that the immediate
demolition of such building or structure is necessary to the protection of
life, property or general welfare of the people in the city.
(Ord. 2011-07, passed 4-12-11)
§ 160.16  AUTHORITY OF CITY ATTORNEY.
   The City Attorney may without further authorization of the City Council
undertake the enforcement of this chapter by all legal means appropriate or
necessary, including but not limited to: enforcement in municipal court; filing
a notice of lis pendens in the official public records of Bell County; filing
of appropriate civil actions in courts of appropriate jurisdiction to seek
compliance with an order made under this chapter, to collect a civil penalty,
or recover costs as provided by this chapter; to appointment of a receiver as
provided by Local Government Code Chapter 214; and to defend the city from suit
if suit is taken to appeal any action of the city.
(Ord. 2011-07, passed 4-12-11)
CHAPTER 161:  MOBILITY 2030
Section
   
161.01   Section 1, Thoroughfare Plan
   
161.02   Section 2, Sidewalk Plan
§ 161.01  SECTION 1, THOROUGHFARE PLAN.
   The Thoroughfare Plan last revised May 20, 2014, is hereby adopted by
reference as though fully copied herein, and shall apply to all property under
the jurisdiction of the city.
(Ord. 2014-10, passed 5-27-14)
§ 161.02  SECTION 2, SIDEWALK PLAN.
   The Sidewalk Plan last revised October 27, 2015, is hereby adopted by
reference as though fully copied herein, and shall apply to all property under
the jurisdiction of the city.
(Ord. 2015-22, passed 10-27-15)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   ANNEXATIONS AND DE-ANNEXATIONS
      
II.   CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS
      
III.   FRANCHISES
      
IV.   REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS
      
V.   STREET NAME CHANGES
      
VI.   VACATIONS AND ABANDONMENTS
      
VII.   ZONING MAP CHANGES
      
VIII.   TAXES, WATER, SEWER AND OTHER RATES AND FEES
      
IX.   ENTERPRISE ZONES AND REINVESTMENT ZONES
      
X.   PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS
TABLE I:  ANNEXATIONS AND DE-ANNEXATIONS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
      3-
61-6  13- Annexing the following four tracts of land:
      61
        Tract 1:  Hogpen Road and the old Killeen-Nolanville Road, and running the full
          width of the road from the present east city limits.
        Tract 2:  A certain tract of land being situated in the south section of the
          Carlis Edwards tract, and being approximately one mile southwest of Nolanville.
          Tract 3:  A certain tract of land being situated in the east section of the
        Carlis Edwards tract, being bounded on the north by the Old Killeen-Nolanville
          Road on the east by a natural drain ditch.
          Tract 4:  A certain tract of land containing 265.7 acres of land described in
        the deed from Tom C. Simmonds and wife, Rebecca Simmonds, of record in Volume
          807, Page 267, Deed Records of Bell County, Texas, to P.R. Cox, Barney Sissom,
          and Sam Garth, Jr.
      4-  Annexing certain property adjoining the east city limits as described in Exhibit
63-3  8-  A, attached to Ordinance 63-3.
      63
      6-  Annexing certain land beginning at the most southerly southwest corner of the
63-4  11- original Town of Harker Heights, the intersection of the east right-of-way line
      63  of Ann Lane, with the north right-of-way line of Farm-to-Market Road #2410 for
          the southeast corner of this.
      8-  Annexing certain property being 100.93 acres of land, and beginning in the east
63-7  13- line of V.L. Evans' survey and the north fence of G.C. & S.F. Ry right-of-way.
      63
      1-  De-annexing certain property beginning at a stake in the north margin of FM
69-3  14- Highway 2410, said stake being the most southerly southeast corner of the City
      69  of Killeen Municipal Airport tract and the most westerly southwest corner of the
          city limits of Harker Heights.
      6-  De-annexing certain property beginning in the east line of V.L. Evans survey and
69-8  6-  the north fence of G.C. & S.F. Ry right-of-way.
      69
      12- Annexing certain property beginning at the point of intersection of the east
72-   12- line of the Robert Cunningham Survey, Abstract No. 158 and the south line of a
22-   72  71.31-acre tract owned by Robert T. Thornton, for the most westerly northwest
          corner of this.
      4-
72-34 17- Annexing the following four tracts of land:
      73
        Tract 1:  Beginning at the most northerly northwest corner of a 79.5-acre tract
          as described in Volume 783, page 523, Deed of Records of Bell County.
        Tract 2:  Beginning at a point in the west line of the Vincent Evans Survey,
          Abstract No. 288, and the north line of U.S. Highway #190.
          Tract 3:  Beginning at the point of intersection of the east line of the Robert
        Cunningham Survey, Abstract No. 158 and the south line of the J.A. Cox Survey,
          Abstract No. 189, for the northwest corner of this.
          Tract 4:  Beginning at the intersection of U.S. Highway 190 and Buffalo Road,
        generally east along the south boundary of the right-of-way of U.S. Highway 190,
          approximately 280 feet to a point on the westerly boundary of Plat #220.
      6-  Annexing a tract of land beginning at an iron pipe in the south line of U.S.
76-20 21- Highway 190 for the northeast corner of Block 11 of the referenced Stillforest
      76  Subdivision for the northeast corner of this.
      4-
79-4  24- Annexing the following two tracts of land:
      79
          Tract 1:  Beginning at a point in the west margin of E. Berry Survey, and the
        east margin of the Alijah Keith Survey, Abstract No. 497, said point in the
          south margin of the Old Killeen-Nolanville Road.
          Tract 2:  Beginning at a point in the south margin of the Old Killeen-Nolanville
        Road, said point being the northwest corner of a 0.87-acre tract and being a
          corner of the present city limits.
      5-  Annexing certain property beginning at an iron rod in the north line of the
84-06 8-  68.14-acre tract that bears N. 70° 32€ 19" W., 954.01 feet, and N. 70° 16€ 55"
      84  W., 439.71 feet from the northeast corner of the 68.14-acre tract for the
          northeast corner of this.
      8-  Annexing certain property beginning at an iron rod in the west margin of the Old
85-13 13- Nolanville-Comanche Gap Road (Warrior Trail) and the south line of the 51.5-acre
      85  tract for the southeast corner of this.
      1-  Annexing certain property beginning at the intersection of the north line of the
86-02 28- Fourth Tract and the west margin of FM No. 2410, for the northeast corner of
      86  this.
      8-  Annexing certain property beginning at a point in the north margin of FM Highway
86-07 12- 2410, and the east margin of Verna Lee Drive.
      86
      4-  Annexing a certain tract of land beginning at a spike in the west margin of
88-11 12- Cedar Knob Road that bears N. 24° 15' 00" E., 1383.70 feet from the southeast
      88  corner of the Magill 490.1-acre tract for the southeast corner of this.
      12- Annexing certain land as described in Exhibit A, attached to Ordinance 88-26,
88-26 27- and known as the Comanche Hills Utility District.
      88
      10- Annexing certain property beginning at an iron rod in the south line of the E.
92-25 22- Berry Survey, Abstract No. 117, for the northwest corner of the H.B. Littlefield
      92  Survey, Abstract No. 511, for the northwest corner of this.
      12- Annexing a certain tract of land beginning at a 3/8" iron road set for the
93-36 21- northeast corner of a 7.530-acre tract deeded to Federal Deposit Insurance
      93  Corporation, said corner being at the intersection of the west margin of
          Warriors Path Road and the south margin of Old Nolanville Road.
      1-  Annexing a certain tract of land beginning at a 3/8" iron rod in the east margin
94-04 11- of Verna Lee Boulevard that bears, N. 19° 11€ 28" E., 50 feet, from the north
      94  margin of FM No. 2410, for the most westerly southwest corner of this.
          8-27-96Annexing certain territory consisting of approximately 698.387 acres
SP:   96- within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city beginning at a point being
0p>   32  the northeast corner of said A.S. Ashley Survey, being the most easterly
          northeast corner of this.
      4-  Extending the corporate limits of the city to include land lying contiguous and
97-02 22- adjacent to the present city limits.
      97
          9-9-97An ordinance extending the corporate limits of the city to include land
          lying contiguous and adjacent to the present city limits; declaring said land to
SP:   97- be a part of the city; declaring said land and its inhabitants and any future
0p>   28  inhabitants of said land to be entitled to all the rights and privileges of
          other lands and citizens of the city and to be bound by the acts, ordinances,
          resolutions and regulations of said city; placing the land in a single family
          residence district, and establishing an effective date.
2004- 5-  An ordinance extending the corporate limits of the City of Harker Heights, Bell
18    25- County, Texas, to include 10.783 acres out of the H.B. Littlefield Survey,
      04  Abstract No. 511, Bell County, Texas; and zone such property R-1.
      8-  An ordinance extending the corporate limits of the City of Harker Heights, Bell
2004- 10- County, Texas, to include approximately 1,155 acres of land lying contiguous and
22    04  adjacent to the present city limits, providing an effective date, adopting a
          service plan, and zoning such property R-1.
2005- 1-  An ordinance extending the corporate limits of the City of Harker Heights, Bell
03    11- County, Texas to include 15.16 acres of land out of the W.J.C. Survey, Abstract
      05  No. 383, providing an effective date and temporarily zoning such property R-1.
          An ordinance extending the corporate limits of the City of Harker Heights, Bell
          County, Texas to include a 30.63 acre tract being further described as part of
2005- 11- the W.H. Russell Survey, Abstract No. 1049, the J.P. Survey, Abstract No. 148,
39    8-  and part of the Gideon Survey, Abstract No. 60, said tract as described in a
      05  deed from Harry L. Robards to Quantro, Inc., being of record in Volume 3488,
          Page 154 of the Official Public Records of Real Property of Bell County, Texas,
          temporarily zoning said property R-1, and providing an effective date.
2007- 3-  An ordinance conforming the Official Public Records of the city to reflect that
12    27- portion of the city’s extraterritorial jurisdiction described in the Final
      07  Judgment rendered in Bell County District Court Cause Number 205,209-B.
      2-  An ordinance extending the corporate limits of the City of Harker Heights, Bell
2009- 2-  County, Texas, to include approximately 746 acres of land lying contiguous and
05    09  adjacent to the present city limits, providing an effective date, adopting a
          service plan, and zoning such property R-1.
2009- 4-  An ordinance adopting an updated Land Use plan for the City of Harker Heights to
09    14- reflect the recent addition of the 2009 Annexation Area and to include various
      09  updates along FM 2410.
      7-  An ordinance extending the corporate limits of the City of Harker Heights, Bell
2009- 7-  County, Texas, to include approximately 96 acres of land lying contiguous and
19    09  adjacent to the present city limits, providing an effective date, adopting a
          service plan, and zoning such property R-1.
      1-  An ordinance extending the corporate limits of the City of Harker Heights, Bell
2011- 25- County, Texas, to include approximately 87.80 acres of land lying contiguous and
02    11  adjacent to the present city limits, providing an effective date, adopting a
          service plan, and zoning such property R-1 (One Family Dwelling District).
      1-  An ordinance extending the corporate limits of the City of Harker Heights, Bell
2016- 12- County, Texas, to include approximately 155.08 acres of land lying contiguous
1     16  and adjacent to the present city limits, providing an effective date, adopting a
          service plan, and zoning such property R-1 (One Family Dwelling District).
         
 
TABLE II:  CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
      9-  Authorizing an agreement with the State Department Public Welfare relative to
70-9  8-  Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance Benefits under the provisions of
      70  applicable state and federal laws.
      11- Authorizing an agreement between the state and the city for the installation,
78-36 14- construction, existence, use, operation, and maintenance of a highway signal
      78  project at the location shown on Exhibit 1, attached to Ordinance 78-36.
      9-  Authorizing an agreement among the city, the City of Nolanville, and Bell
86-08 9-  County Water Control and Improvement District No. 4 for the abolition of such
      86  district.
      4-
88-12 15- Authorizing a warranty agreement between the city and Heights Bank.
      88
      6-  Approving an agreement between the city and the state for the maintenance of
91-07 27- certain state highways and/or portions of state highways.
      91
      2-  Approving an agreement between the city and the state for the installation,
94-09 8-  construction, existence, use, operation, and maintenance of highway traffic
      94  signals/illumination at the locations shown on Exhibit 1, attached to Ordinance
          94-09.
      8-  An ordinance authorizing the execution of an interlocal agreement between the
97-22 2-  city and Dog Ridge Water Supply Corporation in connection with water service to
      97  certain homes within the Dog Ridge Certificate of Convenience and Necessity.
      8-  An ordinance authorizing the execution of a settlement between city and the
97-23 26- Central Texas Council of Governments in connection with the Lookout Ridge
      97  Apartments.
      2-  An ordinance authorizing the execution of an Agreement to Contribute Funds
98-3  10- between the city and the Texas Department of Transportation in connection with
      98  the Highway Project FM 2410 from US 190 to FM 3481.
      2-  An ordinance approving retail base rate reductions for Texas Utilities Electric
98-4  10- Company.
      98
      10- An ordinance granting a permit of conditional use to Tune & Lube Automotive
99-29 5-  Center in the B-4 (secondary and highway business district), on property
      99  located at 113 E. Central Texas Expressway, and described as lot 5A of block 1
          of the Cheyenne addition.
          An ordinance granting a permit of conditional use to Antique/Classic Auto Parts
      10- outside inventory display, auto wrecker impound lot, classic vehicle sales, and
99-35 12- display and new and used antique and classic product retail sales in the B-4
      99  (secondary and highway business district), B-5 (general business district), and
          R-1 (one family dwelling district), located at 1130 FM 2410.
2004- 4-  An ordinance authorizing a development agreement with Stillhouse Ridge, Inc.
14    27- relating to oversizing the water system in The Ridge Subdivision.
      04
2006- 1-  Authorizing a development agreement with Heights Evergreen Developers, Ltd.
01    10- relating to oversizing certain water and sewer system improvements in the
      06  Evergreens-Fawn Valley Subdivisions.
2006- 6-  Authorizing a development agreement with Donald Hubert and Craig Parker,
16    13- relating to oversizing certain storm drainage improvements in the Raceway
      06  Addition Phase 3-Cox Addition Subdivisions.
2007- 2-  Authorizing a development agreement with Heights Evergreen Developers, Ltd.,
07    13- relating to oversizing certain water and sewer system improvements in the
      07  Evergreens Subdivision.
2007- 2-  Authorizing a development agreement with Market Heights, Ltd., relating to
08    13- oversizing certain water and sewer system improvements in the Market Heights
      07  Development.
2008- 2-  Approving a settlement agreement between Atmos Energy Steering Committee and
02    12- Atmos Energy Corp. regarding gas rates.
      08
      3-  Authorizing a development agreement with Heights Evergreen Developers, Ltd.
2008- 25- relating to over sizing certain water system improvements in The Evergreens
07    08  Subdivision and a connecting line joining such improvements to the Cedar Knob
          Pump Station.
2009- 7-  Approving a negotiated resolution between the Atmos Cities Steering Committee
21    28- and Atmos Energy Corp., regarding the rate review.
      09
2010- 2-  Approving an interlocal cooperation and Rule 11 agreement between the cities of
04    16- Harker Heights, Belton, and Nolanville.
      10
2011- 4-  Authorizing a development agreement with WBW Development, Ltd. relating to over
09    19- sizing certain sanitary sewer and water system improvements in the Tuscany
      11  Meadows Phase I Subdivision.
2011- 5-  Approving a negotiated resolution between the steering committee and Oncor
12    24- Electric Delivery Company LLC regarding the company’s application to increase
      11  electric rates.
2011- 8-  Approving a negotiated resolution between the steering committee and Atmos
22    9-  Energy Corp., regarding the company’s fourth annual rate review mechanism
      11  filing.
      7-  Authorizing a Development Agreement with Heights Evergreen Developers, Ltd.
2012- 24- relating to oversizing certain water system improvements in The Evergreens
13    12  Subdivision and a connecting line joining such improvements to the Cedar Knob
          Pump Station.
          An ordinance approving the agreement dated April 09, 2013, between the State of
2013- 4-  Texas and the City of Harker Heights, for the maintenance, control,
10    9-  supervision, and regulation of certain state highways and/or portions of state
      13  highways in the City of Harker Heights; providing for the execution of said
          agreement.
2013- 10- An ordinance approving a negotiated resolution between the Atmos Cities
31    22- Steering Committee and Atmos Energy Corp., Mid-Tex Division regarding the
      13  company’s 2013 annual rate review.
2014- 9-  Authorizing a development agreement with 2410 Real Estate, LP relating to
15    9-  oversizing certain sidewalk improvements in the Hudson Heights Development.
      14
2015- 5-  An ordinance approving a negotiated settlement agreement between the Atmos
11    26- Cities Steering Committee and Atmos Energy Corp., Mid-Tex Division regarding
      15  the company’s 2014 and 2015 rate review.
2015- 7-  Authorizing a development agreement with 2410 Live Oak, LTD relating to the
14    28- oversizing of a 12-inch diameter water line.
      15
2017- 5-  Approving a negotiated settlement between the Atmos Cities Steering Committee
08    23- and Atmos Energy Corp., Mid-Tex Division regarding the company’s 2017 rate
      17  review mechanism filings.
2018- 4-  Authorizing a development agreement with WBW Land Investments, LP relating to
13    24- over sizing certain center left turn lane improvements on FM 3481 for the
      18  benefit of north bound traffic turning on Halona Drive.
      12- Authorizing a development agreement with Riley Scott Homes, L.L.C. dbs Riley
2018- 11- Scott Construction relating to over-sizing certain water line improvements
32    18  within Lot 2B, Block 1, in the amending plat of Lot 2R, Block 1, 2410 Live Oak
          addition.
         
 
TABLE III:  FRANCHISES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                 Authorizing a franchise agreement with the Mid-Texas Telephone
61-2    2-2-61   Company to continue to erect and maintain its poles, wires,
                 anchors, cables, manholes, conduits and other plant
                 construction and appurtenances for a 35-year period.
61-3    7-20-61  Granting an electric light, heat and power franchise to Texas
                 Power & Light Company until July 1, 2011.
                 Authorizing a franchise agreement with Mid-Texas Telephone
75-9    5-13-75  Company to continue to erect and maintain its poles, wires,
                 anchors, cables, manholes, conduits and other plant
                 construction and appurtenances for a 25-year period.
                 Granting a franchise to Lone Star Gas Company, a division of
87-37   12-22-87 Enserch Corporation to furnish and supply gas to the general
                 public for a term of 25 years.
                 Granting a franchise to KBC Corporation to erect, maintain,
91-02   2-14-91  and operate a community antenna television system to serve
                 residential home, multiple unit developments and commercial
                 businesses only for a term of 15 years.
91-03   4-11-91  Granting an electric light, heat and power franchise to
                 Bartlett Electric Cooperative, Inc., until August, 2011.
                 Amending the existing franchise between the city and Texas
93-14   7-13-93  Utilities Electric Company to provide for a different
                 consideration.
                 Approving the request of KBC Corporation to transfer the
95-09   3-28-95  franchise and the cable television system of the corporation
                 to Time Warner Entertainment Advance/ Newhouse Partnership.
2002-21 10-8-02  Amending the existing franchise between the city and TXU Gas
                 Company to provide for a different consideration.
                 Amending the existing franchise between the city and ONCOR
2002-22 10-8-02  Electric Delivery Company to provide for a different
                 consideration.
2003-13 9-23-03  Denying TXU Gas Company's request to change rates for the gas
                 utility system.
2005-19 7-12-05  Denying Atmos Energy Corp., Mid-Tex Division's request to
                 change rates for the gas utility system.
                 Denying Atmos Energy Corp., Mid-Tex Division's request for an
2005-41 11-8-05  annual Gas Reliability Infrastructure Program (GRIP) rate
                 increase.
2006-09 4-25-06  Amending existing franchise between Atmos Energy Corp., Mid-
                 Tex Division.
2007-11 3-13-07  Amending existing franchise between the city and TXU Electric
                 Delivery Company to provide for a different consideration.
2010-20 7-27-10  Amending existing franchise between the city and Atmos Energy
                 Corporation to provide for a different consideration.
                 Granting a franchise to Atmos Energy Corporation for
2013-28 9-24-13  transportation, delivery, sale, and distribution of gas via
                 pipeline and equipment
2014-04 2-25-14  Granting an electric light, heat, and power franchise to
                 Bartlett Electric Cooperative, Inc., until December 31, 2023.
                 Granting an electric power franchise to use the present and
2017-04 4-25-17  future streets and alleys, highways, public utility easements,
                 public ways and public property to Oncor Electric Delivery
                 Company LLC.
                
 
TABLE IV:  REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
95-13    5-23-95     Approving the sale of certain lands and the granting of
                     easements.
95-13(A) 5-23-95     Approving an exchange of land with the Retired Sergeant
                     Major Association.
97-18    8-12-97     Approving the purchase of approximately two acres of land
                     from James Dennis Magill.
2016-13  5-24-16     An ordinance conditionally authorizing waiver of nuisance
                     abatement liens against 416 Elbert Lane.
                    
 
TABLE V:  STREET NAME CHANGES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
      1-
89-02 24- Changing the name of the following streets:
      89
        Pawnee Trail to Pontotoc Trace.
        Apache Trace to Chiricahua Trace.
        Cherokee Drive to Apache Drive.
        Ridgeview Drive to Oakridge Boulevard.
        Maplewood Drive to Chinaberry Circle.
        Cedar Drive to Walnut Circle.
        Tejas Drive to Broken Arrow Drive.
        Tomahawk Trail to Kiamichi Trail.
        Osage Trail to Atoka Trace.
        Evergreen to Quail Hollow Road.
        Valley View to Hilltop Drive.
        Lakeview to Cliffview Drive.
        Cherokee Lane to Lakecliffe Drive.
        Shenandoah Valley Road to Fuller Lane.
        Pawnee Trail to Skipcha Drive.
      6-
89-09 27- Changing the name of the following streets:
      89
        Navajo Trail to Mescalero Trail.
        Navajo Trail to Quanah Trail.
        A certain undedicated street shall be known as Timberline Road.
        A certain dedicated street shall be known as V.F.W. Drive.
        U.S. Highway 190 to Central Texas Expressway.
        Loop 518 (Business Highway 190) to Veterans Memorial Boulevard.
      6-
91-06 13- Changing the name of the following streets:
      91
        Buffalo Drive to Indian Oaks Drive.
        East Amy Lane to Indian Oaks Drive.
        DeCordova Road to Pan American Drive.
        Stagecoach Line Road to Mountain Lion Road.
      2-
94-08 8-  Changing the name of Cross Timbers to Chablis Drive.
      94
      4-
97-05 22- Changing the name of Cedar Knob Road to Stillhouse Lake Drive.
      97
      10- Naming the portion of FM 2410 that begins at the  eastern edge and extends
99-31 12- 3,600 ft., more or less, to the northern boundary of the city park to
      99  Miller's Crossing.
      10- Naming the portion of US 190 frontage road and extending 300 ft., more or
99-32 12- less, to the northern boundary of the city park to Helm's Way.
      99
2005- 9-
30    13- Changing the name of Lathes Drive/Circle to Eagle Ridge.
      05
2017- 8-  Changing the name of the section of Cedar Knob Road, from the end of the
21    22- cul-de-sac centerline, for a distance of 1,174 linear feet to the first
      17  intersection centerline, to Cedar Knob Circle.
         
 
TABLE VI:  VACATIONS AND ABANDONMENT
 
Reference Date Passed Description
Ord.  8-  Abandoning Mockingbird Lane from the most westerly boundary of Meadow Acres First
No.   16- Extension to Harley Drive and Cardinal Lane from the most west boundary of Meadow
71-12 71  Acres First Extension to a line drawn between the eastern boundaries of Lot 21,
          Block 12, and Lot 6, Block 14, Meadow Acres First Extension.
Ord.  11- Abandoning Flendge Drive and Cecil Drive in Kern Valley First and Second
No.   21- Extensions.
72-19 72
Ord.  1-  Abandoning a portion of Mohawk Drive beginning at the northwest corner of Lot 1,
No.   13- Block 7, Meadow Acres, Second Extension.
76-3  76
Ord.  4-  Vacating and abandoning right-of-way easement and utility easement in Comanche
No.   13- Hills, Second Section, a subdivision to the city, and Diamondback, an addition to
76-10 76  the city.
Ord.  10- Abandoning an un-named street in Meadow Acres, Second Extension beginning at an
No.   19- iron pipe in the west line of Harley Drive being the northeast corner of Lot 1,
76-31 76  Block 9 of said subdivision.
Ord.  10- Abandoning any and all of that portion of Buffalo Drive that extends from the
No.   24- south margin of Indian Trail to the east margin of New Highway 190.
78-29 78
Ord.  1-  Abandoning a certain street beginning at the southwest corner of Lot 6, Block 1,
No.   8-  of the Collins Subdivision.
80-1  80
Ord.  9-  Abandoning any and all of the portion of Fullview Court that extends from the
No.   27- north margin of Dorothy Lane to the north property line of Block 4, Lot 2 and
83-09 83  Block 5, Lot 1, platted as Commanche Hills 2nd.
Ord.  9-  Abandoning any and all of the portion of Flendge Drive that extends between Block
No.   27- A, Lot 35 and Block B, Lot 1, South of Clore Road, in the subdivision platted as
83-10 83  Kern Valley 1st.
Ord.  2-  Abandoning any and all of the portion of Cox Drive that extends from the west
No.   26- margin of Block 10, Lot 34, to the east property line of Block 10, Lot 38 in the
85-05 85  subdivision platted as Valley View 3rd.
Ord.  5-  Abandoning any and all of the portion of a drainage easement that extends through
No.   26- Block 1, Lot 15 in the subdivision platted as Indian Trails Section II Replat.
87-19 87
Ord.  5-  Abandoning all alleyways in Wildewood Acres Subdivision, as platted on the final
No.   26- plat of record in Cabinet A, Slide 306-B, Plat Records of Bell County.
87-21 87
Ord.  11- Abandoning any and all of the portion of a certain street that extends between
No.   24- Lot 6, Block 1 and Lot 1, Block 8, North of Beeline Road, in the subdivision
87-35 87  platted as Cox Addition, 1st Extension.
Ord.  8-  Abandoning a utility easement in the McDowell Subdivision, described as part of
No.   12- Lot 1, Block 1, McGinnis Commercial Park, an addition to the city, recorded in
97-21 97  Cabinet C, Slide 17-D, Plat Records of Bell County.
Ord.  4-
No.   14- Abandoning Cecil Drive.
98-07 98
Ord.  7-
No.   28- Abandoning a portion of Triangle Road.
98-31 98
Ord.  11-
No.   14- Abandoning Cardinal Lane between Bluebird Drive and South Amy Lane.
2000- 00
36
Ord.  3-  Abandoning a portion of Frontier Trail right-of-way, an approximate 0.5-acre
No.   13- strip of land on the south side of Frontier Trail extending 498.81 feet from
2001- 01  Central Texas Expressway to the rear of Lot 13, Block 15, Country Trails
10        Addition, 6th Phase.
Ord.  7-  Abandoning a 20-foot portion of right-of-way adjacent to and parallel to the
No.   10- front property line of Lot 7, Block 7, Forest Hills Addition, located at 1607
2001- 01  South Ann Boulevard, (as described by Exhibit A), and retain it as a utility
21        easement.
Ord.  4-
No.   9-  Abandoning a 30-foot passage easement on Lot 28, Block 1, Hidden Valley Estates
2002- 02  (as shown by Exhibit A).
03
Ord.  7-
No.   9-  Releasing a utility easement between Lot 2, Block 36, Country Trails, Phase 14,
2002- 02  and Lot 3, Block 36, Country Trails, Phase 15.
11
Ord.  7-
No.   13- Release of a 60-foot right-of-way that intersects Shoshoni Trail, between Lot 1,
2004- 04  Block 25, Comanche Land 2nd Unit, and Lot 11, Block 24, Comanche Land 2nd Unit.
24
Ord.  10- Release of drainage easements on Lot 16, Block 1, of Tanglewood North subdivision
No.   12- except for a ten foot-strip along the north property line, which shall be
2004- 04  retained by the city as a drainage easement.
49
Ord.  4-
No.   12- Abandoning a 0.569 acre right-of-way adjoining Stagecoach Valley Ltd.
2005- 05
08
Ord.  5-
No.   24- Release of a utility easement on Lot 1A, Block 1, of the Wright Addition, as
2005- 05  described in Exhibit A.
15
Ord.  8-  Abandoning a 0.044 acre right-of-way along the north property line of Lot 7A,
No.   9-  Block 3, being an amending plat of Lots 7 & 8, Block 3, Heights Commercial
2005- 05  Subdivision, as described in Exhibit A.
23
Ord.  5-  Abandoning a ten-foot utility easement on 0.33 acres, part of the Gallatine
No.   9-  Survey, Abstract No. 363, being part of Lot 2, Block 1, McGinnis Commercial Park,
2006- 06  Phase III being a replat of all of Lot 2A, Block 1 of the replat of McGinnis
13        Commercial Park, Phase III.
Ord.  6-
No.   27- Abandoning a 0.027 acre sanitary sewer easement.
2006- 06
18
Ord.  7-
No.   11- Abandoning 0.114 acre of right-of-way along the east property lines of Lots 4 and
2006- 06  5, Block 2, Heights Commercial Subdivision.
22
Ord.  7-  Abandoning 0.109 acre (minus a 12-foot wide strip along the curb of Commercial
No.   11- Drive) of right-of-way along the north property line of Lot 1, Block 3, Heights
2006- 06  Commercial Subdivision.
26
Ord.  11-
No.   13- Release of a utility easement between Lots 20 and 21, Block 1, of the Hidden
2007- 07  Valley Estates, as described in “Exhibit A”.
31
Ord.  2-  Abandoning a 20-foot wide alley located along Lots 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 11, 12, 13, 14,
No.   26- and 15, Block 4, Kern Acres, Second Extension and retaining the property as a
2008- 08  utility easement.
03
Ord.  4-  Abandoning the street right-of-ways of Choctaw Trail, Navajo Circle, Seminole
No.   22- Circle, and East Cherokee Drive, west of Amy Lane, “Exhibit A,” and retaining the
2008- 08  said street right-of-ways as utility easements.
11
Ord.  7-  Abandoning the street right-of-ways of Choctaw Trail, Navajo Circle, Seminole
No.   22- Circle, and Cherokee Trail (east of Amy Lane), “Exhibit A,” and retaining the
2008- 08  said street right-of-ways as utility easements.
18
Ord.  9-
No.   23- Abandoning a 20-foot drainage, sewer and utility easement as described in
2008- 08  “Exhibit A”.
26
Ord.  1-
No.   27- Abandoning a 15-foot wide drainage easement lying between Lots 6 and 7 of
2009- 09  Mountain Lion Business Park as described in Exhibit “A”.
04
Ord.  8-  Abandoning a 5-foot wide utility easement located along the rear of Lots 7, 8, 9,
No.   4-  10 and 11 and along the rear and west side of Lot 12 of Kern Valley Extension
2009- 09  Two.
22
Ord.  2-
No.   9-  Abandoning a 15-foot wide utility easement running along the eastern portion of
2010- 10  Lot 3, Block 3, Evergreen Estates phase 1, Harker Heights, Bell County.
02
Ord.  5-
No.   11- Abandoning a detention area located in Evergreen Phase 1, Cabinet D, Slides 155 B
2010- 10  and C, being owned by the City of Harker Heights.
12
Ord.  7-
No.   13- Abandoning a 20-foot wide utility easement located along Lots 1, 2, and 5C of
2010- 10  Block A, Market Heights Addition.
18
Ord.  9-
No.   14- Abandoning 15-foot wide utility easement running along the eastern portion of Lot
2010- 10  1, Block 2, Evergreen Estates Phase 1.
25
Ord.  11-
No.   8-  Vacating a ten-foot wide utility easement located on Lot 5C of Block A, Market
2011- 11  Heights addition.
31
Ord.  1-
No.   8-  Abandoning a drainage and utility easement on Lots 80 and 81, Block 10, the Ridge
2013- 13  Phase 3 Addition.
01
Ord.  8-  Abandoning (vacating) 0.019 acre of right-of-way along the north property line of
No.   13- Lot 2, Block 3, Heights Commercial Subdivision, as described in Exhibit A of Ord.
2013- 13  2013-20.
20
Ord.  8-
No.   27- Abandoning six feet of a 20-foot wide utility easement located across Lot 24,
2013- 13  Block 1, Warriors Ridge Addition.
22
Ord.  11-
No.   18- Abandoning (vacating) 20 square feet of ten-foot wide utility easement located
2014- 14  across Lot 13, Block 17, County Trails Addition, 1909 Wolverine Trail.
27
Ord.  3-  Abandoning (vacating) 0.025 acres of a 15-foot wide utility easement located
No.   10- across Lot 1, Block 11, Evergreen Phase 1 (2506 Leatherwood Drive) and further
2015- 15  described in “Exhibit A".
05
Ord.  4-
No.   28- Abandoning a 20-foot wide utility easement located on Lots 12,13 and 14 of Block
2015- 15  8, Comanche Land First Unit, as described in Exhibit "A".
08
Ord.  4-  Abandoning (vacating) 15 feet (0.045 acres) of a 20-foot wide utility easement
No.   28- located across the south line of Lot 1, Block 5, Sun Meadow Subdivision, Phase 1
2015- 15  (606 Sun Meadows Drive).
09
Ord.  10-
No.   27- Conditionally authorizing waiver of nuisance abatement liens against 208 W. Robin
2015- 15  Ln.
21
Ord.  1-  Abandoning (vacating) two feet (0.005 acres) of a 15-foot wide utility easement
No.   10- located across Lot 11, Block 3, Evergreen Phase 5 (1609 Gold Splash Trail) and
2017- 17  further described in “Exhibit A”.
01
Ord.  5-  Abandoning (vacating) a ten-foot wide utility easement located across Lot 1A,
No.   9-  Block 1, Bass Subdivision, Phase 2 (1200 FM 2410) and further described in
2017- 17  “Exhibit A”.
05
Ord.  5-  Abandoning (vacating) a 7.5-foot wide utility easement located across Lot 11,
No.   9-  Block 9, the Ridge Phase 3 Subdivision (1920 River Rock Trail) and further
2017- 17  described in “Exhibit A”.
06
Ord.  5-
No.   8-  Abandoning (vacating) 5 feet of a 15 foot wide utility easement located across
2018- 18  Lot 16, Block 1, Evergreen, Phase 1 and further described in Exhibit A.
16
Ord.  2-
No.   26- Abandon (vacate) a portion of the commercial drive public right-of-way (0.012
2019- 19  acres) located on the replat of the Colgate Addition.
05
Ord.  3-
No.   10- Abandoning (vacating) a 5.811 tract out of the A.H. Wood Survey, Abstract No. 886
2020- 20  and further described in Exhibit A.
03
         
 
TABLE VII:  ZONING MAP CHANGES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
      8-9-  Rezoning a parcel of land beginning at an iron pipe that bears S. 20° 00 18" W.,
77-14 77    75.54 feet and N. 76° 52 18" W., 29.63 feet from the northwest corner of the 1.36-
            acre tract from B-2 to L-1.
77-15 9-13- Rezoning the following parcels of land as indicated:
      77
          Lot 1, Block 11; Lot 21, Block 12; and Lot 1, Block 14, Tanglewood North, Fourth
            Unit from R-1 to RT-1.
          Lot 2, Block 11; Lot 3, Block 14; and Lot 23, Block 12, Tanglewood North, Fourth
            Unit, from R-1 to R-2.
          Lot 22, Block 12; Lots 18 through 20, Block 12; Lots 1 through 12, Block 13; and
            Lot 2, Block 14, Tanglewood North, Fourth Unit from R-1 to R-3.
77-16 9-13- Rezoning Lots 25 and 26, Block 8, Meadow Acres, First Extension from R-1 to R-3.
      77
77-19 10-   Rezoning Lot 24, Block 8, Meadow Acres, First Extension from R-1 to R-3.
      25-77
78-3  1-10- Rezoning Lot 1, Block 1, Kern Acres, First Extension, from R-1M to R-2.
      78
78-4  1-10- Rezoning Lot 13 and 14, Block E, Kern Valley, Second Extension from R-1M to R-2.
      78
      3-28- Rezoning a parcel of land beginning at an iron pipe at the intersection of the
78-11 78    north margin of FM Highway 2410, with the west margin of the Robert P. Harvey
            Tract, Vol. 626, page 363, Deed of Records of Bell County from R-1 to B-5.
78-12 3-28- Rezoning Lots 1 through 5, Block 1, Bee Hive Addition from R-1 to R-3.
      78
78-13 3-28- Rezoning Lot 6, Block 1, Bee Hive Addition from R-1 to B-2.
      78
78-17 5-23- Rezoning Lots 33, 34 and 35, Meadow Acres Retreat from R-1 to B-2.
      78
78-21 8-22- Rezoning Lots 2 and 3, Block 3, Cox Addition, First Extension from R-1 to B-3.
      78
            Rezoning a parcel of land beginning at an iron pipe in the west margin of Indian
78-28 10-   Trail that bear S. 68° 47 10" E., 526.3 feet; S. 01° 33 03" E., 55.29 feet and S.
      10-78 15° 12 05" E., 159.70 feet from the northwest corner of the 200-acre tract from R-
            1 and B-2 to B-4.
78-34 10-   Rezoning Lots 4 through 8 and Lots 11 through 13, Block 4, Kern Acres, Second
      24-78 Extension and Revision from R-1 to B-5.
      9-12- Rezoning a parcel of land beginning at a point in the north margin of U.S. Highway
78-41 78    190 (Business Route), which bears N. 75° 33 30" W., 65 feet and N. 15° 42 20" E.,
            55 feet from the southeast corner of a 0.981-acre tract from L-2 to L-1.
78-42 10-   Rezoning Lot 1, Block 14, Tanglewood North, Fourth Unit, First Section, from RT-
      24-78 1 to R-3.
      11-   Rezoning a parcel of land, being 1344 square feet out of the J.J. Tomlinson Survey,
78-43 14-78 Abstract #831 and an additional 640 square feet to the west of the present building
            from B-3 to RC-2.
            Rezoning a parcel of land beginning at the corner of a masonry wall which bears S.
79-2  2-13- 78° 31 10" E., 129.80 feet, S. 75° 33 30" E., 103.40 feet, and N. 14° 26 30" E., 45
      79    feet from the intersection of the north margin of Business Highway 190 and the west
            margin of the V.L. Evans Survey from B-4 to L-4.
79-3  2-13- Rezoning Lot 10, Block 3, Kern Terrace, First Addition from R-2 to R-3.
      79
      4-10- Rezoning a parcel of land beginning at a point in a masonry wall which bears S. 71°
79-13 79    03 20" E., 262.37 feet and S. 18° 56 40" W., 170.21 feet from the northeast corner
            of that certain 2.36-acre tract conveyed to Odell Geer from B-4 to RC-1.
            Rezoning a parcel of land beginning at a corner of a masonry wall which bears S.
79-14 4-24- 71° 03 20" E., 337.45 feet and S. 18° 56 40" W., 168.76 feet from the northeast
      79    corner of that certain 2.36-acre tract here- to-fore conveyed to Odell Geer from B-
            4 to RC-2.
79-15 7-10- Rezoning Lot 13, Block 1, Kern Acres, First Extension, from R-1 to R-3.
      79
79-16 7-10- Rezoning Lots 1, 2, 3 and 4, Block 5, Kern Acres, First Extension from R-1 to R-3.
      79
      11-   Rezoning a parcel of land beginning at an iron pipe at the southwest corner of a
79-17 13-79 tract of land situated in the county and being out of and a part of the S.H. Osborn
            Survey, Abstract 646 from R-MH to R-4.
      11-   Rezoning a parcel of land beginning at an iron pipe at the southwest corner of a
79-18 13-79 tract of land situated in the county and being out of and a part of the S.H. Osborn
            Survey, Abstract 646 from R-MH to B-4.
      11-   Rezoning a parcel of land beginning at the corner of a masonry building which bears
79-19 13-79 N. 70° 36 00" W., 447.70 feet and N. 17° 22 00" E., 81.08 feet from the southeast
            corner of the 50-acre tract from L-2 to L-4.
86-08 8-26- Zoning Blocks 1, 2, and 3, Heights Commercial Subdivision as B-5.
      86
86-09 8-26- Rezoning a parcel of land, being the 600 Block of East Central Texas Expressway
      86    from B-4 to L.
87-02 1-13- Zoning a parcel of land, being the 300 Block of East Central Texas Expressway as B-
      87    4.
87-03 1-13- Rezoning a parcel of land being 590 East Central Texas Expressway from B-4 to RC.
      87
87-04 1-27- Rezoning a parcel of land being the 400 Block of East Buffalo Trail from R-1 to R-
      87    3.
87-07 2-10- Zoning a parcel of land being the 400 Block of East Central Texas Expressway as B-
      87    4.
87-17 5-12- Rezoning a parcel of land being 1505 E. Business Highway 190 from B-4 to B-5.
      87
87-18 5-12- Rezoning a parcel of land being 500 through 800 East FM 2410 from R-1 to B-4.
      87
87-24 7-14- Rezoning a parcel of land being 217 West Business Highway 190 from B-4 to RC.
      87
      8-22- Establishing the permanent zoning of the newly annexed areas known as “The 934
89-12 89    Acres”, annexed on April 12, 1988, and “Comanche Hills Utility District”, annexed
            on December 27, 1988.
            Rezoning a parcel of land beginning at an iron rod in the south margin of Business
91-14 12-   Highway 190 (Veteran's Memorial Boulevard), that bears N. 58° 14 08" W., 156.80
      12-91 feet from the intersection of the south margin with the west margin of Lookout
            Ridge Boulevard from R-1, B-3 and B-4 to M-1.
91-15 12-   Rezoning Lot 18, Block 9, Wildewood Acres from R-1 to R1-M.
      12-91
            Rezoning a parcel of land beginning at an iron rod at the intersection of the north
92-03 3-12- margin of Valley Road and the west margin of N. Ann Boulevard, the iron road bears
      92    N. 70° 36 00" W., 40 feet and N. 19° 24 00" E., 461 feet from the southeast corner
            of the 50-acre tract from R-1 to R1-M.
      3-12- Rezoning a parcel of land beginning at a point which bears S. 70° 36 E., 76.5 feet
92-04 92    and N. 19° 24" E. 50 feet from the northwest corner of the Horton one-acre tract an
            iron stake for the southwest corner from R-3 to R1-M.
92-07 4-23- Rezoning the following two parcels of land:
      92
            (1) Beginning at a point that bears S. 16° 43 26" W., 794.56 feet; S. 73° 17 24"
          E., 208.16 feet and S. 16° 42 36" W., 208.12 feet from the northwest corner from R-
            1 to B-3.
          (2) Beginning at a point No. 19 E. 951.2 feet from the southwest corner of the 200-
            acre tract for the southwest corner from R-1 to B-3.
92-09 5-14- Rezoning a parcel of land beginning at the southeast corner of Comanche Land, First
      92    Unit, the point being the northeast corner from B-2 to R-1.
92-10 7-16- Rezoning a parcel of land beginning at an iron rod in the south margin of Edwards
      92    Drive, for the northwest corner of Tract III from B-4 and R-1 to M-1.
      8-13- Rezoning a parcel of land beginning at the northwest corner of a proposed building,
92-11 92    from which the southwest corner of Lot 10 bears N. 78° 13 minutes W., a distance of
            25 feet and S. 11° 47 minutes W., a distance of 5.1 feet from M-1 to T.
92-12 8-13- Rezoning Lot 4, Block 2 Valley View from R-1M to R-2.
      92
      8-13- Rezoning an area 300 deep along and parallel to the north margin of Central Texas
92-13 92    Expressway (U.S. Highway 190) from the western city limits, eastward approximately
            2,800 feet from R-1 to B-4.
92-20 10-6- Rezoning a parcel of land being 706-E. Edwards Drive as follows: Front 800 square
      92    feet from B-4 to B-4 and L-1; and rear 1220 square feet from B-4 to B-4 and R/C.
92-21 10-6- Rezoning a parcel of land beginning at an iron pipe at the intersection of the east
      92    line of Aztec Trace with the south line of Mohican Trail from R-1 to R-1M.
      10-6- Rezoning a parcel of land beginning at an iron pipe in the south margin of Old
92-22 92    Nolanville Road, being the northwest corner of Lot 9, Block 5, Sun Meadows
            Subdivision, Phase One from B-4 to R-1.
92-23 10-6- Rezoning Lots 9 and 10, Block 12, Comanche Land I (1418 Tejas Trail) from R-1 to R-
      9     1M.
92-27 11-   Rezoning 900 and 902 Ashwood from R-1 to R-1M.
      12-92
92-28 11-   Rezoning 920 Ramblewood from R-1 to R-1M.
      12-92
92-29 11-   Rezoning a parcel of land beginning at an iron pipe found in the south margin of
      12-92 Waco Trace, a road easement from R-1 to R-1M.
92-30 11-   Rezoning Lots 7 and 8, Block 1, Skipcha V from B-4 to R-1.
      12-92
92-33 12-   Rezoning 402 Nolan Trail from R-1 to R-1M.
      10-92
92-34 12-   Rezoning 420 Elbert from R-1 to R-1M.
      10-92
            Rezoning a parcel of land beginning at an iron rod found at the southeast corner of
93-01 1-14- the Hamilton Tract, the iron road being in the north margin of U.S. Highway 190
      93    (Business Route), and the west margin of North Ann Boulevard from B-4 and L-1 to B-
            4 and T.
93-07 4-22- Rezoning 922 Lemonwood from R-1 to R-1M.
      93
93-08 5-13- Rezoning 1715 and 1713 Dakota Trace from R-1 to R-1M.
      93
93-11 6-8-  Rezoning 902 Ramblewood from R-1 to R-1M.
      93
93-12 6-8-  Rezoning 229 Indian Trail from B-1 to B-2.
      93
      8-10- Rezoning a parcel of land beginning at the intersection of the east margin of Rocky
93-15 93    Hill and the north margin of Cherokee Lane being the southwest corner of the Krenek
            tract from R-1 to R-1M.
93-16 8-10- Rezoning 4010 Quail Hollow from R-1 to R-1M.
      93
93-17 8-10- Rezoning 1511 and 1509 Maya Trail from R-1 to R-1M.
      93
93-19 8-6-  Rezoning a parcel of land beginning at an iron pipe being the northeast corner of
      93    Collins Subdivision, Lot 6 from B-4 to B-4 and T.
93-20 8-10- Rezoning Lot 45, Block 1, Thoroughbred Estates, from B-4 to R-1.
      93
93-26 10-   Rezoning 1607 Dalpta Trace from R-1 to R-2.
      12-93
93-27 10-   Rezoning 110 E. Ball from R-1 to R-1M.
      12-93
93-28 10-   Rezoning 114 E. Turnbo from R-1 to R-1M.
      12-93
93-29 11-   Rezoning 1300, 1302, 1304, 1306, 1308, 1310, and 1400 Chiricahua from R-1 to R-1M.
      10-93
93-30 11-   Rezoning 1509, 1513, 1515, 1517, 1519, 1521, 1523, and 1525 Shoshoni from R- MH to
      10-93 B-5.
93-33 12-   Rezoning 305 E. Cardinal from R-1 to R-1M.
      14-93
93-34 12-   Rezoning 1503 and 1505 Mohican Trail and 1515, 1517, and 1519 Maya Trail from B-
      14-93 2 to R-1M.
93-35 12-   Rezoning 1705, 1707, 1709, and 1711 Dakota from R-1 to R-2.
      14-93
94-01 1-11- Rezoning 103 Bob White Lane from B-4 to R-1.
      94
94-02 1-11- Rezoning 105 Ball Road from R-1 to R-1M.
      94
94-03 1-11- Rezoning 1802 and 1804 Indian Trail from B-2 to R-2.
      94
94-11 3-8-  Rezoning 1605 Pima from R-1 to R-2.
      94
94-12 3-8-  Rezoning 107 Dove Lane from R-2 to R-3.
      94
      3-8-  Rezoning a parcel of land beginning at a point which bears N. 71° 34 40" W., 58
94-13 94    feet and N. 18° 25 20" E., 50 feet from the southeast corner of the 0.976-acre
            tract from B-4 to B-4 and T.
94-15 5-10- Rezoning the following three tracts of land from R-1 to B-3:
      94
          Tract 1:  Beginning at an iron stake which bears N. 19° E. 1367.91 feet from the
            southwest corner of the above 200-acre tract.
            Tract 2:  Beginning at an iron stake which bears N. 19° E. 1159.20 feet from the
          southwest corner of the above 200-acre tract, set for the northwest corner of a
            one-acre tract, for the southwest corner, and beginning point.
            Tract 3:  Beginning at an iron rod in the north margin of DeCordova Road, that
          bears N. 20° 44 08" W., 121.20 feet N. 15° 09 20" W., 97.97 feet and S. 55° 25 31"
            W., 567.81 feet from the southeast corner of the 10.85-acre tract, for the
            northeast corner.
94-16 5-10- Rezoning 1910 Zuni Trace from R-1 to R-2.
      94
94-18 5-24- Rezoning 1601 Dakota Trace from R-1 to R-2.
      94
94-22 6-14- Rezoning 217, 219, and 221 E. Cardinal from R-1 to R-1M.
      94
94-23 6-14- Rezoning 511 Bee Line from B-2 to B-3.
      94
94-25 7-12- Rezoning 1402 and 1404 Hopi from R-1 to R-1M.
      94
94-26 7-12- Rezoning 1402 Tejas from R-1 to R-1M.
      94
94-29 8-9-  Rezoning 1406, 1408, and 1410 Pima from R-1 to R-2.
      94
94-30 8-9-  Rezoning 408 E. Cardinal from R-1 to R-1M.
      94
94-32 8-9-  Rezoning 1801, 1803, and 1805 Yuron, and 1802, 1804, and 1806 Seminole from R-1 to
      94    R-1M.
94-33 8-9-  Rezoning 627 Indian Trail from R-1 to B-5.
      94
94-37 9-13- Rezoning 1280 E. FM 2410 from R-1 to B-4.
      94
            Rezoning a parcel of land beginning at a spike found in concrete in the south
94-44 10-   margin of U.S. Highway 190 (Business), and being the northeast corner of that
      11-94 certain 1-acre tract of land described in a deed from E.M. Collins to James McBride
            from B-4 to R-MH.
94-45 10-   Rezoning 1700 Aztec from R-1 to R-2.
      11-94
94-50 11-8- Rezoning 1005 South Ann Boulevard from B-3 to B-3 and L-1.
      94
      12-   Granting a permit to allow the rezoning of a parcel of land being N. 167 of Lot 3,
94-55 13-94 Block 6, Valley View, 1st Extension, locally known as being part of 503 N. Ann
            Boulevard from R-1 to B-5 until December 13, 1995.
      12-   Granting a permit to allow the rezoning of a parcel of land being N. 167 of Lot 3,
94-56 13-94 Block 6, Valley View, 1st Extension, locally known as being part of 503 N. Ann
            Boulevard from R-1 to M-2 until December 13, 1995.
95-02 2-14- Rezoning 1402 and 1404 Pima Trail from R-1 to R-1M.
      95
95-03 2-14- Rezoning 209 and 211 Clore Road from B-4 to R-1M.
      95
95-07 3-14- Rezoning 1505 E. Veterans Memorial Boulevard from B-5 to B-5 and T.
      95
95-08 3-14- Granting a permit to allow the rezoning of a 960 square-foot addition to an
      95    existing building from B-4 to T.
95-10 4-11- Amending Ord. 89-12, by rezoning Lot 3, and a portion of Lots 2, 4, 16, and 17,
      95    Block 42, Comanche Land from R-1 to R-1M.
95-11 4-11- Rezoning 501 North Roy Reynolds from M-1 to R-1M.
      95
      5-23- Rezoning Lots 1 through 5 and Lots 12 through 16 Block 4 Comanche Land 1st Unit
95-14 95    (1402, 1404, 1406, 1408, and 1410 Yuma Trail and 1403, 1405, 1407, 1409, and 1411
            Pima Trail from R-1 to R-3.
95-15 5-23- Rezoning Lots 11 through 19 Block 5 Comanche Land 1st Unit (1524 Indian Tri and
      95    1501, 1503, 1505, 1507, 1509, 1511, 1513, and 1515 Dakota Trace from R-1 to R-2.
95-16 5-23- Rezoning certain real estate, known as the Herbert Addition, from R-2 to R-1M.
      95
95-18 5-23- Rezoning Lots 2 and 3 Block 15 Comanche Land 2nd Unit (1302 and 1304 Chiricahua
      95    Trace) from R-1M to R-2.
95-21 6-13- Rezoning Lot 1 Block 1, H.E.B. Addition from B-3 to B-3 and L-1.
      95
95-25 7-13- Rezoning Lots 1, 2, and 3 Block 4, Kern Terrace 2nd (502, 504, and 506 W. Nolan
      95    Trail) from R-1 to R-1M.
95-26 7-13- Rezoning Lots 28 through 37 Block 1, Cox Addition (401, 403, 405, 407, 409, 411,
      95    413, 415, 417, and 419 E. Cardinal) from R-1 to R-1M.
95-29 8-8-  Rezoning Lot 26 Block 1 Cox Addition (307 E. Cardinal) from R-1 to R-1M.
      95
95-30 8-8-  Rezoning 200 E. Veterans Memorial Blvd. from B-5 to B-5 and RC.
      95
            Rezoning Lots 1 through 8 Block 2 Kern Terrace 2nd, Lot 11 Block 2 Kern Terrace
95-33 9-12- 2nd, Lots 1 through 5 Block 3 Kern Terrace 2nd, Lots 10 through 14 Block 3 Kern
      95    Terrace 2nd, Lots 4 through 16 Block 4 Kern Terrace 2nd, Lot 4 Block 5 Kern Terrace
            2nd from R-1 to R-1M.
95-34 9-12- Rezoning Lots 8 and 9 Block 3 Kern Terrace 2nd Ext (214 and 216 W. Jamie) from R-
      95    1 to R-1M.
95-35 9-12- Rezoning Lots 19 and 20 Block 2 Cox Addition (238 and 240 E. Cardinal Lane) from R-
      95    1 to R-1M.
95-36 9-12- Rezoning Lot 12 Block 4 Cox Addition (308 Elbert Lane) from R-1 to R-1M.
      95
95-42 10-   Rezoning Lot 15 Block 1 Cox Addition (229 E. Cardinal) from R-1 to R-1M.
      10-95
95-43 10-   Rezoning certain real estate from R-1 to R-1M.
      10-95
95-44 10-   Rezoning Lots 34 and 35 Block 1 Meadow Acres Retreat (117 and 119 E. Bee Line) from
      10-95 R-1 to R-1M.
95-47 11-   Rezoning Lots 9 and 10 Block 2 Kern Terrace 2nd Ext. (223 and 225 W. Jamie Road)
      14-95 from R-1 to R-1M.
95-48 11-   Rezoning Lots 8, 9, 14, 15 Block 9 Comanche Land 1st Unit (1611, 1613 Dakota Trace
      14-95 and 1616, 1618 Indian Trail) from R-1 to R-2.
95-49 11-   Rezoning certain real estate from R-1 to B-4 and M-1.
      14-95
95-51 12-   Rezoning Lots 1 through 7 Block 24, Comanche Land 2nd Unit (1500, 1502, 1504, 1506,
      12-95 1508, 1510, and 1512 Shoshoni) from R-1 to R-1M.
95-52 12-   Rezoning certain real estate from B-5 to B-5 and T.
      12-95
96-1  1-9-  Rezoning Lots 9 and 10 Block 19, Comanche Land 2nd Unit (1912 and 1914 Dakota
      96    Trace) from R-1 to R-1M.
96-2  1-9-  Rezoning 1801 Indian Trail from R-1 to R-1M.
      96
96-3  1-9-  Rezoning 601 E. FM 2410 from R-1 to B-4.
      96
96-4  1-9-  Rezoning from 601 E. Veterans Memorial Blvd. from B-4 and RC to B-4 and T.
      96
96-6  2-13- Rezoning Lots 5 through 6, Block 2 Cox Addition (210 and 212 E. Cardinal Lane) from
      96    R-1 to R-1M.
96-7  2-13- Rezoning Lots 9 through 16 Block 15 Land 2nd Unit (1800 and 1802 Chiricahua and
      96    1408, 1410, 1412, 1414, 1416, and 1418 Mohican Trail) from R-1 to R-1M.
96-8  2-13- Rezoning Lots 5 and 6 Block 1, Cox Addition (209 and 211 E. Cardinal Lane) from R-
      96    1 to R-1M.
      2-13- Rezoning Lots 1 through 6 and Lots 19 through 22, Block 17, Comanche Land 2nd Unit
96-9  96    (1409, 1411, 1413, 1415, 1417, and 1419 Mohican Trail and 1501, 1503, 1505, and
            1507 Maya Trail) from R-1 to R-1M.
96-10 2-13- Rezoning Lot 1 Block 33 County Trails 10th Phase (201 Pioneer Trail) R-1 to B-3.
      96
96-14 3-12- Rezoning Lots 10, 11 and 12, Block 25, Comanche 2nd Unit (2206, 2208 and 2300
      96    Indian Trail) from B-3 to B-4.
96-18 4-9-  Rezoning Lots 3, 4 and 5, Block 18, Comanche 2nd Unit (1900, 1902 and 1904 Zuni
      96    Trace) from R-1 to R-2.
96-19 5-7-  Rezoning Lots 1 through 6, Block 3, Comanche 2nd Unit (1402, 1404, 1406, 1408 and
      96    1410 Osage and 1502 Dakota Trace) from R-1 to R-1M.
96-21 5-14- Rezoning 520 Pan American Drive from B-4 to B-4 and RC.
      96
96-28 6-11- Allowing sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages at 575 Pan American Drive, a
      96    special condition under its zoning of B-3.
96-29 6-11- Rezoning a 1600 square foot suite located at 706-D Edwards Drive from B-4 to B-
      96    4 and RC.
96-30 6-11- Rezoning Lots 23, 24 and 25, Block 2 Cox Addition (302, 304, and 306 E. Cardinal
      96    Lane) from R-1 to R-1M.
            Zoning 698.387 acres, part of the Elizabeth Dawson Survey, Abstract No. 258, the
96-32 8-27- A.S. Ashley Survey, Abstract No. 47, the L.D. Odell Survey, Abstract No. 644, the
      96    J.T.W. Hallmark Survey, Abstract No. 413, and the Albert Gallatin Survey, Abstract
            No. 363 as R-1.
96-33 7-9-  Rezoning 4.148 acres, part of the H.B. Littlefield Survey Abst No. 511 (1801
      96    Pontotoc) from R-1 to R-3.
96-35 7-9-  Rezoning parcels of land as described in Exhibit A and B attached to Ordinance No.
      96    96-35, passed 7-9-96, from R-1 to R-1M.
96-43 8-13- Rezoning 1709 Pontotoc from RHM to R-1.
      96
96-44 8-13- Rezoning the corner of FM 2410 and Verna Lee Blvd. from R-1 to B-3.
      96
96-45 8-13- Rezoning the 400 block of FM 2410 from R-1 to B-3.
      96
      8-13- Rezoning a 2,400 square foot addition located on 1.003 acre tract out of the
96-46 96    Francis Hughes Survey Abstract No. 396 (1509 East Veterans Memorial Blvd.) from B-
            4 to T.
96-48 8-27- Rezoning a 33,456 square feet out of 2.500 acres part of the D.J. Keiger Survey
      96    Abstract No. 491 (702 East Central Texas Expressway) from B-4 to B-4 and RC.
96-49 9-10- Rezoning Lots 4 and 5 Block 1, J.G. Rodriguez Subdivision (205 and 207 Clore Road)
      96    from R-1 to R-1M.
96-55 10-8- Rezoning Lots 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12, Block 5, Wildewood Acres (913, 915, 917, 919,
      96    921 and 923 Rosewood).
96-56 10-8- Rezoning Lots 9 and 10, Block 2, Cox Addition (218 and 220 Cardinal Lane), from R-
      96    1 to R-1M.
96-58 11-   Rezoning 2.68 acres, part of the J.T.W.J. Hallmark Survey, Abstract 413, Volume
      26-96 472, Page 499 (900 Block of East FM 2410) from R-1 to B-3.
96-59 1-28- Rezoning 15.578 acres, part of the P.H. Bailey Survey, Abstract 145 (800 Block of
      97    FM 2410) from R-1 to B-3.
97-01 2-11- Rezoning 12.5 acres, part of the P.H. Bailey Survey, Abstract 145 (400 East FM
      97    2410) from RMH to B-4.
97-03 4-8-  Rezoning all 49 parcels of land annexed into the corporate city limits August 27,
      97    1996, to R-1 with the following exceptions:
          Rezoning parcel #047141-01-00 to B-4.
          Rezoning parcels #053167-00-00 and #53150-00-00 to B-4.
          Rezoning parcel #056800-00-00 to B-4.
          Rezoning parcel #056804-00-00 to B-5.
          Rezoning parcel #056807-02-00, the FM frontage to an 800 foot depth to B-5.
97-07 6-10- Rezoning Lot 2A, Block 1, Harker Heights Plaza Addition, (708 Edwards) from B-
      97    4 with a T (Tavern) overlay to B-4
97-08 6-10- Rezoning a parcel of land being 217 West Veterans Memorial Blvd. from B-4 with T
      97    overlay to B-4.
97-09 6-10- Rezoning Lots 9, 10, 19, and 20 Block 1, Kern Acres 2nd Ext. and Rev. (102 West
      97    Veterans Memorial Blvd.) from B-4 with L-1 overlay to B-4.
97-10 6-10- Rezoning parcel #028711051, part of Tract 4 Barney Sissom Subdivision from B-3 with
      97    a L-1 overlay to B-3.
97-11 6-10- Rezoning Lot W 150' of N 110' of Tract 2, Plaza Shopping Center from B-3 with RC
      97    overlay to B-3.
97-12 6-10- Rezoning Lot Pt. of Tract 2, Plaza Shopping Center from B-3 with L-1 overlay to B-
      97    3.
97-13 6-10- Rezoning parcel #0540940101, Abstract 0491 D.J. Keiger from B-4 with L-1 overlay to
      97    B-4.
97-14 6-10- Rezoning parcel #054102010, Abstract 0491 D.J. Keiger, 703 West Central Texas
      97    Expressway, from B-4 with RC overlay to B-4.
97-15 6-10- Rezoning parcel #0507680800, Abstract 0288, V.L. Evans, located at West Veterans
      97    Memorial Blvd. from B-4 with T overlay to B-4.
97-34 1-13- Rezoning property located at the northeast corner of U.S. 190 and FM 2410,
      98    described in Exhibit A, from R-1 and B-4 to B-4.
98-1  2-10- Rezoning property located on the west side of Wildewood Drive, described in Exhibit
      98    A, from R-1 to R-2.
98-09 5-12- Granting a CUP to allow auto repair at Lot 1, Block 1 Harker Heights Plaza
      98    Addition.
98-10 5-12- Rezoning property located at the north side of Cardinal Lane and east of Amy Lane,
      98    and described as Lot 7 of Block 1 of the Cox Addition from R-1 to R-1M.
98-12 5-12- Granting a CUP to allow retail gas sales at the southeast corner of F.M. 2410 and
      98    U.S. 190, described in Exhibit A.
98-13 5-12- Rezoning property located at the southeast corner of F.M. 2410 and U.S. 190,
      98    described in Exhibits A and B, from B-3 to B-4 with the L-1 overlay.
98-14 5-12- Rezoning property located at the southeast corner of Business 190 and Roy Reynolds
      98    from B-5 to B-5 with the L-1 overlay.
98-15 5-12- Granting a CUP to allow retail gas sales at the southeast corner of Business 190
      98    and Roy Reynolds as described in Exhibit A.
98-16 6-9-  Eliminating RC zoning for property located at 704 Edwards Drive.
      98
98-17 6-9-  Granting R-1M at Lot 4 of Block 19 of the Comanche 2nd Unit Subdivision.
      98
98-18 6-9-  Granting B-4 zoning for 1.029 acres of land out of the P.H. Bailey Survey, Abs. 145
      98    and located on Triangle Road.
98-19 6-9-  Eliminating T zoning for property located at 557 W. Vet. Mem. Blvd.
      98
98-20 6-9-  Eliminating RC zoning for property located at 557 W. Vet. Mem. Blvd.
      98
98-21 6-9-  Eliminating T zoning for property located at 570 W. Vet. Mem. Blvd.
      98
98-22 6-9-  Eliminating RC zoning for property located at 203 W. Vet. Mem. Blvd.
      98
98-23 6-9-  Eliminating L-2 zoning for property located at 250 W. Vet. Mem. Blvd.
      98
98-24 6-9-  Eliminating L-1 zoning for property located at 114 E. Vet. Mem. Blvd.
      98
98-25 6-9-  Eliminating L-1 zoning for property located at 561 E. Vet. Mem. Blvd.
      98
98-26 6-9-  Eliminating T zoning for property located at 110 N. F.M. 2410.
      98
98-28 7-14- Granting B-3 at 1612 F.M. 2410, and described by submitted filed notes.
      98
98-30 7-14- Granting R-2 at Lot 18 of Block 9 of the Comanche Land 1st Unit Subdivision.
      98
98-33 8-11- Granting a CUP to allow secured truck parking area at Lot 1 Block 1 of the Bowyer
      98    Addition.
98-34 8-11- Granting a CUP to allow automotive sales and repairs at 114 East Veterans Memorial
      98    Blvd.
98-35 9-8-  Granting R-1M at 1904 Dakota Trace, and described as Lot 5 and N18' of Lot 6 of
      98    Block 19 of Comanche Land Second Unit.
98-39 10-   Granting a CUP to allow Manufactured Home Repairs, at 212 W. Jamie Road.
      13-98
98-42 10-   Granting R-3 at 1602 Aztec Trace, and described as Lots 4-9 of Block 51 of Comanche
      13-98 Land.
98-43 10-   Granting R-1M at 223 and 225 E. Cardinal Lane, and described as Lots 12 and 13 of
      13-98 Block 1 of Cox Addition.
98-44 10-   Granting a CUP to allow retail gasoline sales and “L-1” Overlay at Lot 2 Block 1 of
      13-98 the Norris Crossing Addition.
98-45 10-   Granting a CUP to expand secured truck parking area at Lot 1 Block 1 of the Bowyer
      13-98 Addition.
98-47 12-8- Granting B-4 at the south side of Indian Oaks Drive, northwest of Hwy 190, and
      98    southeast of Amy Lane and described by submitted field notes.
98-48 12-8- Granting a CUP to allow an Auto Repair/Tire Center/Quick Lube on a portion of Lot 1
      98    Block 1 of the Bowyer Addition.
98-49 12-8- Granting R-1M at Bobwhite Lane, and described as Lot 8B of Block 2 of the Meadow
      98    Acres.
98-50 12-8- Granting R-2 at 1800 Yuron Trace, and described as Lots 6 through 8, 14 through 16,
      98    and part of Lot 17 of Block 43 of Comanche Land Subdivision.
98-51 12-   Granting B-5 on the south side of Beeline Lane, west of Amy, as part of the Plaza
      14-98 Shopping Center Addition, and as described by submitted field notes (Exhibit A).
      12-   Granting R-1M at 410, 412, 427, 429, 430 & 432 E. Cardinal Lane, and described as
98-54 14-98 Lots 33 and 34 of Block 2, Lots 41 and 42 of Block 1, and Lots 43 and 44 of Block 2
            of the Cox Addition.
99-05 3-9-  Granting R-3 at 902 and 904 Crymes Lane, and described as Lots 7 and 8 of Block 4
      99    of the Cox 1st Extension Revised.
99-06 3-9-  Granting a CUP for a retail gasoline sales area at 601 Indian Trail, as described
      99    by submitted field notes (Exhibit A).
99-09 5-11- Granting R-1M on the West side of Ponca Trace, and described as Lots 2 and 3 of
      99    Block 37 of the Comanche Land III.
99-12 07-   Granting B-5 at 125 and 127 Cox Drive, and described as N200' of Lots 27 and 28 of
      13-99 Block 1 of Valley View.
99-13 07-   Granting RC over B-4 at 128 East Veterans Memorial Blvd,. and described by
      13-99 submitted field notes.
99-14 07-   Granting R-1M at 1406 Hopi Trail, 1405 and 1407 Tejas Trail, and described as Lots
      13-99 3, 26 and 27 of Block 11 of Comanche Land First Unit.
99-15 8-10- Granting a CUP for a 180' Monopole Cellular Communications Tower at 1260 FM 2410,
      99    and described by submitted field notes.
99-17 8-10- Granting B-4 at 1608 FM 2410, and described by submitted field notes.
      99
99-22 9-14- Rezoning property located at 913 Ramblewood Drive, and described as Lot 7 and 20'
      99    strip adjacent on the north of Block 1 of Wildwood Acres from R-1 to R-1M.
      9-14- Rezoning property located at 201 and 209 South Ann Blvd., 102 and 104 E. Kathey
99-23 99    Road, and 103 E. Arlo Road, and described as Lots 1,2,3,9, and 10 of Block 4 of
            Kern Acres from B-1 to R-3.
      10-   Rezoning property located at 924 Rosewood and 925 and 929 Maplewood and described
99-33 12-99 as Lot 3 10' strip adjacent on South of Block 6 of Wildwood Acres, and Lots 13, 14
            and 15 and 10' strip North of Block 7 of Wildwood Acres from R-1 to R-1M.
      11-9- Granting B-4 to R-3 and changing the Land Use Plan from Commercial to High Density
99-39 99    Residence at southeast corner of Elbert and Amy Lane and described as Lot 1, Block
            4 of the Cox Addition.
99-41 11-9- Granting R-1 to B-4 at the west side of Amy and South of Ruby Road, and described
      99    by submitted field notes.
99-42 12-   Granting R-1 to R-1M at 3911 Quail Hollow Road, and described as Lot 24 of Block 2
      14-99 of Hidden Ranchettes.
99-43 12-   Granting R-1 to R-1M at 4022 Quail Hollow Road, and described as Lots 68, 69, 70 of
      14-99 Block 8 of Hidden Ranchettes.
99-44 12-   Granting R-MH to B-4 with RC Overlay at South side of F.M. 2410, North of Central
      14-99 Texas Expwy, and West of South Ann Blvd., and described by submitted field notes.
99-45 12-   Granting R-1 to B-5 at 1130 F.M. 2410, and described by submitted field notes.
      14-99
99-46 12-   Granting R-1 to B-4 at 1130 F.M. 2410, and described by submitted field notes.
      14-99
2000- 1-11- Granting R-1 to R-1M at 406 West Nolan Trail, and as Lot 3 of Block 5 of Kern
01    2000  Terrace Extension Two.
2000- 1-11- Granting B-1 and B-5 to B-4 located on the east side of the 300 Block of Indian
02    2000  Trail, and described by submitted field notes.
2000- 1-11- Granting a Conditional Use Permit for a Quik Lube Center area on the south side of
03    2000  Pan American Drive, between Indian Trail and Elbert Lane, and described by
            submitted field notes (Exhibit A).
2000- 2-8-  Granting B-4 (Secondary & Highway Commercial District) with R-C (Restaurant serving
06    2000  alcohol overlay) to B-4 (Secondary and Highway Commercial District) with T at 534
            Veterans Memorial Blvd, and described by submitted field notes (Exhibit A).
2000- 2-8-  Granting a Conditional Use Permit for outside storage area on the southeast corner
07    2000  of Beeline and Watson, and described as Lot 1 of Block 3 of the Cox 1st Extension
            Revised.
2000- 2-8-  Granting R-1 to B-2 at the south side of U.S. 190 between Copperhead and Gasisco,
08    2000  and described by submitted field notes.
2000- 3-14- Granting a CUP for a 150 foot Monopole Wireless Communication Tower, on the
10    2000  property located on the southern boundary of 401 West Central Texas Expressway, and
            described by submitted field notes (Exhibit A).
            Granting R-1 (Single Family Dwelling District) and B-4 (Secondary & Highway
2000- 4-11- Commercial District) to B-4 (Secondary Highway Commercial District) Veterans
12    00    Memorial Blvd., located at the east side of Indian Trail and south side of Veterans
            Memorial Blvd. of described by submitted field notes. (Exhibit A).
2000- 5-9-  Granting a CUP for Atlas Towing, a vehicle storage, towing and general repair
16    00    facility located at 627 E. Veterans Memorial Blvd., between Lookout Ridge Blvd. and
            Indian Trail.
2000- 5-9-  Granting a CUP for Washburn Industries, Inc., for a Classic Lube and Oil located on
17    00    the south side of Pan American Drive between Indian Trail and Elbert Lane.
            Granting a Conditional Use Permit for Killeen Boats and Motors Inc., dba Texas Boat
2000- 6-15- World, a marine supply, sales and service facility, located at 303 West Cental
19    00    Texas Expressway, west of Aztec Pet Hospital, and east of the Best Little
            Floorhouse in Texas, in a B-4 (Secondary and Highway Business District) and by
            submitted field notes.  (Exhibit A)
2000- 6-15- Granting R-1 to R-1M at Lot 1 of Block 1 of Stephenson Addition.
20    00
2000- 7-11- Granting R-1 to B-4 at 1827 E. FM 2410, otherwise known as the Fireside Addition,
21    00    being out of and part of the Elizabeth Dawson Survey Abstract No. 258, save and
            except Tract 1 and Tract 2, and described by submitted field notes.
            Granting a Conditional Use Permit for Jesus Claudio, dba J.C. Automotive, for an
2000- 7-11- automotive repair garage, located at 2315 Indian Trail on the northeast corner of
22    00    FM 2410 and Indian Trail, in a B-4 (Secondary and Highway Business District) and by
            submitted site plan.  (Exhibit A)
2000- 7-11- Granting B-4 to B-5 on 2.4 acres of the Francis Hughes Survey, located east of FM
23    00    3219, between Business 190 and Edwards Drive, and described by submitted field
            notes.
2000- 8-8-  Granting R-1 (Single Family Dwelling) to R-1M (Single Family Dwelling, Specifically
24    00    Zoned to Allow Manufactured Housing) on property located at 920 Lemonwood Drive,
            and described as Lot 11, Block 4 of Wildewood Acres.
2000- 9-12- Granting R-1 (Single Family Dwelling) to R-1M (Single Family Dwelling, Specifically
28    00    Zoned to Allow Manufactured Housing) on the property located at 1415 Tejas Trail
            and described as Lot 22, Block 11 of Comanche Land, First Unit.
            Granting R-1 (Single Family Dwelling) to R-1M (Single Family Dwelling, Specifically
2000- 9-12- Zoned to Allow Manufactured Housing) located on 1611 Pontotoc Trace and described
29    00    as Lot 8, Block 45, Comanche Land, and by described field notes and described by
            submitted field notes.
2000- 9-12- Granting R-1 (Single Family Residential) to R-1M (Single Family Residential
30    00    Specifically Zoned to Allow Manufactured Housing) on the property located at 924
            Lemonwood and described as Lot 4, Block 13 of Wildewood Acres.
2000- 9-12- Granting R-1 (Single Family Dwelling) to R-1M (Single Family Dwelling, Specifically
31    00    Zoned to Allow Manufactured Housing) located on 1706 Pontotoc Trace and described
            as Lot 1, Block 37 of Comanche Land, Third Unit.
2000- 9-12- Granting a Conditional Use Permit for Brad Martin, an individual doing business as
32    00    Precision Tune Auto Care, located at 200 West Central Texas Expressway, and
            described as Lot 1, Block 1 of Heights Commercial Subdivision.
2000- 9-12- Granting B-3 (Local Business District) to B-5 (General Business District), located
33    00    on 5.846 acres of the J.J. Tomlin Survey located east of Bluebird Drive, north of
            Cherokee Drive, and west of Amy Lane, and described by submitted field notes.
2000- 12-   Granting a Conditional Use Permit for a 100-foot 3-face radio tower, on the
37    12-00 property located at 708 Edwards Drive (Harker Heights Plaza), and (Exhibit A).
2000- 12-   Granting R-1 to R-1M at 425 Clore Road, and as Lot 2 of Block F of Kern Valley
38    12-00 Second Extension.
2000- 12-   Granting R-1 to R-2 at 1602 South Amy Lane, and as Lot 3 of Block 5 of Forest
39    12-00 Hills.
2000- 12-   Granting R-1 to R-2 at 906 Crymes, and as Lot 9 of Block 4 of Cox First Extension
40    12-00 Revised.
2001- 1-9-  Granting a Conditional Use Permit to Abel Rios to allow a CTE Automotive Center at
01    01    116 E. Veterans Memorial Blvd.
2001- 1-9-  Granting R-1 to R-3 between Aztec and Pueblo Trace, and between Hopi and proposed
02    01    Natchez Trace, and described by submitted field notes.
2001- 1-9-  Granting a Conditional Use Permit to Thachara Suresh Punnan to allow a Citgo Pak at
03    01    809 S. Ann Blvd.
2001- 2-13- Granting R-1 to R-1M at 400 and 402 East Cardinal Lane, and as Lots 28 and 29 of
04    01    Block 2 of Cox Subdivision.
2001- 2-13- Granting a Conditional Use Permit to Zouhair A. Jabal to allow an E-Z Way #9 at 307
05    01    East FM 2410.
2001- 2-13- Granting a Conditional Use Permit to Houston Convenience Inc. to allow an MS
06    01    Express at 519 East Veterans Memorial Blvd.
2001- 3-13- Granting R-1 to R-1M at 2002 Warriors Path, 1808 Ute Trail, and 1810 Ute Trail, and
07    01    as Lots 1, 4, and 5, Block 1 of Five Feathers Subdivision.
2001- 3-13- Granting B-4 to R-1M at 1518 Maya Trail, and as Lot 2, Block 20 of Comanche Land
08    01    2nd Unit Subdivision.
2001- 3-13- Granting R-3 to R-1M at 301, 303, 305, and 307 South Mary Jo Drive, and as Lots 1,
11    01    2, 3, and 4, Block 5 of Kern Acres 1st Extension Subdivision.
2001- 3-13- Granting a CUP to operate a Group Daycare Home to the Zion Temple Church of God in
12    01    Christ at 204 Dove Street.
2001- 4-10- Granting a CUP to operate a Mini-Storage Warehouse to Jim and Gay Smith in the 500
15    01    block of East Central Texas Expressway and described by submitted field notes.
2001- 5-8-  Granting R-1 to R-1M at 308 South Harley Drive, and described as Lots 16 and 17,
16    01    Block 5, Kern Acres Subdivision.
    2001- 5-8-01Granting R-1M to R-2 at 1510 and 1512 Maya Trail, and described as Lots 2 and
      17    3, Block 19, Comanche Land, Second Unit, Subdivision.
2001- 6-12- Granting R-1 to R-1M at 1501 Mohican Trail and 1513 Maya Trail and described as
18    01    Lots 7 and 16, Block 17, Comanche Land Second Unit Subdivision.
2001- 7-10- Granting a CUP to Mr. Lane Heginbotham to allow a mini-storage warehouse at 301
22    01    Lookout Ridge Boulevard.
2001- 8-14- Granting R-1 to R-2 at 907 and 909 Daisy and described as Lots 4 and 5, Block 12,
23    01    Cox 1st Extension, Revision, Subdivision.
2001- 8-14- Granting R-1 to R-2 at 1619 Pontotoc and described as Lots 7 and 8, Block 44,
24    01    Comanche Land Subdivision.
2001- 9-25- Granting a CUP to operate a used car lot to Otha and Debbie Crocker at 104 West
29    01    Veterans Memorial Boulevard and described as Lots 7, 8, 17, and 18, Block 1, Kern
            Acres 2nd Extension and Revision.
            Granting B-4 to R-3 with the exception of the northwest lot with the 80 foot
2001- 10-9- frontage and 120 foot depth and retain R-1 as is on property located 330 feet north
32    01    of Clore Road, east of Amy Lane, and described as Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, Block 1, of
            Chase Manor Subdivision and 26.550 acres of the S.H. Osborn A#646 survey.
            Granting R-1 (Single Family Residential) to B-2 (Neighborhood Retail District) and
2001- 12-   R-2 (Two Family Dwelling District) on property located on the south side of Indian
37    11-01 Trail, and west of Verna Lee Boulevard on approximately 4.98 acres of the Albert
            Gallatin Survey Abstract No. 363.
            Granting R-MU (Mixed Residential Dwelling District) on property located on both
            sides of Clore Road, Beeline Lane, Robin Lane, Cardinal Lane, Elbert Lane, Travis
            Lane, Crymes Lane, Daisy Lane, McClure Lane and Rebecca Lane; and described as Kern
            Valley Second Extension, Block D, Lots 1-12, Block E, Lots 1-14; Kern Valley First
2002- 3-12- Extension, Block A, Lots 2-32; Cox First Extension Revised, Block 8, Lots 1-12,
02    02    Block 9, Lots 1-14, Block 3, Lots 2-9, Block 4, Lots 1-12, Block 5, Lots 1-3 and 7-
            9, Block 12, Lots 1-18, Block 9A, Lots 1-10, Block 10, Lots 1-20, Block 11, Lots 1-
            10, Block 6, Lots 5-14, Block 7, Lots 1-11; Cox, Block 1, Lots 7-45, Block 2, Lots
            7-45, Block 3, Lots 5-30, Block 4, Lots 5-30, and a portion of the 13.330 acres of
            the A-0393 D. Houston Survey.
2002- 4-9-  Granting R-1 to R-1M on property located at the corner of Dakota Trace and Shasta
04    02    Trail, and described as Lot 14, Block 22, Comanche Land 2nd Unit.
2002- 4-9-  Granting a CUP in the R-1 District to allow an accessory dwelling on property
05    02    located at 1707 Pontotoc Trace, and as described by submitted field notes.
2002- 4-9-  Granting B-4 (Secondary/Highway Business District) on property generally extending
06    02    approximately 2,827 feet along East Central Texas Expressway from the western city
            limits line and for a depth of 650 feet.
            Granting R-MU (Mixed Residential Dwelling District) on property generally located
            between Pontotoc Trail and Ute Trail, and between Ponca Trace and Aztec Trace:
            between Hopi Trail and Caddo Trail, and between Indian Trail and Dakota Trace;
            south of Hopi Trail and west of Dakota Trace; on both sides of Tejas Trail, Mohican
            Trail, Maya Trail, Shasta Trail, Chiricahua Trace, Zuni Trace, and on both sides of
            Ute Trail and Maya Trail west of Indian Trail, and described as Comanche Land 1st
            Unit, Block 11, Lots 1-28, Block 12, Lots 1-16, Block 13, Lots 1-18, Block 14, Lots
            1-10; Comanche Land 2nd Unit, Block 15, Lots 1-17, Block 16, Lots 1-3, Block 17,
2002- 5-14- Lots 1-22, Block 18, Lots 1-14, Block 19, Lots 1-15, Block 20, Lots 2-10, Block 21,
07    02    Lots 1-8, Block 22, Lots 1-14, Block 23, Lots 1-13 and 16-23, Block 24, Lots 1-11,
            Block 25, Lots 1-12; Comanche Land 3rd Unit, Block 37, Lots 1-18, Block 40, Lots
            120; Comanche Land Undedicated, Block 27, Lots 1-15, Part of Block 29, 2.080 acres
            of the E. Dawson Survey Bo's Mobile Home Park; Block 42, Lots 6-13, 0.507 acres of
            the E. Dawson Survey, 0.789 acres of the E. Dawson Survey, 0.806 acres of the E.
            Dawson Survey, 0.378 acres of the E. Dawson Survey, 0.251 acres of the E. Dawson
            Survey; 1.320 acres of the E. Dawson Survey, 4.840 acres of the E. Dawson Survey J.
            & C. Mobile Home Park, Block 43, Lots 1-21; Cash Addition, Block 1, Lots 1-3;
            Herbert Addition, Block 1, Lots 1-14; Crystal Addition, Block 1, Lots 1 & 2.
2002- 7-9-  Granting B-3 to R-2 on property located north of FM 2410 and west of Wildewood
12    02    Drive, and described as Lots 1 - 9, Block One, Tres F.S. Addition, Phase One.
2002- 8-13- Granting  B-1 to B-2 on property located at 101 West FM 2410, and described as lot
13    02    1, Block 1, Louis Addition.
2002- 11-   Granting R-1 to R-3 on property located at 106 East Kathey Road and described as
26    12-02 Lot 3-A, Block 4, Kern Acres 2nd Extension and Revision.
2002- 11-   Granting R-1 to R-2 on property located at 2214 and 2216 Addax Trail and described
27    12-02 as Lots 1 and 2, Block 43, Country Trails, Phase 16, Subdivision.
2003- 4-8-  Granting R-3 on property located on 0.72 acres west of Amy Lane and approximately
02    03    120 feet south of Ruby Road.
2003- 4-8-  Granting R-1 on property located on 0.495 acres at 1700 E. FM 2410 and B-4 on 0.183
03    03    acres at 1700 E. FM 2410.
2003- 5-13- Granting a CUP to allow the outside holding of antique auto parts on property
05    03    located at 1130 FM 2410.
2003- 7-8-  Granting a CUP to allow an indoor shooting range on property located 160 feet west
06    03    of the intersection of Lookout Ridge Boulevard and Veterans Memorial Boulevard.
2003- 10-   Granting B-4 on property located at 333 Indian Trail and described as Lot 1, Block
14    14-03 1 of the Post Office Addition.
2003- 12-9- Granting R-2 on property located at 927, 929, 937 and 939 Maplewood and described
16    03    as Lots 14, 15, 19 and 20, Block 7, of Wildewood Acres Subdivision.
2004- 1-13- Granting R-1M on property located on West Nolan Trail and described as 1.245 Acres
02    04    of the A-0288 V.L. Evans Survey.
2004- 2-10- Granting B-5 on property located on Indian Trail, adjacent to the Family Dollar
04    04    Store and described as 1.321 acres of the W.E. Hall Survey, Abstract 1086.
2004- 3-9-  Granting B-4 on property located on Central Texas Expressway, between Indian Trail
07    04    and Buffalo Trail, and described as 3.784 acres of the A-0363 A. Gallatin Survey.
2004- 3-9-  Granting R-2 on property located at 1705 Aztec Trace, and described as Lots 1, 2,
08    04    3, 14, 15, 16, and 17, Block 46, Comanche Land.
2004- 3-9-  Granting R-2 on property located at 1614 Hopi Trail, and described as Lots 4 and
09    04    13, Block 46, Comanche Land.
2004- 4-13- Granting B-4 on property located on FM 2410, and described as 0.721 acres of the A-
12    04    0413 J.T. & W.J. Hallmark Survey, 1.904 acres of the A-0413 J.T. & W.J. Hallmark
            Survey, and 3.000 acres of the A-0413 J.T. & W.J. Hallmark Survey.
2004- 5-11- Granting B-4 on property located on the southwest corner of Chaparral Road and
16    04    Stillhouse Lake Road, and described as 3.456 acres of the Peter Williamson Survey,
            Abstract #1099A-0413 J.T. & W.J. Hallmark Survey.
2004- 5-11- Granting B-5 w/T overlay on property located on Veterans Memorial Boulevard, and
17    04    described as Tract 1, 0.725 acres, and Tract 2, 1.017 acres, of the Francis Hughes
            Survey, Abstract #396.
2004- 6-8-  Granting a CUP in the R-MU District to allow an accessory dwelling on property
20    04    located at 1613 Maya Trail, and described as .378 acres, part of Block 42, of the
            A-0258 E. Dawson Survey, Comanche Land Undedicated.
2004- 6-8-  Granting B-5 w/T overlay on property located on Veterans Memorial Boulevard, and
21    04    described as Tract 3, 2.407 acres of the Francis Hughes Survey, Abstract #396.
2004- 7-13- Granting R-1 on property located on corner of Cheetah Trail and Caribou Trail, and
23    04    described as Lots 1, 2, and 3, Block 3, of the Country Trails Commercial Addition.
2004- 8-10- Granting B-5 on property located on 50.453 acres of the Daniel J. Keiger Survey,
28    04    South of U.S. 190 on East Bound frontage road, East of City Limits Line.
2004- 8-10- Granting R-2 on property located on 133 acres of the David Houston Survey, Abstract
29    04    #393, West of Amy Lane, South of Cardinal Lane, and North of Elbert Lane.
2004- 8-10- Granting R-2 on property located at 927 and 929 Pinewood Drive, described as Lots
30    04    14 and 15, Block 11, Wildewood Acres, and 932 and 941 Maplewood Drive, described as
            Lot 17, Block 8 and Lot 21, Block 7, Wildewood Acres.
2004- 8-10- Granting R-1 on property located on Cheetah Trail, and described as Lots 4, 5, 6,
31    04    7, 8, and 9, Block 3, of the Country Trails Commercial Addition.
2004- 9-14- Granting R-1M on property located at 1412 and 1414 Pima Trail, described as Lots 6
39    04    and 7, Block 7, Comanche Land First Unit.
2004- 9-14- Granting R-2 on property located on Pueblo Trace, described as Lots 1 and 2, Block
40    04    1, Little Comanche (located across from the eastern end  of Yuma Trail).
2004- 10-   Granting R-2 on property located at 1409 and 1411 Natchez Trace, described as Lots
45    12-04 16 and 17, Block 7, Comanche Land 1st Unit.
2004- 10-   Granting R-3 on property located on one acre of the W.E. Hall Survey, Abstract
46    12-04 1086, located on East Beeline Road, west of Indian Trail, and west of McDowell
            Plaza Addition.
2004- 10-   Granting R-2 on property located at 931 Maplewood Drive and 938 Rosewood Drive,
47    12-04 described as Lot 16, Block 7, and Lot 20, Block 6, Wildewood Acres.
2004- 11-9- Granting R-2 on property located at 938 and 950 Ramblewood Drive, described as Lots
50    04    20 and 21, Block 2, Wildewood Acres.
2004- 11-9- Granting R-1 on property located at 204 East Robin Lane, described as Lot 3, Block
51    04    6, Cox 1st.
2004- 11-9- Granting R-2 on property located on Yuron Trace and Ute Trail, described as 4.562
52    04    acres and 2.483 acres of the H.B Littlefield Survey, Abstract #512.
2004- 11-9- Granting PD-M on property located at 701 Sun Meadows, described as 7.059 acres of
53    04    the E. Berry Survey, A-117.
2005- 1-11- Granting B-4 on property located at 2105 Triangle Road, described as 1.109 acres of
01    05    the P.R. Bailey Survey, Abstract #145.
2005- 1-11- Granting B-3 on property located approximately 300 feet east of the intersection of
02    05    Buffalo Trail and U.S. 190 access road, described as part of Lot 5, Block 4,
            Diamond Back Addition.
2005- 3-8-  Granting R1-M on property located at 116 East Turnbo Road, described as Lot 3,
04    05    Block 7, Valley View 2nd Extension.
2005- 5-10- Granting R-2 on property located at 914 Lemonwood Drive, described as Lot 8, Block
12    05    4, Wildewood Acres.
2005- 5-10- Granting R-2 on property located at 930, 932 and 934 Rosewood Drive, described as
13    05    Lots 16, 17 and 18, Block 6, Wildewood Acres.
2005- 6-14- Granting R-2 on property described as a 4 acre tract of land, west of Pueblo Trace,
16    05    extending approximately 1,130 feet along the north side of Yuma Trail and described
            by submitted field notes.
2005- 7-19- Granting R-2 (Two-Family Dwelling District) on 5.697 acres of land located to the
20    05    north of Pima Trail, west of Pueblo Trace, and south of Yuma Trail, and described
            by submitted field notes.
            Granting PD-M (Planned Development- Mixed Use) to include B-4 Commercial Business
2005- 8-9-  and “T-District” overlay on property located at 706 Edwards Drive, Harker Heights
21    2005  Plaza Shopping Center, described as Lot 1A and 2A, Block 1, Replat of Harker
            Heights Plaza Addition, with conditions stated in the passing ordinance.
2005- 9-13- Granting a CUP in the R-1 District to allow an accessory dwelling on property
25    2005  located at 2917 Cedar Knob Road, described as 28.88 acres of the H.R. Morrell
            Survey, Abstract #570.
2005- 9-13- Granting R-MU (Mixed-Use Residential) on property described as 2.08 acres of the
26    2005  Elizabeth Dawson Survey, Abstract No. 258, located east of Indian Trail, north of
            Ute Trail, and west of Aztec Trace, and described by submitted field notes.
2005- 9-13- Granting R-2 (Two-Family Dwelling District) on property located at 217 West Robin
27    2005  Lane, described as Lot 22, Block 8, Meadow Acres, 1st Extension.
2005- 9-13- Granting R-2 (Two-Family Dwelling District) on property located at 305 Bonnie
28    2005  Drive, described as Lot 32, Block 3, Kern Acres, 1st Extension.
2005- 10-   Granting R-1M (Single-Family Dwelling District Allowing Manufactured Homes) on
36    11-   property located at 302 and 304 South Juanita Drive, described as Lots 13 and 14,
      2005  Block 3, Kern Acres, 1st Extension.
2005- 12-   Granting R-2 (Two-Family Dwelling District) on property located at 1602 Dakota
42    13-   Trace, described as Lot 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10, Block 7, Comanche Land 1st Unit.
      2005
2006- 2-14- Granting B-4 w/T Overlay (Secondary/ Highway Business District with a Tavern
02    2006  Overlay) on property described as 3,750 sq. ft. of property located at 544 W.
            Veterans Memorial Blvd. and as described by “Attachment A” of Ord. 2006-02.
2006- 2-14- Granting B-4 (Secondary/Highway Business district) on property located at corner of
03    2006  Prospector Trail and FM 3481, as described by submitted field notes.
2006- 2-14- Granting R-3 (Multi-Family Dwelling District) on property located at 100 and 102
04    2006  East Robin Lane, described as tract 1 and tract 2, (except for the easterly 10
            feetof tract 2) of the Barney Sissom Subdivision.
2006- 3-14- Granting R-2 (Two Family Dwelling District) on property located at 936 Rosewood
06    06    Drive, described as Lot 19, Block 6, Wildewood Acres.
2006- 4-11- Granting R-2 (Two-Family Dwelling District) on property located at 926 and  928
07    06    Rosewood Drive, described as Lot 14  and 15, Block 6, Wildewood Acres.
            Granting R-2 (Two-Family Dwelling District) with the exception of the front 200-
2006- 5-9-  foot strip of land along U.S. Business 190, on 2.418 acres of the W.E. Hall Survey
10    06    Abstract No. 1086 and the J.M. Roberts Survey Abstract No. 723, located
            approximately 312 feet west of Lookout Ridge Boulevard, as described by submitted
            field notes.
            Granting R-2 (Two-Family Dwelling District) with the exception of the front 200-
2006- 5-9-  foot strip of land along U.S. Business 190 on 10.54 acres of the W.E. Hall Survey
11    06    Abstract No. 1086 and the J.M. Roberts Survey Abstract No. 723, located
            approximately 150 feet west of Lookout Ridge Boulevard, as described by submitted
            field notes.
2006- 6-13- Rezoning approximately 1.274 acres of the A-0363 Gallatin Survey located at 1306
15    06    Indian Trail and immediate vicinity from R-1 (Single Family Residential District)
            to B-2 (Neighborhood Retail District).
2006- 7-11- Granting B-4 (Secondary/Highway Business District) located at 2101 Memory Lane, Lot
20    06    81, Block 3, Savannah Heights Subdivision.
2006- 7-11- Granting R-MU (Secondary/Highway Business District) located at 106 E. Ball Street,
21    06    Lot 3, Block 4, Valley View Estates Subdivision.
2006- 8-8-  Granting R-2 (Two-Family Dwelling District) on property located at 911 Lemonwood,
27    06    described as Lot 6, Block 3, Wildewood Acres.
2006- 8-8-  Granting R-2 (Two-Family Dwelling District) on property located at 930 Ramblewood
28    06    Drive, described as Lot 16, Block 2, Wildewood Acres.
2006- 8-8-  Granting R-2 (Two-Family Dwelling District) on property located at 939 and 941
29    06    Ramblewood Drive, described as Lot 20 and 21, Block 1, Wildewood Acres.
2006- 9-12- Granting R-2 (Two-Family Dwelling District) on property located at 933 Ramblewood
33    06    Drive, described as Lot 17, Block 1, Wildewood Acres.
2006- 9-12- Granting R-2 (Two-Family Dwelling District) on property located at 927 Ramblewood
34    06    Drive, described as Lot 14, Block 1, Wildewood Acres.
2006- 9-12- Granting R-2 (Two-Family Dwelling District) on property located at 1509, 1511 and
35    06    1513 Pueblo Trace, described as Lot 1, 2, and 3, Block 1, Pueblo Trace Addition.
            Granting PD-M on property located  on a 5.838 acre tract located south of
2006- 10-3- Prospector Trail, east of the drainage channel parallel to Mustang Trail and 143.3
38    06    feet west of Stillhouse Lake Road.  Permitted uses are: manager’s office and living
            quarters and associated uses; storage units and boat storage on the west side of
            the development.
2006- 12-   Granting R-2 (Two-Family Dwelling District) on property located at 400 N. Ann
44    12-06 Boulevard, described as Lot 13, Block 3, Kern Terrace Subdivision.
2006- 12-   Granting R-2 (Two-Family Dwelling District) on property located at 909 Lemonwood
45    12-06 Drive, described as Lot 5, Block 3, Wildewood Acres Subdivision.
2007- 2-13- Granting R-2 (Two-Family Dwelling District) on property located at 913 Maplewood
05    07    Drive, described as Lot 6A, Block 7, Wildewood Acres Subdivision.
2007- 3-13- Granting R-1(M) (One-Family Manufactured Home Dwelling District) on property
09    07    located at 108 West Valley Road, described as Lot 3, Block 4, Kern Terrace.
2007- 3-13- Granting B-4 (Secondary and Highway Business District) on 6.26 acres located south
10    07    of FM 2410, east and west of Grant Edwin Boulevard.
2007- 4-10- Granting R-2 (Two-Family Dwelling District) on property located at 112 and 114 West
15    07    Kathey Road, described as Lot 8 and 9, Block 3, Kern Acres, 2nd Extension.
2007- 5-8-  Granting RMU (Mixed Use Residential) located at 124, 126, and 128 East Ball Road,
17    07    Lots 7, 8, and 9, Block 8, Valley View Addition, 2nd Extension.
2007- 7-10- Granting B-3 (Local Business District) on lots bounded by West Bobwhite Lane on the
19    07    north, South Ann Blvd on the east, and Beeline on the south, described as Lots 3,
            4, 7, and 8, Block 6, Meadow Acres Subdivision.
2007- 8-14- Granting R-2 (Two-Family Dwelling District) on property located at 501 Bonnie
20    07    Drive, described as Lot 9, Block 3, Kern Acres, 1st Extension.
2007- 8-14- Granting a CUP, to allow a commercial business on property located at 1909 Forest
22    07    Hills Drive, described as Lot 5, Block 17, Forest Hills Subdivision, subject to the
            conditions stated in the ordinance.
2007- 11-   Granting R-2 (Two-Family Dwelling District) on property located at 1402, 1404,
28    13-07 1406, 1408, 1410, 1412, 1414, and 1416 Natchez Trail, described as Lots 1-8, Block
            8, Comanche Land 1st Unit.
2007- 11-   Granting R-2 (Two-Family Dwelling District) on property located at 1403, 1405,
29    13-07 1407, 1409, 1411, 1413, 1415, and 1417 Hopi Trail, described as Lots 17-24, Block
            8, Comanche Land 1st Unit.
2007- 11-   Granting R-2 (Two-Family Dwelling District) on property located at 200 North Randy
30    13-07 Boulevard, Lot 12, Block 2, Kern Terrace.
2007- 12-   Granting R-2 (Two-Family Dwelling District) on property located at 931, 933 and 935
32    11-07 Rosewood Drive, described as Lots 16 - 18, Block 5, Wildewood Acres.
2008- 2-12- Granting R-2 (Two-Family Dwelling District) on approximately .370 acre tract of the
01    08    I.T. Bean Survey, Abstract No. A-0115, located at 1518 Aztec Trace, described as
            Lot 10, Clock 52, Comanche Land 1st Unit.
            Granting PD-M (Planned Development - Mixed Use) on approximately 10.28 acre tract
2008- 2-26- of the F.D. Cox Survey, Abstract No. A-0220, located at the northeastern corner of
04    08    the intersection of Nola Ruth Blvd. and Old Nolanville Road, subject to compliance
            with certain items.
2008- 3-11- Granting R-2 (Two-Family Dwelling District) on property located at 304 North Ann
05    08    Boulevard, described as Lot 15, Block 3, Kern Terrace.
            Granting a CUP, to allow a commercial health spa retreat and associated uses and
2008- 4-8-  educational classes for holistic practitioners on property located at 4100
08    08    Stillhouse Lake Road, described as 1.00 acre of the C.B. Roberts Survey, Abstract
            #718, and the John Gosline Survey, Abstract #A-343.
2008- 5-13- Granting a CUP, to allow a dog daycare and self-service dog wash on property
13    08    located at 104 East Veterans Memorial Boulevard, described as Lots 4, 5, 13, and
            14, Block 2, Kern Acres 2nd Extension, subject to conditions.
2008- 5-13- Granting a CUP, to allow a four-story motel/hotel on property described as Lot 7A,
14    08    Block 1, ACTG Addition, subject to conditions.
            Granting B-4 w/T Overlay (Secondary and Highway Business District with a tavern
2008- 9-9-  Overlay) on 0.061 acre tract of land in Bell County, Texas, being part of the
24    08    Cullender Keele Survey, Abstract No. A- 0991, described being the northeast portion
            of that certain concrete block building located at 400 West Veterans Memorial
            Boulevard.
2008- 12-9- Granting a CUP, to construct additional storage buildings at Heights Mini Storage
33    08    on property located at 700 Indian Trail, described as Lot 2, Block 1, Heights Mini
            Storage.
2009- 2-10- Granting R-MU (Mixed Residential) on approximately 4.9 acre tract of the I.T. Bean
06    09    Survey, 2-1-2, Abstract No. A-0115BC.
2009- 4-14- Granting R-2 (Two-Family Dwelling District) on property located at 925 Maplewood
08    09    Drive, described as Lot 13, Block 7, Wildewood Acres.
            Granting B-4 (Secondary and Highway Business District) on property located on the
2009- 6-9-  southeast corner of Shelby Lane and Memory Lane, south to one-half of the drainage
14    09    easement for a portion and the entire drainage easement for the remainder, on
            property located at 2101 Memory Lane, described as Lot 81, Block 4, Savannah
            Heights Subdivision.
            Granting a CUP, to construct a real estate office on the southern most portion of
2009- 6-9-  land located at the southeast corner of Shelby Lane and Memory Lane, from the
15    09    southernmost property line north to one- half of a drainage easement, on property
            located at 2101 Memory Lane, described as Lot 81, Block 4, Savannah Heights
            Subdivision.
2009- 8-11- Granting R-2 (Two-Family Dwelling District) 919 Maplewood Drive, described as Lot
23    09    11, Block 7, Wildewood Acres.
2009- 8-11- Granting R-2 (Two-Family Dwelling District) 921 Maplewood Drive, described as Lot
24    09    12, Block 7, Wildewood Acres.
2009- 8-11- Granting R-2 (Two-Family Dwelling District) 922 Rosewood Drive, described as Lot
25    09    12, Block 6, Wildewood Acres.
2009- 11-   Granting R-2 (Two-Family Dwelling District) 921 Maplewood Drive, described as Lot
32    17-09 11, Block 7, Wildewood Acres.
2009- 11-   Granting R-2 (Two-Family Dwelling District) 923 Maplewood Drive, described as Lot
33    17-09 12, Block 7, Wildewood Acres.
2010- 3-9-  Granting a CUP, to allow a commercial business to operate a specialized care home
05    10    for eight residences on property located at 3220 Comanche Gap Road, described as
            approximately 4.042 acre tract of the W.H. Russell Survey, Abstract No. A-1049BC.
2010- 3-9-  Granting M-1 (Light Manufacturing District) on property located at the southwest
06    10    corner of East Veterans Memorial Boulevard and Lookout Ridge described as
            approximately 1.065 acre tract of the J.M. Roberts Survey, Abstract No. A-0723BC.
            Granting a CUP, to allow a commercial business to operate an animal boarding
2010- 3-9-  facility located at the southwest corner of East Veterans Memorial Boulevard and
07    10    Lookout Ridge, described as approximately 2.34 acre tract of the J.M. Roberts
            Survey, Abstract No. A-0723BC.
            Granting an amendment to the PD-M (Planned Development-Mixed Use) on a 5.838 acre
2010- 6-8-  tract located at 800 Prospector Trail, described as Lot 1, Block 1, Skipcha
13    10    Commercial South Subdivision to include an 8000 square foot lease center with B-4
            (Secondary and Highway Business District) uses on a 1.034 acre portion of the
            tract, further described in Exhibit A, as attached to Ord. 2010-13.
2010- 6-8-  Granting a CUP (Conditional Use Permit), to construct an accessory dwelling for a
14    10    relative or servant (not for rent) on property located at 2301 Tye Valley Road,
            described as Lots 19-22, Block 1, Hidden Valley Estates.
2010- 7-13- Granting R1-R (Rural One-Family Dwelling District) on property located at 2839
19    10    Comanche Gap Road, described as Lot 2, Block 1, Tuscan Ridge at the Lake
            Subdivision.
2010- 10-   Granting B-4 (Secondary and Highway Business District) 601 E. FM 2410, described as
29    12-10 one acre tract out of the W.F. Hunt Survey, Abstract No. A04558BC.
2010- 10-   Granting R-2 (Two-Family Dwelling District) 934 Maplewood Drive, described as
30    12-10 Wildewood Acres, Block 8, Lot 18, and the adjacent 10-foot strip to the south of
            Lot 18.
2010- 10-   Granting R-1 (One-Family Dwelling District) at 107 E. Bobwhite Lane, described as a
31    12-10 portion of Lot 9 Block 2, Meadow Acres.
2010- 11-9- Granting B-4 (Secondary and Highway Business District) property located at the
34    10    northeast corner Knight’s Way (FM 2410) and Warriors Path, described as
            approximately 5.320 acres, part of the Uriah Hunt Survey, Abstract No. 401.
2010- 11-9- Granting B-4 (Secondary and Highway Business District) on property located at 806
35    10    S. Ann Boulevard described as part of Lots 3 and 4, Block 6, Meadow Acres.
2011- 2-8-  Granting B-4 (Secondary and Highway Business District) on property located at 2300
03    11    Indian Trail, described as Lots 11-12, Block 25, Comanche Land 2nd Unit.
2011- 2-8-  Granting B-4 (Secondary and Highway Business District) on property located at 2302
04    11    Indian Trail, described as Lots 13-15, Block 25, Comanche Land 2nd Unit.
2011- 3-8-  Granting B-4 (Secondary and Highway with a T Overlay) on property located at 400-
05    11    402 W. Veterans Memorial Boulevard, described as approximately .825 acre tract of
            the C. Keele Survey, Abstract No. A-0991BC.
2011- 4-12- Granting B-4 Secondary and Highway with a T/Overlay for 1573 square feet of net
06    11    floor area on property located at 1827 E. FM 2410, described as Lot 1, Block 1,
            Fireside Addition.
2011- 5-10- Granting R-2 (Two-Family Dwelling District) on property located to the west of Amy
10    11    Lane; to the south of Ruby Road; and to the north of East Bobwhite Lane, described
            as 7.993 acres out of the Keele Survey.
            Granting B-4 with T Overlay (Secondary and Highway Business District with a Tavern
2011- 5-10- Overlay) on 1,740 square feet of net floor area on property located at 116 East
11    11    Veterans Memorial Boulevard, described as Lots 8-9, 20-21, Block 2, Kern Acres,
            Second Extension and Revision.
2011- 6-14- Granting R-2 (Two-Family Dwelling District) on property located at 102 and 104 Ball
13    11    Road, described as Lots 1-2, Block 4, Valley View First Extension.
            Granting B-4 (Secondary and Highway Business District) on a 2.21 acre tract out of
2011- 6-28- the Cross and Sprott Surveys, located on the west side of FM 3481 and approximately
14    11    1,400 feet north of Chaparral Road, described as Commercial Lot 1, Block 10,
            Tuscany Meadows Preliminary Plat.
            Granting B-3 (Local Business District) on a 2.72 acre tract out of the Cross,
2011- 6-28- Sprott and William Surveys, located on the northwest corner of FM 3481 and
15    11    Chaparral Road, described as Commercial Lot 27, Block 3, Tuscany Meadows
            Preliminary Plat.
2011- 7-12- Granting R-2 (Two-Family Dwelling District) on property located at 901 Lemonwood
16    11    Drive, described as Lot 1, Block 3, Wildewood Acres and adjacent ten-foot strip to
            the North (See Attachment A).
2011- 8-9-  Granting R1-R (Rural One-Family Dwelling District) on property located at 3973 High
18    11    Oak Drive, described as approximately 5.0 acres, Tract 14, Property Identification
            No. 127182, Lakeside Hills Section One (See Attachment A).
2011- 8-9-  Granting R1-R (Rural One-Family Dwelling District) on approximately 5.3 acres,
19    11    described as Tract 15, Property Identification No. 53509, Lakeside Hills Section
            One and the parcel directly south of 3973 High Oak Drive (See Attachment A).
            Granting PD-M (Planned Development - Mixed Use) on approximately 10.275 acre tract
2011- 8-9-  out of the F.D. Cox Survey, Abstract No. A-0220BC, located at the southeastern
20    11    corner of the intersection of Nola Ruth Boulevard and Old Nolanville Road, subject
            to compliance with all that is stipulated in Attachment A, which shall be kept in
            the Planning and Development Department’s files (See Attachment A).
2011- 9-13- Granting R1-R (Rural One-Family Dwelling District) on property located at 4972
28    11    Lakeside Drive, described as approximately 5.96 acres, Tract 65, Property
            Identification No. 49354, Lakeside Hills Section Two. (See Attachment A).
2011- 9-13- Granting R-2 (Two-Family Dwelling District) on property located at 913 Pinewood
29    11    Drive, described as Lot 7, Block 11, Wildewood Acres and ten (10) foot strip
            adjacent on the North. (See Attachment A).
            Granting the PD-M (Planned Development - Mixed Use) on property located at 326
2012- 7-10- Morgan Street, 346 Morgan Street, 352 Morgan Street and 366 Morgan Street,
11    12    described as Lots 3-6, Block 1, Morgan Commercial Addition.  Per the PD-M Narrative
            (Attachment A); PD-M Site Plan (Attachment B); PD-M Architectural Standards
            (Attachment C); and PD-M Location Map (Attachment D), subject to the following:
               1.   Development of the property shall be in conformance with the project
          narrative (Attachment A) and the site plan (Attachment B) attached as part of the
            ordinance.
             2.   Development of the structures shall be subject to the architectural
            standards attached as part of the ordinance (Attachment C).
             3.   No non-residential uses will be permitted, except those uses as provided in
            B-3 (Local Business District).
               4.   The project site, Lots 3, 4, 5, 6, Block 1, Morgan Commercial Addition is
          approximately 3.9 acres and a waiver from the required five acres under § 155.036
            (C)(2) is recommended.
             5.   All landscape plantings coordinating with wrought iron fencing shall be an
            evergreen species and a minimum three feet in height at the time of installation.
               6.   An eight-foot masonry screening wall with landscape improvements shall be
          installed along the frontage of Frontier Trail to buffer the parking area from
            residential uses also fronting on Frontier Trail.
2012- 8-14- Granting R-2 (Two-Family Dwelling District) on property located at 931 Ashwood
14    12    Drive, described as Lot 16, Block 9, Wildewood Acres and the ten (10 foot strip
            adjacent on the North. (See Attachment A to Ord. 2012-14.)
            Granting R-2 (Two-Family Dwelling District) on property located at 939 & 941
2012- 8-14- Pinewood Drive, described as Lots 20-21, Block 11, Wildewood Acres and the ten (10)
15    12    foot strip adjacent on the North; and 938 & 940 Pinewood Drive, described as Lots
            20-21, Block 12, Wildewood Acres and the adjacent ten (10) foot strip to the South.
            (See Attachment A to Ord. 2012-15.)
            Granting R1-R (Rural One-Family Dwelling District) on property located at 11130
2012- 10-9- Rummel Road, described as approximately 5.27 acres, Lot Tract 9, Property
24    12    Identification No. 74678, Lakeside Hills Section One. (See Attachment A to Ord.
            2012-24.)
2012- 10-9- Granting R-2 (Two-Family Dwelling District) on property located at 900 Lemonwood
25    12    Drive, described as Lot 1, Block 4, Wildewood Acres and the ten (10) foot strip
            adjacent on the South.  (See Attachment A to Ord. 2012-25.)
            Granting the RT-1 (Townhouse Single- Family Dwelling District) on property located
            at 938 and 940 Pinewood Drive, described as Lots 20-21, Block 12, Wildewood Acres
2012- 11-   and the ten (10) foot strip adjacent to the south of each lot; and property located
26    20-12 at 939 and 941 Pinewood Drive, described as Lots 20-21, Block 11, Wildewood Acres
            and the ten (10) foot strip adjacent to the north of each lot.  (See Attachment A
            to Ord. 2012-26.)
            Granting the RT-1 (Townhouse Single- Family Dwelling District) on property located
            at 926 Ashwood Drive, described as Lots 14-15, Block 10, Wildewood Acres and the
2012- 11-   ten (10) foot strip adjacent to the south of each lot; and on property located at
27    20-12 938 and 940 Ashwood Drive, described as Lots 20-21, Block 10, Wildewood Acres and
            the ten (10) foot strip adjacent to the south of each lot.  (See Attachment A to
            Ord. 2012-27.)
2013- 2-12- Granting the R-2 (Two-Family Dwelling District) on property located at 925
02    13    Ramblewood Drive, described as Lot 13, Block 1, Wildewood Acres and the forty (40)
            foot adjacent strip to the north.  (See Attachment A to Ord. 2013-02.)
2013- 2-12- Granting the R-2 (Two-Family Dwelling District) on property located at 919
03    13    Ramblewood Drive, described as Lot 10-A, Block 1, Wildewood Acres and the forty
            (40) foot adjacent strip to the north.  (See Attachment A to Ord. 2013-03.)
2013- 2-12- Granting the R-2 (Two-Family Dwelling District) on property located at 933
04    13    Maplewood Drive, described as Lot 17-A, Block 7, Wildewood Acres and the ten (10)
            foot adjacent strip to the north.  (See Attachment A to Ord. 2013-04.)
2013- 2-12- Granting the RT-1 (Townhouse Single-Family Dwelling District) on approximately 0.173
 acre tract, Abstract No. A-0413BC located adjacent to Verna Lee Boulevard.  (See
            Attachment A to Ord. 2013- 05.)
            Granting the R1-R (Rural One-Family Dwelling District) on property located at 4280
2013- 2-12- High Oak Drive, described as approximately 5.03 acres, Lot Tract 33, Property
06    13    Identification No. 16989, Lakeside Hills Section Two.  (See Attachment A to Ord.
            2013-06.)
            Granting the B-4 (Secondary and Highway Business District) on property located at
2013- 2-12- 12411 FM 2410, described as approximately 1.918 acre tract out of the W.H. Webb
07    13    Survey, 1, Abstract No. A-1016BC and out of the J.M. Cross Survey, Abstract No. A-
            0179.  (See Attachment A to Ord. 2013-07.)
            Granting the PD-M (Planned Development-Mixed Use) on approximately 19.93 acre tract
            of land described as an 11.434 acre tract, a 0.258 acre tract, and a 5.709 acre
2013- 5-14- tract out of the W.E. Hall Survey, Abstract No. A-1086BC; and 4 acres from Lot 4,
12    13    Block 1, Centex Waste Management Addition, Phase Two, generally located north of
            Clore Road, east of Indian Trail, west of Lookout Ridge and south of Veterans
            Memorial Boulevard and generally addressed as 329 Indian Trail. (See Attachments A,
            B, C, D, and E to Ord. 2013-12.)
2013- 6-11- Granting R1 (One-Family Dwelling) to R1-R (Rural One-Family Dwelling District) on
16    13    property located at 2835 Comanche Gap Road, described as approximately 5.926 acres,
            Lot 1, Block 1, Horizon Addition. (See Attachment A to Ord. 2013-16).
2013- 6-11- Granting a Conditional Use Permit to Thomas Wilson to construct a stand-alone
17    13    structure on property located at 2835 Comanche Gap Road, described as approximately
            5.926 acres, Lot 1, Block 1, Horizon Addition, subject to conditions.
            Granting the R-2 (Two-Family Dwelling District) on property located at 101 Stone
2013- 10-   Canyon Court, described as Lot 7, Block 12, Tanglewood North, 4th Unit, 1st
29    22-13 Section; and R-2 (Two-Family Dwelling District) on property located at 103, 105 and
            107 Stone Canyon Court, described as Lots 8-10, Block 12, Tanglewood North, 4th
            Unit, 1st Section.
2013- 10-   Granting the R-2 (Two-Family Dwelling District) on property located at 2312, 2314
30    22-13 and 2316 Verna Lee Blvd., described as Lots 1A, 1B, and 1C, Wildewood Acres.
2013- 11-   Granting the R-2 (Two-Family Dwelling District) on property located at 909 Rosewood
32    12-13 Drive, described as Lot 5, Block 5, Wildewood Acres and the ten (10) foot adjacent
            strip to the north. (See Attachment A to Ord. 2013-32).
2013- 11-   Granting the R-2 (Two-Family Dwelling District) on property located at 911 Rosewood
33    12-13 Drive, described as Lot 6, Block 5, Wildewood Acres and the ten (10) foot adjacent
            strip to the north. (See Attachment A to Ord. 2013-33).
            An ordinance to amend Ordinance No. 2013-12, PD-M (Planned Development - Mixed Use)
            pursuant to the standards described in the Development Conditions - “The Enclave at
            Heights” on an approximately 19.827 acre tract of land described as a parcel of
2013- 12-   land in Bell County, Texas, part of the W.E. Hall Survey, Abstract No. 1086 and the
34    10-13 J.M. Roberts Survey, Abstract No. 723, Official Public Records of Real Property,
            Bell County, Texas, generally located north of Clore Road, east of Indian Trail,
            west of Lookout Ridge Boulevard and south of Veterans Memorial Boulevard and
            generally addressed as 329 Indian Trail.
2013- 12-   Granting the R-2 (Two-Family Dwelling District) on property located at 403 S. Mary
35    10-13 Jo Drive, described as Lot 6, Block 5, Kern Acres 1st Extension & Revision. (See
            Attachment A).
2013- 12-   Adopting Development District No. 1 - The Knight’s Way Corridor - Design Goals,
36    10-13 Guidelines, and Standards Manual on property fronting Knight’s Way (FM 2410) from
            the intersection at U.S. Highway 190 to the eastern city limits.
2014- 2-11- Granting a Conditional Use Permit  in the R-1 District at 3208 Stillhouse Lake
03    14    Road.
2014- 4-8-  Granting the R-2 (Two-Family Dwelling District) on property located at 205 and 207
05    14    West Arlo, described as Lots 21 and 22, Block 1, Kern Acres, 1st Extension. (See
            Attachment A to Ord. 2014-05).
2014- 5-13- Granting a T-Overlay on 2,613 square feet of net floor area on property located at
07    14    1827 E. FM 2410, described as Lot PT 1, Block 1 (E. 252.72' of 1), 1.204 acres,
            Fireside Addition.
2014- 5-13- Granting B-4 zoning on 3.67 acres and 6.41 acres located along the eastern frontage
08    14    of Stillhouse Lake Road generally south of FM 2410 and immediately across from
            Prospector Trail.
2014- 5-13- Granting R-2 zoning on property located at 933 Ashwood Drive, described as Lot 17,
09    14    Block 9, Wildewood Acres and the ten foot adjacent strip to the north.
2014- 6-10- Granting a CUP (Conditional Use Permit) to allow a professional office to operate
11    14    in an R-1 (Single Family Dwelling District) on business located at 103 E. FM 2410,
            also described as Lot 7, Block 15 Forest Hills.
2014- 7-8-  Granting R-2 zoning on property located at 1601 and 1607 Pontotoc Trace, described
13    14    as Lots 1-12 and Lot 13, Block 45, Comanche Land, 4th Unit.
2014- 8-12- Granting R-2 zoning on property located at 1423 Hopi Trail and 1614 Dakota Trace,
14    14    described as Lots 12, 13, 14, 15 and 16, Block 8, Comanche Land, 1st Unit.
2014- 9-9-  Granting R1-R with a Conditional Use Permit (CUP) zoning on property located at
20    14    3895 High Oak Drive, described as Tract 13, 5 acres, Lakeside Hills Section One.
2014- 9-9-  Granting R-2 zoning on property located at 1525 Aztec Trace, described as Lot 4,
21    14    Block 1, 0.606 acres, Materne Place.
2014- 9-9-  Granting B-3 zoning on Abstract A0579bc, H Morrell, 3, acres 4.85, generally
22    14    located north of the intersection of Stillhouse Lake Road and Cedar Knob Road, also
            known as Property ID 433991.
2014- 11-   Granting PD-B zoning on property located at 107 West Mountain Lion Road, 
28    18-14 approximately 2.095 acres of 100 West Mountain Lion Road, known as Purser Family
            Park.
2015- 2-10- Granting PD-R (Planned Development-Residential District) on 10.275 acres located at
02    15    the SE corner of Nola Ruth Boulevard and Old Nolanville Road. 
2015- 4-14- Granting R-1(M) zoning on Abstract 288, V.L. Evans Survey, acres 0.794, generally
07    15    located on Jamie Road, also known as Property ID 77900.
            Granting B-4 zoning on a 1.677 acre tract of land in Bell County, Texas, part of
2015- 5-12- the Uriah Hunt Survey, Abstract No. 401, and being part of the tract described as
10    15    44.37 acres in the deed to Anderson Ortega, Jr. and wife, Janie J. Ortega, of
            record in Volume 1985, page 253, Deed Records of Bell County, Texas, generally
            located at 13950 E FM 2410.
2015- 6-9-  Granting PD-R (Planned Development-Residential District) on 9.1 acres located at
12    15    the northeast quadrant of Cedar Knob Road and Stillhouse Lake Road.
2015- 7-14- Granting R-2 zoning on Lot 10, Block 4 and 10 ft. strip adjacent to the South,
13    15    Wildewood Acres, also known as 918 Lemonwood Drive.
2015- 8-11- Granting R-2 zoning on Lots 6, 7, part of 8, Block 3, Comanche Land First Unit,
15    15    also known as 1504 Dakota Trace.
            Granting PD-R (Planned Development- Residential District) on 144.18 acres of land
            in Bell County, Texas, out of the H.R. Morrell Survey, Abstract No. 579, Lucy
2015- 9-8-  O’dell Survey, Abstract No. 644, and the J.T.W.J. Hallmark Survey, Abstract No.
19    15    413, and also being a portion of the tract described as 490.1 acres in a deed to
            James Dennis Magill dated May 23, 1972 and recorded in Volume 1177, page 145 of the
            Bell County deed records and laying east of F.M. 3481, and further described as
            Property ID # 433992 and Property ID # 67413.
2015- 10-   Granting R-2 zoning on Lot 15 and 20-foot strip adjacent on North Side, Block 1,
20    13-15 Wildewood Acres, Bell County, Texas, and further described as Property ID # 113746,
            also known as 929 Ramblewood Drive.
2015- 11-   Granting R-2 zoning on Lots 6-11, Block 4, Comanche Land 1st unit subdivision, 1.8
23    10-15 acres, Bell County, Texas further described as Property ID # 55580, also known as
            1514 Dakota Trace.
2015- 12-8- Granting a CUP (Conditional Use Permit), to allow a private art school in a single
24    15    family residence located at 103 Mountain Lion Road, described as Property ID
            #90579, A0838BC R W Tom, 2-7, 1.378 acres, Bell County, Texas.
            Granting a CUP (Conditional Use Permit), to allow B-3 uses with conditions on 2.9
2016- 3-8-  acres of land, described as A0343BC J Goslin 1-1 and A1099BC P Williamson 14-9,
04    16    acres 2.996, with Property ID #73390, generally located at the southeastern corner
            of the intersection of Stillhouse Lake Road (FM 3481) and Fuller Lane, Harker
            Heights, Texas.
            Granting a Planned Development- Residential District (PD-R) with conditions on
2016- 3-8-  approximately 13.569 acres, being three parcels out of the W.E. Hall survey,
05    16    abstract no. 1086, the S.H. Osborne survey, abstract no. 646, and the J.M. Roberts
            survey, abstract no. 723.
            Granting a CUP (Conditional Use Permit), to allow a dog training facility located
2016- 3-8-  at 1901 E. FM 2410 (Knights Way), described as Property ID #434691, Guys with Green
06    16    Shoes Addition, Block 001, Lot 0001, Acres 4.92, Harker Heights, Bell County,
            Texas.
            Granting a CUP (Conditional Use Permit), to allow a modular building at 850 W.
2016- 4-12- Central Texas Expressway described as Savannah Commercial Addition, Block 001, Lot
08    16    Part 1 (1, less part out of east side), Acres 19.306, with Property ID #390292,
            Harker Heights, Bell County, Texas.
            Granting R1-R zoning on Lot 20 and Lot 21, Block One, Comanche Gap Estates, a
            subdivision in Harker Heights, Bell County, Texas, according to the map or plat of
2016- 5-10- record in Cabinet A, Slide 192-D, Plat Records of Bell County, Texas, also known as
11    16    2934 Apache Loop, Property ID #117892 and Lot 19, Block One, Comanche Gap Estates,
            a subdivision in Harker Heights, Bell County, Texas according to the map or plat of
            record in Cabinet A, Slide 192-D, Plat Records of Bell County, Texas, also known as
            1940 Apache Loop, Property ID #74361.
            Granting R-2 zoning Lots 13 and 14, Block Three, Wildewood Acres, an addition to
            the City of Harker Heights, Bell County, Texas, according to the map or plat of
2016- 5-10- record in Cabinet A, Slide 306-B, plat records of Bell County, Texas, together with
12    16    a ten-foot adjacent strip abandoned alley per ordinance in Volume 2313, Page 391,
            Deed Records of Bell County, Texas, also known as 925 Lemondwood, Property ID
            #40470 and 927 Lemonwood, Property ID #40471.
            Granting Planned Development - Residential District (PD-R) zoning with conditions
2016- 7-12- on property described as A1032BC, D.R. Hughes Survey, 2, Acres 9.339, in the City
15    16    of Harker Heights, Bell County, Texas, Property ID # 459261, also known as 3401
            Oakridge Blvd.
2016- 7-12- Granting R1-R zoning on property described as A0722BC, R.Y. Renick, 2-3, Acres
16    16    8.91, in the City of Harker Heights, Bell County, Texas, Property ID # 70961,
            located at the North Eastern corner of Broken Arrow Drive and Hanna Hawk Circle.
2016- 8-9-  Granting R-2 zoning on property described as A0115BC I T Bean, Lot 1, Block 51
17    16    Comanche Lands UNDED Acres .34, Bell County Texas, with Property ID# 124333, also
            known as 1600 Aztec Trace.
2016- 9-13- Granting R-2 zoning on property described as Wildwood Acres Replat (Lts 15-16, Blk
18    16    8), Block 008, Lot 015A, Harker Heights, Bell County, Texas, Property ID# 60206,
            also known as 930 Maplewood Drive.
2016- 9-13- Granting RMU zoning on property described as Kern Acres 1st extension and revision,
19    16    Block 003, Lot 0005, Harker Heights, Bell County, Texas, Property ID# 131803, also
            known as 401 Bonnie Drive.
            Granting a CUP (Conditional Use Permit) for a telecommunications tower on property
2016- 9-13- described as Heights Commercial Subdivision, Block 002, Lot 0003, Harker Heights,
20    16    Bell County, Texas, Property ID# 47731, also known as the Extraco Bank Building
            located at 100 W. Central Texas Expressway.
2016- 10-   Granting R-2 (Two-family Dwelling District) zoning on property located at 1703
25    11-16 Pueblo Trace.
            Granting PD-R (Planned Development - Residential Zoning) on 144.134 acres of land
            in Bell County, Texas, out of the H.R. Morrell Survey, Abstract No. 579,  Lucy
2016- 12-   O'Dell Survey, Abstract No. 644, and the J.T.W.J. Hallmark Survey, Abstract No.
27    13-16 413, and also being a portion of the tract described as 490.1 acres in a deed to
            James Dennis Magill dated May 23, 1972 and recorded in Volume 1177,  Page 145 of
            the Bell County deed records and laying East of F.M. 3481, and further described as
            Property Id#433992 and Property Id#67413.
2016- 12-   Granting a Conditional Use Permit (CUP) on property located at 1407 Summer Glen
28    13-16 Drive.
2017- 1-10- Granting R-2 zoning on property described as Lot 8, Block 2, and 10-foot strip
02    17    adjacent on South, Wildewood Acres, City of Harker Heights, Bell County, Texas, and
            further described as Property ID# 30401, also known as 914 Ramblewood Drive.
2017- 4-11- Granting R-1 zoning on property located at 4972 Lakeside Hills Drive.
03    17
2017- 6-13- Modifying a CUP (Conditional Use Permit) on property located at 1909 Forest Hills
13    17    Drive.
2017- 7-11- Granting R-2 zoning on property located at 1604 Dakota Trace.
14    17
2017- 7-11- Modifying a CUP (Conditional Use Permit) on property located at 103 East Knights
15    17    Way.
2017- 8-8-  Granting a CUP to allow a real estate office on property located at 105 East
16    17    Knights Way.
2017- 8-8-  Granting R-2 zoning on property located at 914 Maplewood Drive.
17    17
2017- 8-8-  Granting R-2 zoning on property located at 308 Bonnie Drive.
18    17
2017- 8-8-  Granting R-2 zoning on property located at 402 Bonnie Drive.
19    17
            Granting PD-M (Planned Development - Mixed Use) on properties described as A-0179BC
2017- 8-8-  J.M. Cross, 3-3-1, acres 1.504, with Property ID# 127920, A-0179BC J.M. Cross,
20    17    acres 2.097, with Property ID#198358, A- 0179BC J.M. Cross, 3-3, acres 9.469, with
            Property ID# 38947, A-0179BC J.M. Cross, 3-3-2, acres 6.949 with Property ID#
            127921, generally located at 12590 E. Knights Way (E. FM 2410).
2017- 9-12- Amending Ord. 2015-02 on 10.275 acres located at SE Corner of Nola Ruth Boulevard
26    17    and Old Nolanville Road.
2017- 11-   Granting R1-R zoning on property located at 2237 Apache Drive.
29    14-17
2017- 12-   Granting R1-R zoning on property located at 11361 Orlan Drive.
31    12-17
2018- 1-9-  Granting R2-I zoning on property located at 304 Harley Drive.
01    18
2018- 1-9-  Granting R-2 zoning on property located at 905 Rosewood Drive.
02    18
2018- 1-9-  Granting a CUP (Conditional Use Permit), to allow Garden Homes, on property
03    18    generally located to the cast of Preswick Circle.
2018- 2-13- Granting R1-I zoning on property located at 223 East Valley Road.
07    18
2018- 2-13- Granting a conditional use permit (CUP) on property located at 3806-A Oakridge
08    18    Boulevard.
2018- 4-10- Granting B-4 zoning on property located at 331 Indian Trail.
11    18
2018- 5-8-  Granting R-2 zoning on Block 1, Lots 8 and 9 and 20 feet strips adjacent on north,
14    18    Wildewood Acres and further described in Property Id # 32902 and 32901, also known
            as 915 and 917 Ramblewood Drive.
2018- 5-8-  Granting a CUP on property located at 1107 Old Oak Road.
15    18
2018- 6-12- Granting R1-R zoning on property located at 3200 and 3202 Comanche Gap Road.
17    18
            Granting B-4 zoning on property located on Property ID# 393005, generally located
2018- 7-10- on Cedar Knob Road between Loblolly Drive and E. Knights Way with the addition of
18    18    an 8-foot privacy fence along the eastern property lines as allowed under §150.38
            ADDITIONAL SCREENING OR FENCING.
            Granting a CUP (Conditional Use Permit), to adjust design requirements for an air
            conditioning and heating repair company on property designated as B-4 (Secondary
            and Highway Business District), described as Lot 7A, Block 1, Amended Plat of Lots
2018- 8-14- 7, 8, 17 and 18 Kern Acres, Second Extension & Revision, an addition to the City of
20    18    Harker Heights, Bell County, Texas, according to the map or plat of record in
            Cabinet C, Slide 318-D, Plat Records of Bell County, Texas, identified as Property
            ID# 118033, generally located at 104 West Veterans Memorial Boulevard, Harker
            Heights, Bell County, Texas
2018- 9-11- Granting B-4 zoning on 3.87 acre tract of land in Bell County, Texas, being part of
24    18    the Uriah Hunt Survey, Abstract No. 401, generally located at 13960 E. Knights Way
            (E FM 2410)
            Granting a CUP (Conditional Use Permit), to adjust design requirements for an
2018- 12-   existing storage business of property designated as B-5 (General Business
27    11-18 District), on 5.394 acres described as part of Lot 3, Block 1, and all of Lot 4,
            Block 1, J.P.T.C. addition, generally located at 1174 S. Amy Lane, Harker Heights,
            Bell County, Texas.
            Granting PD-M (Panned Development - Mixed Use) on properties 20.069 acres out of
2018- 11-   the J. M. Cross Survey, Abstract No. 179, being Property ID#S 127920, 198358,
28    13-18 38947, and 127921, generally located at 12590 E. Knights Way (E. FM 2410), Harker
            Heights, Bell County, Texas.
            Granting a CUP (Conditional Use Permit), to allow an accessory dwelling unit to be
2018- 11-   occupied by a relative, on property described as Leasure Addition, Block One (1),
29    13-18 Lot One (1), Acres 1.432, Property ID# 408903, generally located at 1801 Ponca
            Trace, Harker Heights, Bell County, Texas.
            Granting a CUP (Conditional Use Permit), to allow a masonry clad manufactured home
2018- 11-   on property described as Five Feathers Addition, Block One (1), Lot Two (2),
30    13-18 Property ID# 185944, generally located at 2204 Warriors Path, Harker Heights, Bell
            County, Texas.
            Granting PD-B (Planned Development - Business) on a 6.730 acre tract of land
            situated in the E.M. Sprott survey, Abstract No. 772, the R.W. Tom survey, Abstract
2018- 12-   No. 840, the J.T. and W.J. Hallmark survey, Abstract No. 837, all in Bell County,
31    11-18 Texas and being a part or portion of that certain called 46.849 acre tract of land
            described in deeds to 2410 Real Estate LP, generally located near the intersection
            of Hudson Boulevard and Prospector Trail in Harker Heights, Bell County, Texas.
2019- 2-12- Granting R-2 zoning on property located at 913 Ashwood Drive, Harker Heights,
03    19    Texas.
2019- 2-12- Granting R1-R zoning on property located at 12411 E. FM 2410 (E. Knights Way),
04    19    Harker Heights, Texas.
            Granting a CUP (Conditional Use Permit), to allow an accessory dwelling unit on
2019- 3-26- property described as part of Lot 8 and all of Lots 9 and Lot 10, Block 4, Hidden
06    19    Valley Estates, an addition in Bell County, Texas, recorded in Cabinet A, Slide
            212-A, Plat Records of Bell County, Texas, generally located at 2223 Fuller Lane,
            Harker Heights, Bell County, Texas.
2019- 3-12- Granting R-2 zoning on property located at 926 Maplewood Drive, Harker Heights,
07    19    Texas.
2019- 3-12- Granting B-3 zoning on property located at 514 and 516 Clore Road, Harker Heights,
08    19    Texas.
            Granting R2-1 zoning on property described as, Lot 22, Block 3, Kern Acres, first
2019- 5-14- extension and revision, according to a map or plat of record in Cabinet A, Slide
12    19    223-D Plat Records of Bell County, Texas, generally located at 504 S. Juanita
            Drive, Harker Heights, Bell County, Texas.
            Granting R2-I zoning on properties described as Lots 1-8 and 11, Block Two (2);
            Lots 6-7, Block Three (3); Lots 8-14 & Adjacent 70'X 30' Strips, Block Three (3);
            and Lots 1-16, Block Four (4), all in Kern Terrace Second Extension, according to
2019- 6-11- the plat of record at Cabinet A, Slide 225-A, Plat Records of Bell County Texas,
15    19    being generally located at 205, 207, 209, 210, 214, 216, 218, 219, 220, 221, 222,
            224, 226, 227 Jamie Road; 400, 401, 402, 403, 404, 405, 406, 407, 408, 409, 410,
            411 N Juanita Drive; and 504, 506, 508 W Nolan Trail, Harker Heights, Bell County,
            Texas.
2019- 6-11- Granting PD-B zoning on property located at 101 N. Roy Reynolds Drive, Harker
16    19    Heights, Texas.
            Granting R-2 zoning on property described as 5.461 acres, being part of the H.B.
            Littlefield Survey, Abstract No. 511, being all of a called 5.44 acre tract of
2019- 6-11- record in Volume 1380, Page 255, Deed Records of Bell County, Texas, also being
17    19    known as all of Lots 6 thru 13, Block 35, all of Lots 6 thru 13, Block 36, and a
            portion of Kiowa Trace, of Comanche Land, an unrecorded subdivision in Bell County,
            Texas, generally located at the corner of Ute Trail and Warriors Path Road, Harker
            Heights, Bell County, Texas.
2019- 7-9-  Granting a CUP (Conditional Use Permit), to adjust design requirements for 4C
19    19    Headstart Program on property generally located at 120 Harley Drive, Harker
            Heights, Bell County, Texas.
2019- 7-23- Granting a CUP (Conditional Use Permit), to allow certain uses associated with a B-
20    19    1 zoning district or a real estate office on property located at 703 W. Knights Way
            (W. FM 2410), Harker Heights, Bell County, Texas.
2019- 9-10- Granting a Conditional Use Permit (CUP) on property located at 4650 High Oak Drive.
25    19
            Granting R-3 zoning on property described as Lots 1-5, Block Three (3), Kern
            Terrace Second Extension, according to the plat of records in Cabinet A, Slide 225-
2019- 9-10- A, Plat Records of Bell County, Texas; and 1.241 acres out of the V.L. Evans Survey
26    19    Abstract 288, generally located southwest of the intersection of Jamie Road and
            North Mary Jo Drive, currently addressed as 200, 202, 204, 206, and 208 Jamie Road
            and 200 Jane Circle, Harker Heights, Bell County, Texas.
2019- 9-10- Granting R2-I zoning on property described as Yandell Mobile Home Park, being 1.446
27    19    acres out of the V.L. Evans Survey, Abstract 288, located at 201 N. Mary Jo Drive.
            Granting R2-I zoning on property described as 4.216 acres out of the V.L. Evans
2019- 9-10- Survey, Abstract 288, being the same property described in Field Notes attached to
28    19    a general warranty deed recorded under instrument number 2010-00016917, Real
            Property Records of Bell County, Texas, generally located at Lynn Drive, Harker
            Heights, Bell County, Texas.
            Amending PD-B (Planned Development-Business District) on property located at 107 W.
2019- 9-24- Mountain Lion Road, described as 2.930 acres out of the R.W. Tom Survey, Abstract
32    19    No. 838, and 110 W. Mountain Lion Road, described as 2.097 acres in the D.H.
            Roberts Survey, Abstract No. 1118.
            Granting R-2 zoning on property described as Lot Nine (9), Block 52, Comanche Land
2020- 1-14- Subdivision, an unrecorded subdivision, out of Abstract 115 of the I.T. Bean
01    20    Survey, generally located near the intersection of Aztec Trace and Yuma Trail,
            Harker Heights, Bell County, Texas.
            Granting an amendment to ordinance 2015-24 for an existing Conditional Use Permit
2020- 1-14- (CUP) to allow for an expansion of the main structure serving as the business Tap
02    20    Tap Art School on property described as A0838BC R.W. Tom, 2-7, Acres 1.378,
            generally located at 103 Mountain Lion Road, Harker Heights, Bell County, Texas.
            Granting a Conditional Use Permit (CUP) to allow a four story hotel not to exceed
            60 feet in height within a B-4 zoning district on property described as a 2.200
2020- 5-12- acre tract of land in Harker Heights, Bell County, Texas, being all of Lot Seven,
15    20    and part of Lot Three, Block One, ACTG Addition, being a replat of Lot Two, Block
            One, Union State Bank Addition, Phase Three as recorded in Cabinet D, Slide 200-D,
            generally located behind 335 E. Knights Way, Harker Heights, Bell County, Texas.
            Granting R1-R zoning on property described as Tract 89, Lakeside Hills, Section
2020- 5-12- Three, a subdivision in Bell County, according to the plat thereof of record in
16    20    Plat Book A, Slide 43-D, plat records of Bell County, Texas, and containing 8.02
            acres, generally located at 11365 Orlan Drive, Harker Heights, Bell County, Texas.
            Granting R1-R zoning on property described as Tract 20, Lakeside Hills, Section
2020- 6-6-  Two, a subdivision in Bell County, according to the plat of record in Cabinet A,
19    20    Slide 43-C, plat records of Bell County, Texas, containing 6.11 acres, generally
            located at 10518 Meadow Circle, Harker Heights, Bell County, Texas.
            Granting R2-1 zoning on property described as Lots One (1) through Five (5), Block
            Three (3), Kern Terrace Second Extension, Harker Heights, per plat of record in
2020- 6-9-  Cabinet A, Slide 225-A, Plat Records of Bell County, Texas, and 1.241 Acres out of
20    20    the V.L. Evans Survey, Abstract 288, generally located southwest of the
            intersection of Jamie Road and Mary Jo Drive, currently addressed as 200, 202, 204,
            206, and 208 Jamie Road, and 200 Jan Circle, Harker Heights, Bell County, Texas.
2020- 7-14- Granting R-2 zoning on property located at 931 and 933 Pinewood Drive, Harker
23    20    Heights, Texas.
2020- 7-14- Granting R1-R zoning on property described as 5.63 acres, Lot 90 of Lakeside Hills
24    20    Section Three, generally located at 11366 Orlan Drive, Harker Heights, Bell County,
            Texas.
2020- 7-14- Granting R-2 zoning on property described as 9.10 acres out of the H.B. Littlefield
25    20    Survey, Abstract 511, generally located within the 1700 Block of Warriors Path,
            Harker Heights, Texas.
2020- 7-14- Granting PD-B zoning on property located at 12025 E. Knights Way (E. FM 2410),
26    20    Harker Heights, Bell County, Texas.
           
 
 
TABLE VIII: TAXES, WATER, SEWER AND OTHER RATESAND FEES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
      9-  An ordinance prescribing and setting the 1998 rates and charges for sales of the
97-25 9-  water and services of the wastewater system of the city; prescribing the time for
      97  payment of accounts and penalties for non- payment; setting deposits for utilities;
          and providing an effective date.
      9-
97-26 9-  An ordinance levying a tax rate for the city for the tax year 1998.
      97
      9-  An ordinance adopting and approving a budget for the city for the fiscal year
97-27 9-  October 1, 1997 to September 30, 1998.
      97
      9-  Adopting and approving a budget for the fiscal year October 1, 1998 to September
98-36 8-  30, 1999.
      98
      9-
98-37 8-  Levying a tax rate for the city for the tax year 1999.
      98
      9-  Prescribing and setting the 1999 rates and charges for sales of the water and
98-38 8-  services of the wastewater system of the city; prescribing the time for payment of
      98  accounts and penalties for non-payment, setting deposits for utilities; and
          providing an effective date.
      9-  An ordinance prescribing and setting the 1999-2000 rates and charges for sales of
99-24 14- water, services of the wastewater system, and garbage collection of the city;
      99  prescribing the payment of accounts and penalties for non- payment; setting
          deposits for utilities; and providing an effective date.
      9-  An ordinance adopting and approving a budget for the fiscal year October 1, 1999 to
99-25 14- September 30, 2000.
      99
      9-
99-26 14- An ordinance levying a tax rate for the city for the tax year 2000.
      99
      5-  An ordinance prescribing and setting the rates and charges for the City Parks and
2000- 9-  Recreation Aquatics Program, prescribing the daily admission fees, swim pass fees,
14    00  swim lessons fees, setting deposits with rental fees, and providing an effective
          date.
2000- 9-  An ordinance adopting and approving a budget for the city for the fiscal year
25    5-  October 1, 2000, to September 30, 2001.
      00
2000- 9-
26    5-  An ordinance levying a tax rate for the city for the tax year 2001.
      00
      9-  An ordinance prescribing and setting the FY2000-01 rates and charges for sales of
2000- 5-  water, services of the wastewater system, and garbage collection of the city;
27    00  prescribing the time for payment of accounts and penalties for non-payment; setting
          deposits for utilities; and providing an effective date.
      6-  An ordinance approving the general service rates including rate adjustment
2001- 26- provisions and miscellaneous service charges for sales and transportation of
20    01  natural gas to residential, commercial, and industrial consumers; and providing for
          the manner in which such rates may be changed, adjusted, and amended.
      8-  An ordinance prescribing and setting the FY2001-02 rates and charges for sales of
2001- 28- water, services of the wastewater system, and garbage collection of the city;
25    01  prescribing the time for payment of accounts and penalties for non-payment; setting
          deposits for utilities; and  providing an effective date.
2001- 8-
26    28- An ordinance levying a tax rate for the city for the tax year 2002.
      01
2001- 8-  An ordinance adopting and approving a budget for the city for the fiscal year
27    28- October 1, 2001, to September 13, 2002.
      01
2002- 9-
18    24- An ordinance levying a tax rate for the city for the tax year 2003.
      02
      9-  An ordinance prescribing and setting the  FY2002-03 rates and charges for sales of
2002- 24- water, services of the wastewater system, and garbage collection of the city;
19    02  prescribing the time for payment of accounts and penalties for non-payment; setting
          deposits for utilities; and providing an effective date.
2002- 9-  An ordinance adopting and approving a budget for the city for the fiscal year
20    24- October 1, 2002 to September 13, 2003.
      02
2003- 9-
09    9-  An ordinance levying a tax rate for the city for the tax year 2004.
      03
      9-  An ordinance prescribing and setting the FY2003-04 rates and charges for sales of
2003- 9-  water, services of the wastewater system, and garbage collection of the city;
11    03  prescribing the time for payment of accounts and penalties for non-payment; setting
          deposit for utilities; and providing an effective date.
2003- 9-  An ordinance adopting and approving a budget for the city for the fiscal year
12    9-  October 1, 2003 to September 30, 2004.
      03
2004- 2-  An ordinance prescribing and setting the FY2003-04 rates and charges for new
05    24- service meters of the city and providing an effective date.
      04
2004- 3-  An ordinance adopting and approving a hotel/motel budget for the city for the
10    9-  fiscal year October 1, 2003 to September 30, 2004.
      04
2004- 9-  An ordinance adopting and approving a budget for the city for the fiscal year
36    7-  October 1, 2004 to September 30, 2005.
      04
      9-  An ordinance prescribing and setting the FY2004-05 rates and charges for sales of
2004- 21- water, services of the wastewater system, and garbage collection; prescribing the
37    04  time for payment of accounts and penalties for non-payment; setting deposit for
          utilities; and providing an effective date.
2004- 9-
38    7-  An ordinance levying a tax rate for the city for the tax year 2004.
      04
2005- 9-  An ordinance adopting and approving a budget for the city for the fiscal year
33    27- October 1, 2005 to September 30, 2006.
      05
2005- 9-
34    27- An ordinance levying a tax rate for the city for the tax year 2005.
      05
      9-  An ordinance prescribing and setting the fiscal year 2005-2006 rates and charges
2005- 27- for sales of water, services of the wastewater system, and garbage collection of
35    05  the city; prescribing the time for payment of accounts and penalties for non-
          payment; setting deposit for utilities; and providing an effective date.
2006- 9-  An ordinance adopting and approving a budget for the city for the fiscal year
30    5-  October 1, 2006 to September 30, 2007.
      06
2006- 9-
31    5-  An ordinance levying a tax rate for the city for the tax year 2006.
      06
      9-  An ordinance prescribing and setting the fiscal year 2006-2007 rates and charges
2006- 5-  for sales of water, services of the wastewater system, and garbage collection of
32    06  the city; prescribing the time for payment of accounts and penalties for non-
          payment; setting deposit for utilities; and providing an effective date.
2007- 9-  An ordinance adopting and approving a budget for the city for the fiscal year
23    18- October 1, 2007 to September 30, 2008.
      07
2007- 9-
24    18- An ordinance levying a tax rate for the city for the tax year 2007.
      07
      9-  An ordinance prescribing and setting the FY2007-2008 rates and charges for sales
2007- 18- and water, services of the wastewater system, drainage utility fees and garbage
25    07  collection of the city; prescribing the time for payment of accounts and penalties
          for non-payment; setting deposits for utilities; and providing an effective date.
2008- 9-  An ordinance adopting and approving a budget for the city for the fiscal year
21    2-  October 1, 2008 to September 30, 2009.
      08
2008- 9-
22    2-  An ordinance levying a tax rate for the city for the tax year 2008.
      08
      9-  An ordinance prescribing and setting the FY 2008-2009 rates and charges for sales
2008- 2-  and water, services of the wastewater system, drainage utility fees and garbage
23    08  collection of the city; prescribing the time for payment of accounts and penalties
          for non-payment; setting deposits for utilities; and providing an effective date.
2009- 4-  An ordinance amending the Fee Schedule of the City of Harker Heights to waive the
10    14- rezoning fee on a one-time basis for a period of one year for any property located
      09  within the areas annexed by Ords. 2004-22 and 2009-05.
2009- 9-  An ordinance adopting and approving a budget for the City of Harker Heights, Texas
28    1-  for the fiscal year beginning October 1, 2009 to September 30, 2010.
      09
2009- 9-  An ordinance levying a tax rate for the City of Harker Heights, Texas for the tax
29    1-  year 2009.
      09
2009- 9-  An ordinance prescribing and setting the fiscal year 2009-2010 rates and charges of
30    1-  the City of Harker Heights, Texas; penalties for non-payment; and providing an
      09  effective date.
2010- 1-  An ordinance amending the parks and recreation fees of the fiscal year 2009- 2010
01    12- fee schedule.
      10
2010- 9-  An ordinance levying a tax rate for the City of Harker Heights, Texas for the tax
23    7-  year 2010.
      10
2010- 9-  An ordinance prescribing and setting the fiscal year 2010-2011 rates and charges of
24    7-  the City of Harker Heights, Texas; penalties for non-payment; and providing an
      10  effective date.
2010- 9-
28    14- An ordinance approving new rates for natural gas service with Atmos Mid-Tex.
      10
2011- 9-  An ordinance adopting and approving a budget for the City of Harker Heights, Texas
25    6-  for the fiscal year beginning October 1, 2011 to September 30, 2012.
      11
2011- 9-  An ordinance levying a tax rate for the City of Harker Heights, Texas for the tax
26    6-  year 2011.
      11
2011- 9-  An ordinance prescribing and setting the fiscal year 2011-2012 rates and charges of
27    6-  the City of Harker Heights, Texas; penalties for non-payment; and providing an
      11  effective date.
2012- 3-  An ordinance amending the fiscal year 2011-2012 rates and charges of the City of
05    27- Harker Heights, Texas; penalties for non- payment; and providing an effective date.
      12
2012- 4-
06    24- An ordinance amending the budget for fiscal year 2011-2012.
      12
2012- 4-  An ordinance amending the parks and recreation fees of the fiscal year 2011-2012
07    24- fee schedule.
      12
2013- 5-  An ordinance approving and adopting the rate schedule “RRM - Rate Review Mechanism”
14    14- (“RRM Tariff”) for Atmos Mid-Tex, regarding natural gas rates.
      13
2013- 9-  Adopting and approving a budget for the fiscal year beginning October 1, 2013 to
24    10- September 30, 2014.
      13
2013- 9-  Levying a tax rate for the tax year 2013 for the purpose of maintenance and
25    10- operation.
      13
2013- 9-  Setting the fiscal year 2013-2014 rates and charges for the city and penalties for
26    10- non-payment.
      13
2013- 9-  An ordinance amending the parks and recreation fees of the fiscal year 2013-2014
27    10- fee schedule.
      13
2013- 12- An ordinance authorizing publication of notice of intention to issue city
37    10- combination tax and revenue certificates of obligation.
      13
2014- 4-  An ordinance granting authority to the City Manager to waive adoption fees for dogs
06    22- and cats adopted from the city under certain circumstances.
      14
2014- 6-  An ordinance amending the water and sewer service rates section of the fiscal year
12    24- 2013-2014 fee schedule.
      14
2014- 9-  An ordinance granting authority to the City Manager to waive fines and fees for
16    9-  overdue library materials, or accept donations in lieu of such fines and fees,
      14  under certain circumstances.
2014- 9-  An ordinance adopting and approving a budget for the City of Harker Heights, Texas,
17    9-  for the fiscal year beginning October 1, 2014, to September 30, 2015.
      14
2014- 9-
18    9-  An ordinance levying a tax rate for the city for the tax year 2014.
      14
2014- 9-  An ordinance prescribing and setting the fiscal year 2014-2015 rates and charges of
19    9-  the city, penalties for non-payment, and providing an effective date.
      14
2015- 9-  An ordinance adopting and approving a budget for the City of Harker Heights, Texas,
16    8-  for the fiscal year beginning October 1, 2015, to September 30, 2016.
      15
2015- 9-
17    8-  An ordinance levying a tax rate for the city  for the tax year 2015.
      15
2015- 9-  An ordinance prescribing and setting the fiscal year 2015-2016 rates and charges of
18    8-  the city; penalties for non-payment; and providing an effective date.
      15
2016- 9-  An ordinance adopting and approving a budget for the City of Harker Heights, Texas,
21    13- for the fiscal year beginning October 1, 2016 to September 30, 2017.
      16
2016- 9-  An ordinance levying a tax rate for the City of Harker Heights, Texas for the tax
22    13- year 2016.
      16
2016- 9-  An ordinance prescribing and setting the fiscal year 2016-2017 rates and charges of
23    13- the City of Harker Heights, Texas; penalties for non-payment; and providing an
      16  effective date.
2017- 9-  An ordinance adopting and approving a budget for the City of Harker Heights, Texas,
23    12- for the fiscal year beginning October 1, 2017 to September 30, 2018.
      17
2017- 9-  An ordinance levying a tax rate for the City of Harker Heights, Texas for the tax
24    12- year 2017.
      17
2017- 9-  An ordinance prescribing and setting the fiscal year 2017-2018 rates and charges of
25    12- the City of Harker Heights, Texas; penalties for non-payment; and providing an
      17  effective date.
2017- 11- An ordinance amending the utility fund budget for the City of Harker Heights, Texas
30    14- for the fiscal year October 1, 2017 to September 30, 2018.
      17
          An ordinance approving a tariff authorizing an annual rate review mechanism (“RRM”)
2018- 3-  as a substitution for the annual interim rate adjustment process defined by §
10    13- 104.301 of the Texas Utilities Code, and as negotiated between Atmos Energy Corp.,
      18  Mid-Tex Division (“Atmos Mid-Tex” or “Company”) and the company to reimburse
          cities’ reasonable ratemaking expenses.
2018- 9-  An ordinance adopting and approving a budget for the City of Harker Heights, Texas
21    11- for the fiscal year beginning October 1, 2018 to September 30, 2019.
      18
2018- 9-  An ordinance levying a tax rate for the City of Harker Heights, Texas for the tax
22    11- year 2018.
      18
2018- 9-  An ordinance prescribing and setting the fiscal year 2018-2019 rates and charges of
23    11- the City of Harker Heights, Texas; penalties for non-payment; and providing an
      18  effective date.
2018- 10- An ordinance amending the Fire Department fee section of the fiscal year 2018-2019
26    23- fee schedule to include fees for motor vehicle accidents.
      18
2019- 4-  An ordinance amending the city fee schedule to include a fee for animal abuser
10    23- registration.
      19
2019- 4-  An ordinance amending the general fund budget for the City of Harker Heights for
11    23- fiscal year 2018-2019.
      19
2019- 6-  An ordinance amending the building permits fees section of the fiscal year 2018-
18    11- 2019 fee schedule to remove valuation-based fees from residential permits.
      19
          An ordinance providing for a continuing program of uniform regulations governing
2019- 8-  the installation, testing, and certification of backflow prevention assemblies and
22    13- technicians, and to permit and control the installation, routine maintenance, and
      19  inspection of backflow prevention assemblies; and setting registration fee for
          testing.
2019- 9-  An ordinance adopting and approving a budget for the City of Harker Heights, Texas
29    10- for the fiscal year beginning October 1, 2019 to September 30, 2020.
      19
2019- 9-  An ordinance levying a tax rate for the City of Harker Heights, Texas for the tax
30    10- year 2019.
      19
2019- 9-  An ordinance prescribing and setting the fiscal year 2019-2020 rates and charges of
31    10- the City of Harker Heights, Texas; penalties for non-payment; and providing an
      19  effective date.
2019- 9-  An ordinance approving a tariff authorizing an annual rate review mechanism (“RRM”)
33    24- as negotiated between Atmos Energy Corp., Mid-Tex Division (“Atmos Mid-Tex” or
      19  “Company”) and the company to reimburse cities’ reasonable ratemaking expenses.
2019- 10- An ordinance amending the parks and recreation fees of the fiscal year 2019-2020
35    22- fee schedule.
      19
         
 
TABLE IX: ENTERPRISE ZONES AND REINVESTMENT ZONES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     An ordinance designating a certain Area as Tax Abatement
2000-13  4-25-00     Reinvestment Zone Number One for commercial tax abatement
                     for a credit card collection agency.
                    
 
TABLE X:  PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
2004- 11-9-04   Granting PD-M on property located at 701 Sun Meadows, described as 7.059 acres
53              of the E. Berry Survey, A-117.
                Granting PD-M (Planned Development - Mixed Use) to include B-4 Commercial
2005-           Business and “T-District” overlay on property located at 706 Edwards Drive,
21    8-9-05    Harker Heights Plaza Shopping Center, described as Lot 1A and 2A, Block 1,
                Replat of Harker Heights Plaza Addition, with conditions stated in the passing
                ordinance.
                Granting PD-M on property located on a 5.838 acre tract located south of
2006-           Prospector Trail, east of the drainage channel parallel to Mustang Trail and
38    10-3-06   143.3 feet west of Stillhouse Lake Road. Permitted uses are: manager’s office
                and living quarters and associated uses; storage units and boat storage on the
                west side of the development.
                Granting PD-M (Planned Development - Mixed Use) on approximately 10.28 acre
2008- 2-26-08   tract of the F.D. Cox Survey, Abstract No. A-0220, located at the northwestern
04    (Expired) corner of the intersection of Nola Ruth Blvd. and Old Nolanville Road, subject
                to compliance with certain items.
                Granting an amendment to the PD-M (Planned Development - Mixed Use) on a 5.838
                acre tract located at 800 Prospector Trail, described as Lot 1, Block 1,
2010- 6-8-10    Skipcha Commercial South Subdivision to include an 8,000 square foot lease
13              center with B-4 (Secondary and Highway Business District) uses on a 1.034 acre
                portion of the tract, further described in Exhibit A, as attached to Ord. 2010-
                13.
                Granting PD-M (Planned Development - Mixed Use) on approximately 10.28 acre
2011- 8-9-11    tract of the F.D. Cox Survey, Abstract No. A-0220, located at the northeastern
20              corner of the intersection of Nola Ruth Blvd. and Old Nolanville Road, subject
                to compliance with certain terms.
2012-           Granting PD-M (Planned Development - Mixed Use) on property located at 326,
12    7-10-12   346, 352, and 366 Morgan Street, described as Lots 3, 4, 5, and 6 Block 1,
                Morgan Commercial Addition.
               
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Texas Revised Statutes and Texas Codes
References to 1960 Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO TEXAS REVISED STATUTES AND TEXAS CODES
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
 
State Cite                          Code Section
Title 30, § 290.44(h)(4)(A) and (B)54.22
Title 30, § 290.47(f)              54.21
Title 30 , § 312.142               53.01
Title 30 , § 312.143               53.28
Title 30 , § 319.11                53.28
Title 30 , §§ 319.21-319.29       53.22
 
CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE
 
State Cite    Code Section
Art. 17.04    36.01
Art. 18.05    93.06
Art. 45.056   36.06
Art. 103.0031 36.07
 
FAMILY CODE
 
State Cite Code Section
101.003    90.01
Title 3    130.99
 
FINANCE CODE
 
State Cite            Code Section
                      124.02,
Ch. 393, Subchapter G 124.04,
                      124.99
393.001               124.02
393.601               124.02
393.627               124.08
                      
 
GOVERNMENT CODE
 
State Cite Code Section
Title 8, Subtitle G     37.12
Ch. 54                  33.80
Ch. 214                 33.80,
                        160.16
Ch. 418                 38.09
Ch. 469                 150.02
Ch. 552                 114.04
                        37.01 -
851.001 et seq.         37.03,
                        37.05 -
                        37.07
852.004                 37.10
852.105                 37.09
853.003                 37.09
853.305                 37.061
853.401                 37.06
853.401 - 853.404       37.06
853.402                 37.06
853.404                 37.08
853.601                 37.06
854.102                 37.09
854.202                 37.09
854.203                 37.07
854.204                 37.09
854.205                 37.09
854.301 - 854.308       37.09
854.405                 37.09
854.406                 37.09
854.408                 37.09
854.409                 37.09
854.410                 37.09
854.601 - 854.605       37.10
855.314                 37.10
855.408                 37.10
855.502                 37.10
156.101                 121.03
156.103(a)(1) or (a)(3) 121.03
156.103(c)              121.03
156.103(d)              121.03
311.005                 121.01
351.001(2)              121.01
351.001(5)              121.01
351.001(6)              121.01
351.001(7)              121.01
351.001(9)              121.01
 
HEALTH & SAFETY CODE
 
State Cite Code Section
Ch. 341               115.02
341.031 et seq.       54.06
Ch. 481               101.03
Ch. 756, Subchapter G 102.02
Ch. 821               90.81
821.022               90.81
821.025               90.81
Ch. 822, Subchapter A 90.50
Ch. 822, Subchapter D 90.53
822.001               90.01
822.041               90.01
822.0422              90.51
Ch. 823               33.45,
                      33.49
 
LOCAL GOVERNMENT CODE
 
State Cite Code Section
Ch. 42                154.01
54.001                10.99,
                      131.99
211.007               155.234
Ch. 212               154.02,
                      154.26
212.004               154.01
212.013               154.26
212.016               154.26
212.0146              154.26
241.001 et seq.       97.02
284.054               104.21
370.002               130.25
Ch. 402, Subchapter C 35.20,
                      35.29
 
OCCUPATIONS CODE
 
State Cite Code Section
Ch. 1001   154.01
Ch. 1071   154.01
Ch. 1201   105.02
Ch. 1702   90.51
 
PARKS & WILDLIFE CODE
 
State Cite Code Section
1.101      101.01
 
PENAL CODE
 
State Cite Code Section
1.07   103.01
6.03   115.02
12.23  10.19
Ch. 21 115.37
21.01  115.22
21.09  90.81
Ch. 22 115.37
Ch. 25 115.37
28.08  131.20
38.10  36.01
42.01  101.03,
       105.03
42.09  90.81
42.091 90.81
42.092 90.81
42.10  90.81
42.105 90.81
Ch. 43 115.37
47.02  115.02
 
PROPERTY CODE
 
State Cite Code Section
Ch. 21     151.111 -
           151.113
 
REVISED CIVIL STATUTES
 
State Cite        Code Section
Art. 4477-9a      151.117
Art. 6701d-11     92.01
Art. 9102         72.14
Art. 9102, § 5(c)155.068
 
TAX CODE
 
State Cite Code Section
Ch. 312    151.115
 
TRANSPORTATION CODE
 
State Cite Code Section
311.007                    96.20
Ch. 391                    151.096
Ch. 541, Subchapter D      100.02
541.401                    151.015
543.009                    36.01
543.102                    36.01
543.103                    36.01
543.104                    36.01
Ch. 545, Subchapter G      72.30
547.701                    71.06
552.0071                   130.04
681.011                    72.14,
                           155.068
Ch. 683                    92.20
683.012                    92.03
706.002(a)(2), (3), or (4) 36.04
706.006(a)                 36.04
 
UTILITY CODE
 
State Cite Code Section
39.352     122.01
 
WATER CODE
 
State Cite Code Section
5.103      53.22
5.105      53.22
16.315     153.01
 
REFERENCES TO 1960 CODE
 
1960 Code Cite   1996 Code Section
Rule 2           30.11
Ch. 7, Art. 59   31.01
Ch. 11, Art. 47  131.01
Ch. 11, Art. 48  131.02
Ch. 12, Art. 128 11.01
Ch. 20, Art. 85  130.01
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
61-2     2-2-61    T.S.O.,
                   Table III
61-6     3-13-61   T.S.O.,
                   Table I
61-3     7-20-61   T.S.O.,
                   Table III
63-3     4-8-63    T.S.O.,
                   Table I
63-4     6-11-63   T.S.O.,
                   Table I
63-7     8-13-63   T.S.O.,
                   Table I
64-1     5-12-64   150.99
                   96.35,
64-3     6-9-64    96.37,
                   96.39 -
                   96.41
65-3     3-23-65   113.20 -
                   113.23
66-3     4-12-66   113.23
67-6     9-12-67   116.01 -
                   116.06
69-3     1-14-69   T.S.O.,
                   Table I
69-4     2-11-69   92.20
69-8     6-6-69    T.S.O.,
                   Table I
                   120.01 -
70-7     8-11-70   120.10,
                   120.99
70-8     9-8-70    130.02, T.S.O.,
                   Table II
71-2     2-26-71   152.01,
                   152.02
71-3     3-17-71   152.35 -
                   152.48
71-12    8-16-71   T.S.O.,
                   Table VI
72-3     3-14-72   92.16 -
                   92.21
72-10    8-8-72    37.01 -
                   37.07
                   96.35,
72-12    5-9-72    96.36,
                   96.38
72-19    11-21-72  T.S.O.,
                   Table VI
72-22    12-12-72  T.S.O.,
                   Table I
                   111.01,
72-23    12-12-73  111.02,
                   111.99
72-34    4-17-73   T.S.O.,
                   Table I
75-8     4-15-75   35.01
75-9     5-13-75   T.S.O.,
                   Table III
76-3     1-13-76   T.S.O.,
                   Table VI
76-10    4-13-76   T.S.O.,
                   Table VI
76-20    6-21-76   T.S.O.,
                   Table I
76-31    10-19-76  T.S.O.,
                   Table VI
77-14    8-9-77    T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
77-15    9-13-77   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
77-16    9-13-77   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
77-19    10-25-77  T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
78-3     1-10-78   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
78-4     1-10-78   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
78-11    3-28-78   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
78-12    3-28-78   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
78-13    3-28-78   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
78-15    5-23-78   70.28,
                   70.29
78-17    5-23-78   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
78-21    8-22-78   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
78-28    10-10-78  T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
78-29    10-24-78  T.S.O.,
                   Table VI
                   117.01,
78-32    9-26-78   117.02,
                   117.04 -
                   117.06
78-34    10-24-78  T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
                   119.01,
78-35    11-14-78  119.03,
                   119.99
78-36    11-14-78  T.S.O.,
                   Table II
78-41    9-12-78   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
78-42    10-24-7   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
78-43    11-14-7   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
                   113.01 -
                   113.07,
                   113.35 -
79-1     2-13-79   113.44,
                   113.55 -
                   113.68,
                   113.99
79-2     2-13-79   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
79-3     2-13-79   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
79-4     4-24-79   T.S.O.,
                   Table I
79-13    4-10-79   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
79-14    4-24-79   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
79-15    7-10-79   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
79-16    7-10-79   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
79-17    11-13-79  T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
79-18    11-13-79  T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
79-19    11-13-79  T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
80-1     1-8-80    T.S.O.,
                   Table VI
                   70.01 -
                   70.09,
                   70.20 -
                   70.27,
                   70.40 -
                   70.42,
                   71.01 -
                   71.10,
80-4     6-10-80   72.02 -
                   72.13, Ch. 74,
                   Sched. I,
                   II,
                   III,
                   IV,
                   92.01 -
                   92.04,
                   96.55 -
                   96.60
80-5     6-10-80   32.01 -
                   32.09
81-1     3-24-81   33.01 -
                   33.02
81-2     4-29-81   116.01 -
                   116.06
                   112.01 -
81-8     10-13-81  112.03,
                   112.99
                   38.01 -
82-10    11-23-82  38.09,
                   38.99
83-1     2-8-83    92.15 -
                   92.21
83-2     2-8-83    92.03
83-3     3-22-83   Ch. 74,
                   Sched. I
83-6     6-23-83   116.01 -
                   116.06
83-9     9-27-83   T.S.O.,
                   Table VI
83-10    9-27-83   T.S.O.,
                   Table VI
83-13    12-13-83  92.03
84-6     5-8-84    T.S.O.,
                   Table I
                   Ch. 74, Sched.
84-8     8-14-84   V,
                   VI
85-1     2-12-85   116.01 -
                   116.06
85-5     2-26-85   T.S.O.,
                   Table VI
85-13    8-13-85   T.S.O.,
                   Table I
                   51.01 -
                   51.04,
85-18    10-22-85  51.15 -
                   51.19,
                   51.30 - 51.35,
                   51.99
85-19    10-22-85  92.16,
                   92.17
85-20    10-22-85  72.06,
                   72.08
85-21    10-22-85  72.01
86-2     1-28-86   T.S.O.,
                   Table I
86-6     8-12-86   35.02
86-7     8-12-86   T.S.O.,
                   Table I
86-8     8-26-86   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
86-8     9-9-86    T.S.O.,
                   Table II
86-9     8-26-86   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
87-2     1-13-87   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
87-3     1-13-87   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
87-4     1-27-87   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
87-7     2-10-87   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
                   153.01 -
87-9     3-10-87   153.12,
                   153.20 - 153.24, 153.35 - 153.37,
                   153.99
87-10    4-14-87   50.02,
                   50.99
87-11    4-28-87   Ch. 75,
                   Sched. I
87-12    4-28-87   50.99
87-13    4-28-87   Ch. 74,
                   Sched. I
87-16    5-12-87   153.37
87-17    5-12-87   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
87-18    5-12-87   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
87-19    5-26-87   T.S.O.,
                   Table VI
                   150.30 -
87-20    5-26-87   150.38,
                   150.99
87-21    5-26-87   T.S.O.,
                   Table VI
87-24    7-14-87   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
87-28    8-11-87   97.02,
                   97.03
87-29    9-8-87    36.01
87-30    9-8-87    36.01
87-31    9-8-87    36.01
87-35    11-24-87  T.S.O.,
                   Table VI
87-37    12-22-87  T.S.O.,
                   Table III
88-7     3-8-88    150.33
88-11    4-12-88   T.S.O.,
                   Table I
88-12    4-15-88   T.S.O.,
                   Table II
88-13    4-26-88   97.01
                   52.01,
88-15    6-28-88   52.04,
                   52.05
88-16    6-28-88   50.01,
                   50.99
88-18    8-23-88   Ch. 74,
                   Sched. II
                   117.01,
                   117.02,
88-21    9-27-88   117.04 -
                   117.06,
                   117.99
                   Ch. 74,
88-25    12-27-88  Sched. III, Ch. 75,
                   Sched. I
88-26    12-27-88  T.S.O.,
                   Table I
88-27    12-27-88  Ch. 74,
                   Sched. I
                   95.01 -
89-1     1-10-89   95.08, 95.20 - 95.28,
                   95.99
89-2     1-24-89   T.S.O.,
                   Table V
89-5     4-25-89   130.40 -
                   130.45
                   152.15 -
89-7     5-23-89   152.22,
                   152.99
89-9     6-27-89   T.S.O.,
                   Table V
89-10    8-8-89    30.01
89-12    8-22-89   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
89-14    8-22-89   152.01
89-20    12-12-89  93.01 -
                   93.06
90-4     4-10-90   93.01
90-5     5-20-90   34.01 -
                   34.14
91-2     2-14-91   T.S.O.,
                   Table III
91-3     4-11-91   T.S.O.,
                   Table III
91-6     6-13-91   T.S.O.,
                   Table V
91-7     6-27-91   T.S.O.,
                   Table II
91-11    9-26-91   37.08 -
                   37.11
91-13    10-10-91  39.01 -
                   39.05
91-14    12-12-91  T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
91-15    12-12-91  T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
                   117.01,
                   117.02,
92-2     1-23-92   117.04 -
                   117.06,
                   117.99
92-3     3-12-92   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
92-4     3-12-92   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
                   94.20 -
92-5     3-26-92   94.25,
                   94.99
92-6     3-26-92   91.01
92-7     4-23-92   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
                   51.32,
                   90.01 -
                   90.08,
                   90.35 -
                   90.44,
92-8     4-23-92   90.46,
                   90.47,
                   90.49,
                   90.50,
                   90.60 -
                   90.68,
                   90.98
92-9     5-14-92   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
92-10    7-16-92   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
92-11    8-13-92   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
92-12    8-13-92   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
92-13    8-13-92   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
                   151.001 -
                   151.011, 151.020 - 151.028,
                   151.040 -
                   151.043,
                   151.055 -
92-19    10-6-92   151.071,
                   151.080 -
                   151.097,
                   151.110 -
                   151.118,
                   151.999
92-20    10-6-92   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
92-21    10-6-92   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
92-22    10-6-92   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
92-23    10-6-92   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
92-25    10-22-92  T.S.O.,
                   Table I
92-27    11-12-92  T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
92-28    11-12-92  T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
92-29    11-12-92  T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
92-30    11-12-92  T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
92-33    12-10-92  T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
92-34    12-10-92  T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
93-1     1-14-93   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
93-4     2-25-93   52.01,
                   52.05
93-5     4-8-93    90.62
93-7     4-22-93   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
93-8     5-13-93   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
93-9     5-25-93   91.25 -
                   91.34
93-11    6-8-93    T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
93-12    6-8-93    T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
93-14    7-13-93   T.S.O.,
                   Table III
93-15    8-10-93   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
93-16    8-10-93   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
93-17    8-10-93   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
93-19    8-6-93    T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
93-20    8-10-93   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
                   52.01,
93-21    9-2-93    52.04,
                   52.05
93-24    9-28-93   130.99
93-25    9-28-93   151.008
93-26    10-12-93  T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
93-27    10-12-93  T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
93-28    10-12-93  T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
93-29    11-10-93  T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
93-30    11-10-93  T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
93-32    11-29-93  33.02
93-33    12-14-93  T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
93-34    12-14-93  T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
93-35    12-14-93  T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
93-36    12-21-93  T.S.O.,
                   Table I
94-1     1-11-94   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
94-2     1-11-94   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
94-3     1-11-94   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
94-4     1-11-94   T.S.O.,
                   Table I
94-6     1-25-94   Ch. 74,
                   Sched. I
94-7     6-14-94   150.33
94-8     2-8-94    T.S.O.,
                   Table V
94-9     2-8-94    T.S.O.,
                   Table II
94-10    2-22-94   Ch. 74,
                   Sched. I
94-11    3-8-94    T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
94-12    3-8-94    T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
94-13    3-8-94    T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
                   114.01 -
94-14    4-26-94   114.06,
                   114.99
94-15    5-10-94   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
94-16    5-10-94   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
94-18    5-24-94   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
                   52.20 -
94-21    6-14-94   52.23,
                   52.99
94-22    6-14-94   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
94-23    6-14-94   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
94-25    7-12-94   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
94-26    7-12-94   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
94-29    8-9-94    T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
94-30    8-9-94    T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
94-32    8-9-94    T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
94-33    8-9-94    T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
                   118.01 -
                   118.05,
                   118.20 -
                   118.32,
94-36    8-23-94   118.40 -
                   118.49,
                   118.60 -
                   118.76,
                   118.98,
                   118.99
94-37    9-13-94   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
                   52.01,
94-40    9-13-94   52.04,
                   52.05,
                   52.99
94-44    10-11-94  T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
94-45    10-11-94  T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
94-48    10-11-94  70.02
94-49    10-25-94  33.35 -
                   33.39
94-50    11-8-94   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
94-55    12-13-94  T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
94-56    12-13-94  T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
95-2     2-14-95   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
95-3     2-14-95   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
95-5     2-28-95   33.36 -
                   33.37
95-7     3-14-95   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
95-8     3-14-95   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
95-9     3-28-95   T.S.O.,
                   Table III
95-10    4-11-95   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
95-11    4-11-95   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
95-13    5-23-95   T.S.O.,
                   Table IV
95-13(A) 5-23-95   T.S.O.,
                   Table IV
95-14    5-23-95   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
95-15    5-23-95   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
95-16    5-23-95   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
95-18    5-23-95   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
95-21    6-13-95   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
95-25    7-13-95   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
95-26    7-13-95   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
95-29    8-8-95    T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
95-30    8-8-95    T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
                   115.01 - 115.03,
                   115.15 - 115.25,
95-31    9-12-95   115.35 -
                   115.38,
                   115.98,
                   115.99
95-32    9-12-95   33.20 -
                   33.24
95-33    9-12-95   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
95-34    9-12-95   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
95-35    9-12-95   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
95-36    9-12-95   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
95-40    10-3-95   Ch. 74,
                   Sched. I
95-41    10-4-95   37.06,
                   37.07
95-42    10-10-95  T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
95-43    10-10-95  T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
95-44    10-10-95  T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
                   110.01 -
95-45    10-10-95  110.07,
                   110.99
95-47    11-14-95  T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
95-48    11-14-95  T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
95-49    11-14-95  T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
95-51    12-12-95  T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
95-52    12-12-95  T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
96-1     1-9-96    T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
96-2     1-9-96    T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
96-3     1-9-96    T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
96-4     1-9-96    T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
96-6     2-13-96   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
96-7     2-13-96   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
96-8     2-13-96   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
96-9     2-13-96   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
96-10    2-13-96   T.S.O.,
                   Table VII
                   115.01 - 115.03,
                   115.15 - 115.25,
96-12    2-27-96   115.35 -
                   115.38,
                   115.98,
                   115.99
96-13    2-27-96   33.36 -
                   33.37
96-14    3-12-96   T.S.O. VII
96-18    4-9-96    T.S.O. VII
96-19    5-7-96    T.S.O. VII
96-20    5-14-96   Ch. 74,
                   Sched. I
96-21    5-14-96   T.S.O. VII
96-24    5-28-96   36.02
96-25    5-28-96   152.35 -
                   152.48
96-28    6-11-96   T.S.O. VII
96-29    6-11-96   T.S.O. VII
96-30    6-11-96   T.S.O. VII
96-31    6-11-96   152.36
96-32    8-27-96   T.S.O. I
96-33    7-9-96    T.S.O. VII
96-34    7-9-96    72.14
96-35    7-9-96    T.S.O. VII
96-37    7-23-96   130.45
96-38    7-23-96   93.02
96-39    7-23-96   150.32
96-40    7-23-96   90.39
96-43    8-13-96   T.S.O. VII
96-44    8-13-96   T.S.O. VII
96-45    8-13-96   T.S.O. VII
96-46    8-13-96   T.S.O. VII
96-48    8-27-96   T.S.O. VII
96-49    9-10-96   T.S.O. VII
96-52    9-10-96   52.01
96-53    10-8-96   Ch. 98
96-54    10-8-96   Ch. 75,
                   Sched. I
96-55    10-8-96   T.S.O. VII
96-56    10-8-96   T.S.O. VII
96-57    10-22-96  96.20 -
                   96.25
96-58    11-26-96  T.S.O. VII
96-59    1-28-97   T.S.O. VII
96-60    1-28-97   152.46
97-01    2-11-97   T.S.O. VII
97-02    4-8-97    T.S.O. I
97-03    4-8-97    T.S.O. VII
97-05    4-22-97   T.S.O. V
97-06    4-22-97   Ch. 115
97-07    6-10-97   T.S.O. VII
97-08    6-10-97   T.S.O. VII
97-09    6-10-97   T.S.O. VII
97-10    6-10-97   T.S.O. VII
97-11    6-10-97   T.S.O. VII
97-12    6-10-97   T.S.O. VII
97-13    6-10-97   T.S.O. VII
97-14    6-10-97   T.S.O. VII
97-15    6-10-97   T.S.O. VII
97-17    7-22-97   Ch. 74,
                   Sched. I
97-18    8-12-97   T.S.O. IV
97-19    8-12-97   Ch. 76
97-21    8-12-97   T.S.O. VI
97-22    8-26-97   T.S.O. II
97-23    8-26-97   T.S.O. II
97-24    8-26-97   37.061
97-25    9-9-97    52.01,
                   T.S.O. VIII
97-26    9-9-97    T.S.O. VIII
97-27    9-9-97    T.S.O. VIII
97-28    9-9-97    T.S.O. I
97-29    9-23-97   118.76
97-30    11-14-97  35.50 -
                   35.55
97-32    11-25-97  152.17,
                   152.21
                   33.01 -
                   33.05,
97-33    12-9-97   33.20 -
                   33.24,
                   33.35 -
                   33.39
97-34    1-13-98   T.S.O. VII
98-1     2-10-98   T.S.O. VII
98-3     2-10-98   T.S.O. II
98-4     2-10-98   T.S.O. II
                   95.01 -
98-5     2-24-98   95.11,
                   95.99
98-7     4-14-98   T.S.O. VI
                   51.02,
98-8     4-28-98   51.16,
                   51.18, 51.33, 51.34, 51.36
98-9     5-12-98   T.S.O. VII
98-10    5-12-98   T.S.O. VII
98-11    5-12-98   Ch. 74,
                   Sch. I
98-12    5-12-98   T.S.O. VII
98-13    5-12-98   T.S.O. VII
98-14    5-12-98   T.S.O. VII
98-15    5-12-98   T.S.O. VII
98-16    6-9-98    T.S.O. VII
98-17    6-9-98    T.S.O. VII
98-18    6-9-98    T.S.O. VII
98-19    6-9-98    T.S.O. VII
98-20    6-9-98    T.S.O. VII
98-21    6-9-98    T.S.O. VII
98-22    6-9-98    T.S.O. VII
98-23    6-9-98    T.S.O. VII
98-24    6-9-98    T.S.O. VII
98-25    6-9-98    T.S.O. VII
98-26    6-9-98    T.S.O. VII
98-27    7-14-98   130.04
98-28    7-14-98   T.S.O. VII
98-29    7-14-98   T.S.O. VII
98-30    7-14-98   Ch. 74,
                   Sch. I
98-31    7-28-98   T.S.O. VI
98-33    8-11-98   T.S.O. VII
98-34    8-11-98   T.S.O. VII
98-35    9-8-98    T.S.O. VII
98-36    9-8-98    T.S.O. VIII
98-37    9-8-98    T.S.O. VIII
98-38    9-8-98    T.S.O. VIII
98-39    10-13-98  T.S.O. VII
98-40    10-13-98  52.40 et seq.
98-41    10-13-98  52.21,
                   52.22
98-42    10-13-98  T.S.O. VII
98-43    10-13-98  T.S.O. VII
98-44    10-13-98  T.S.O. VII
98-45    10-13-98  T.S.O. VII
98-46    11-24-98  Ch. 121
98-47    12-8-98   T.S.O. VII
98-48    12-8-98   T.S.O. VII
98-49    12-8-98   T.S.O. VII
98-50    12-8-98   T.S.O. VII
98-51    12-14-98  T.S.O. VII
98-54    12-14-98  T.S.O. VII
                   150.01 -
99-01    1-12-99   150.03,
                   150.99
99-04    2-23-99   90.36
99-05    3-9-99    T.S.O. VII
99-06    3-9-99    T.S.O. VII
99-08    4-27-99   Ch. 51
99-09    5-11-99   T.S.O. VII
99-11    5-25-99   90.62
99-12    7-13-99   T.S.O. VII
99-13    7-13-99   T.S.O. VII
99-14    7-13-99   T.S.O. VII
99-15    8-10-99   T.S.O. VII
99-17    8-10-99   T.S.O. VII
99-19    8-24-99   36.02
99-20    8-24-99   36.03
99-22    9-14-99   T.S.O. VII
99-23    9-14-99   T.S.O. VII
99-24    9-14-99   T.S.O. VIII
99-25    9-14-99   T.S.O. VIII
99-26    9-14-99   T.S.O. VIII
99-27    9-14-99   37.06,
                   37.08
99-28    9-14-99   37.09
99-29    10-5-99   T.S.O. II
99-31    10-12-99  T.S.O. V
99-32    10-12-99  T.S.O. V
99-33    10-12-99  T.S.O. VII
99-34    10-12-99  Ch. 51
99-35    10-12-99  T.S.O. II
                   72.01,
                   72.15,
99-36    10-26-99  72.20 -
                   72.24,
                   76.02,
                   76.04
                   152.01 -
                   152.04,
                   152.15,
99-37    11-9-99   152.16,
                   152.19,
                   152.20,
                   152.35 -
                   152.37
                   33.02,
99-38    11-9-99   33.21,
                   33.36
99-39    11-9-99   T.S.O. VII
99-41    11-9-99   T.S.O. VII
99-42    12-14-99  T.S.O. VII
99-43    12-14-99  T.S.O. VII
99-44    12-14-99  T.S.O. VII
99-45    12-14-99  T.S.O. VII
99-46    12-14-99  T.S.O. VII
2000-01  1-11-00   T.S.O. VII
2000-02  1-11-00   T.S.O. VII
2000-03  1-11-00   T.S.O. VII
                   92.15 -
2000-04  1-30-00   92.20,
                   92.22
2000-05  2-8-00    90.50
2000-06  2-8-00    T.S.O. VII
2000-07  2-8-00    T.S.O. VII
2000-08  2-8-00    T.S.O. VII
2000-10  3-14-00   T.S.O. VII
2000-12  4-11-00   T.S.O. VII
2000-13  4-25-00   T.S.O. IX
2000-14  5-9-00    T.S.O. VIII
2000-16  5-9-00    T.S.O. VII
2000-17  5-9-00    T.S.O. VII
                   117.01,
                   117.02,
2000-18  6-13-00   117.04 -
                   117.06,
                   117.99
2000-19  6-15-00   T.S.O. VII
2000-20  6-15-00   T.S.O. VII
2000-21  7-11-00   T.S.O. VII
2000-22  7-11-00   T.S.O. VII
2000-23  7-11-00   T.S.O. VII
2000-24  8-8-00    T.S.O. VII
2000-25  9-5-00    T.S.O. VIII
2000-26  9-5-00    T.S.O. VIII
                   51.30,
2000-27  9-5-00    51.99,
                   52.01,
                   T.S.O. VIII
2000-28  9-12-00   T.S.O. VII
2000-29  9-12-00   T.S.O. VII
2000-30  9-12-00   T.S.O. VII
2000-31  9-12-00   T.S.O. VII
2000-32  9-12-00   T.S.O. VII
2000-33  9-12-00   T.S.O. VII
                   96.55,
                   96.57,
2000-34  9-5-00    96.60,
                   96.70,
                   96.71
                   10.99,
2000-35  10-24-00  93.03,
                   93.04, 93.99
2000-36  11-14-00  T.S.O. VI
2001-01  1-9-01    T.S.O. VII
2001-02  1-9-01    T.S.O. VII
2001-03  1-9-01    T.S.O. VII
2001-04  2-13-01   T.S.O. VII
2001-05  2-13-01   T.S.O. VII
2001-06  2-13-01   T.S.O. VII
2001-07  3-13-01   T.S.O. VII
2001-08  3-13-01   T.S.O. VII
2001-10  3-13-01   T.S.O. VI
2001-11  3-13-01   T.S.O. VII
2001-12  3-13-01   T.S.O. VII
2001-13  4-10-01   95.09
                   157.01-
2001-14  4-10-01   157.15,
                   157.99
2001-15  4-10-01   T.S.O. VII
2001-16  5-8-01    T.S.O. VII
2001-17  5-8-01    T.S.O. VII
2001-18  6-12-01   T.S.O. VII
2001-19  6-12-01   99.01-
                   99.14
2001-20  6-26-01   T.S.O. VIII
2001-21  7-10-01   T.S.O. VI
2001-22  7-10-01   T.S.O. VII
2001-23  8-14-01   T.S.O. VII
2001-24  8-14-01   T.S.O. VII
                   51.30,
2001-25  8-28-01   52.01,
                   T.S.O. VIII
2001-26  8-28-01   T.S.O. VIII
2001-27  8-28-01   T.S.O. VIII
2001-28  8-28-01   100.01 -
                   100.14
2001-29  9-25-01   T.S.O. VII
2001-30  9-25-01   36.04
2001-32  10-9-01   T.S.O. VII
                   115.02,
                   115.15,
2001-33  10-23-01  115.21,
                   115.36,
                   115.99
                   122.01 -
2001-34  11-13-01  122.04,
                   122.99
2001-35  11-13-01  72.30
                   155.001 -
                   155.005,
                   155.020 -
                   155.040,
                   155.050,
                   155.051,
                   155.060 -
                   155.068,
                   155.080 -
                   155.082,
2001-36  11-13-01  155.100 -
                   155.102,
                   155.200 -
                   155.202,
                   155.210 -
                   155.214,
                   155.220 -
                   155.222,
                   155.230 -
                   155.234,
                   155.999
2001-37  12-11-01  T.S.O. VII
2002-01  2-12-02   50.02
2002-02  3-12-02   T.S.O. VII
2002-03  4-9-02    T.S.O. VI
2002-04  4-9-02    T.S.O. VII
2002-05  4-9-02    T.S.O. VII
2002-06  4-9-02    T.S.O. VII
2002-07  5-14-02   T.S.O. VII
2002-09  6-25-02   115.15,
                   115.17
2002-10  6-25-02   35.60 -
                   35.66
2002-11  7-9-02    T.S.O. VI
2002-12  7-9-02    T.S.O. VII
2002-13  8-13-02   T.S.O. VII
2002-14  8-13-02   150.02 -
                   150.04
2002-16  9-24-02   35.20 -
                   35.30
2002-18  9-24-02   T.S.O. VIII
                   51.30,
                   51.99,
2002-19  9-24-02   52.01,
                   52.99,
                   T.S.O. VIII
2002-20  9-24-02   T.S.O. VIII
2002-21  10-8-02   T.S.O III
2002-22  10-8-02   T.S.O III
                   37.04,
2002-23  10-8-02   37.06,
                   37.07 -
                   37.09
2002-24  10-8-02   130.02
2002-25  11-12-02  10.19
2002-26  11-11-02  T.S.O. VII
2002-27  11-12-02  T.S.O. VII
2002-28  11-12-02  155.020
                   156.01,
                   156.02,
                   156.15-
2002-31  11-12-02  156.17,
                   156.90,
                   156.98,
                   156.99
2003-01  3-25-03   130.45
2003-02  4-8-03    T.S.O. VII
2003-03  4-8-03    T.S.O. VII
2003-04  4-8-03    130.04
2003-05  5-13-03   T.S.O. VII
2003-06  7-8-03    T.S.O. VII
2003-08  8-26-03   130.45
2003-09  9-9-03    T.S.O. VIII
                   Ch. 74, Schs.
2003-10  9-9-03    V,
                   VI,
                   VII
2003-11  9-9-03    52.01,
                   T.S.O. VIII
2003-12  9-9-93    T.S.O. VIII
2003-13  9-23-03   T.S.O. III
2003-14  10-14-03  T.S.O. VII
2003-16  12-9-03   T.S.O. VI
2004-01  1-13-04   155.028
2004-02  1-13-04   T.S.O. VII
                   71.01,
2004-03  1-27-04   Ch. 74, Sch.
                   II
2004-04  2-10-04   T.S.O. VII
2004-05  2-24-04   52.01,
                   T.S.O. VIII
                   155.003,
2004-06  3-9-04    155.040,
                   155.051
2004-07  3-9-04    T.S.O. VII
2004-08  3-9-04    T.S.O. VII
2004-09  3-9-04    T.S.O. VII
2004-10  3-9-04    T.S.O. VIII
2004-11  4-13-04   36.03
2004-12  4-13-04   T.S.O. VII
2004-14  4-27-04   T.S.O. II
2004-16  5-11-04   T.S.O. VII
2004-17  5-11-04   T.S.O. VII
2004-18  5-25-04   T.S.O. I
2004-19  5-25-04   Ch. 74,
                   Sch. V
2004-20  6-8-04    T.S.O. VII
2004-21  6-8-04    T.S.O. VII
2004-22  8-10-04   T.S.O. I
2004-23  7-13-04   T.S.O. VII
2004-24  7-13-04   T.S.O. VI
                   117.01 -
2004-25  7-27-04   117.09,
                   117.99
2004-26  7-27-04   Ch. 74,
                   Sch. V
                   51.30,
                   130.45,
2004-27  8-10-04   150.05,
                   150.32,
                   150.33,
                   155.040
2004-28  8-10-04   T.S.O. VII
2004-29  8-10-04   T.S.O. VII
2004-30  8-10-04   T.S.O. VII
2004-31  8-10-04   T.S.O. VII
2004-32  8-10-04   Ch. 74,
                   Sch. V
2004-33  8-24-04   150.02
2004-34  8-24-04   Ch. 74,
                   Sch. V
2004-35  8-24-04   Ch. 74,
                   Sch. II
2004-36  9-7-04    T.S.O. VIII
2004-37  9-21-04   52.01,
                   T.S.O. VIII
2004-38  9-7-04    T.S.O. VIII
2004-39  9-14-04   T.S.O. VII
2004-40  9-14-04   T.S.O. VII
                   101.01-
2004-42  9-14-04   101.07,
                   130.45
2004-44  9-28-04   51.20
2004-45  10-12-04  T.S.O. VII
2004-46  10-12-04  T.S.O. VII
2004-47  10-12-04  T.S.O. VII
2004-49  10-12-04  T.S.O. VI
2004-50  11-9-04   T.S.O. VII
2004-51  11-9-04   T.S.O. VII
2004-52  11-9-04   T.S.O. VII
2004-53  11-9-04   T.S.O. VII
2005-01  1-11-05   T.S.O. VII
2005-02  1-11-05   T.S.O. VII
2005-03  1-11-05   T.S.O. I
2005-04  3-8-05    T.S.O. VII
                   Ch. 74,
2005-05  3-29-05   Sch.V,
                   VI, Ch. 75,
                   Sch. I
2005-06  4-12-05   Ch. 74,
                   Sch. V
2005-07  4-12-05   155.062,
                   155.068
2005-08  4-12-05   T.S.O. VI
2005-12  5-10-05   T.S.O. VII
2005-13  5-10-05   T.S.O. VII
2005-14  5-10-05   33.45-
                   33.49
2005-15  5-24-05   T.S.O. VI
2005-16  6-14-05   T.S.O. VII
2005-17  6-28-05   90.01
2005-18  6-28-05   33.47
2005-19  7-12-05   T.S.O. III
2005-20  7-19-05   T.S.O. VII
2005-21  8-9-05    T.S.O. VII
2005-22  8-9-05    39.10 -
                   39.20
2005-23  8-9-05    T.S.O. VI
2005-24  8-9-05    101.08,
                   130.45
2005-25  9-13-05   T.S.O. VII
2005-26  9-13-05   T.S.O. VII
2005-27  9-13-05   T.S.O. VII
2005-28  9-13-05   T.S.O. VII
                   156.01 -
                   156.05,
                   156.15 -
2005-29  9-13-05   156.17,
                   156.90,
                   156.98,
                   156.99
2005-30  9-13-05   T.S.O. V
2005-31  9-27-05   10.19
2005-32  9-27-05   130.04
2005-33  9-27-05   T.S.O. VIII
2005-34  9-27-05   T.S.O. VIII
2005-35  9-27-05   52.01,
                   T.S.O. VIII
2005-36  10-11-05  T.S.O. VII
2005-37  10-11-05  37.09
2005-38  11-8-05   90.41
2005-39  11-8-05   T.S.O. I
2005-40  11-8-05   52.20 -
                   52.24
2005-41  11-8-05   T.S.O. III
2005-42  12-13-05  T.S.O. VI
2006-01  1-10-06   T.S.O. III
2006-02  2-14-06   T.S.O. VII
2006-03  2-14-06   T.S.O. VII
2006-04  2-14-06   T.S.O. VII
2006-05  2-28-06   Ch. 74,
                   Sch. V
2006-06  3-14-06   T.S.O. VII
2006-07  4-11-06   T.S.O. VII
2006-08  4-11-06   118.29
2006-09  4-25-06   T.S.O. III
2006-10  5-9-06    T.S.O. VII
2006-11  5-9-06    T.S.O. VII
2006-13  5-9-06    T.S.O. VI
2006-14  6-13-06   155.068
2006-15  6-13-06   T.S.O. VII
2006-16  6-13-06   T.S.O. II
2006-18  6-27-06   T.S.O. VI
2006-20  7-11-06   T.S.O. VII
2006-21  7-11-06   T.S.O. VII
2006-22  7-11-06   T.S.O. VI
2006-23  7-11-06   T.S.O. VI
2006-24  7-25-06   Ch. 74, Sch. II
2006-25  7-25-06   Ch. 74, Sch. V
2006-27  8-8-06    T.S.O. VII
2006-28  8-8-06    T.S.O. VII
2006-29  8-8-06    T.S.O. VII
2006-30  9-5-06    T.S.O. VIII
2006-31  9-5-06    T.S.O. VIII
2006-32  9-5-06    52.01,
                   T.S.O. VIII
2006-33  9-12-06   T.S.O. VII
2006-34  9-12-06   T.S.O. VII
2006-35  9-12-06   T.S.O. VII
2006-38  10-3-06   T.S.O. VII
2006-39  10-3-06   Ch. 74,
                   Sch. V
                   155.003,
                   155.005,
                   155.020 -
                   155.027,
                   155.030,
                   155.036,
2006-40  10-24-06  155.039,
                   155.040,
                   155.050,
                   155.051,
                   155.061,
                   155.084,
                   155.100,
                   155.234
2006-44  12-12-06  T.S.O. VII
2006-45  12-12-06  T.S.O. VII
2007-05  2-13-07   T.S.O. VII
2007-06  2-13-07   150.02 -
                   150.04
2007-07  2-13-07   T.S.O. II
2007-08  2-13-07   T.S.O. II
2007-09  3-13-07   T.S.O. VII
2007-10  3-13-07   T.S.O. VII
2007-11  3-13-07   T.S.O. III
2007-12  3-27-07   T.S.O. I
2007-14  4-10-07   98.02,
                   98.20
2007-15  4-10-07   T.S.O. VII
2007-16  5-1-07    130.20 -
                   130.25
2007-17  5-8-07    T.S.O. VII
2007-18  6-26-07   158.01 - 158.12
2007-19  7-10-07   T.S.O. VII
2007-20  8-14-07   T.S.O. VII
2007-21  8-14-07   Ch. 74, Sch. VII
2007-22  8-14-07   T.S.O. VII
2007-23  9-18-07   T.S.O. VIII
2007-24  9-18-07   T.S.O. VIII
2007-25  9-18-07   T.S.O. VIII
2007-26  9-25-07   158.01
2007-27  10-2-07   155.027
2007-28  11-13-07  T.S.O. VII
2007-29  11-13-07  T.S.O. VII
2007-30  11-13-07  T.S.O. VII
2007-31  11-13-07  T.S.O. VI
2007-32  12-11-07  T.S.O. VII
2008-01  2-12-08   T.S.O. VII
2008-02  2-12-08   T.S.O. II
2008-03  2-26-08   T.S.O. VI
2008-04  2-26-08   T.S.O. VII
2008-05  3-11-08   T.S.O. VII
2008-07  3-25-08   T.S.O. II
2008-08  4-8-08    T.S.O. VII
2008-09  4-8-08    Ch. 74, Sch. I
                   90.01,
                   90.09,
2008-10  4-8-08    90.48,
                   90.62,
                   90.98
2008-11  4-22-08   T.S.O. VI
2008-12  4-22-08   76.04
2008-13  5-13-08   T.S.O. VII
2008-14  5-13-08   T.S.O. VII
2008-15  5-27-08   Ch. 74, Sch. V
2008-16  5-27-08   151.001,
                   151.015
2008-17  6-10-08   155.040
2008-18  7-22-08   T.S.O. VI
2008-21  9-2-08    T.S.O. VIII
2008-22  9-2-08    T.S.O. VIII
2008-23  9-2-08    52.04,
                   T.S.O. VIII
2008-24  9-9-08    T.S.O. VII
                   153.01 -
                   153.12,
                   153.20 -
2008-25  9-23-08   153.22,
                   153.30-
                   153.34,
                   153.90,
                   153.99
2008-26  9-23-08   T.S.O. VI
2008-33  12-9-08   T.S.O. VII
                   153.21,
                   153.22,
2009-01  1-13-09   153.31,
                   153.32,
                   153.34
                   159.01 -
2009-02  1-13-09   159.06,
                   159.99
                   90.01,
                   90.49 -
2009-03  1-27-09   90.51,
                   90.96,
                   90.97
2009-04  1-27-09   T.S.O. VI
2009-05  2-2-09    T.S.O. I
2009-06  2-10-09   T.S.O. VII
2009-08  4-14-09   T.S.O. VII
2009-09  4-14-09   T.S.O. I
2009-10  4-14-09   T.S.O. VIII
2009-11  4-14-09   150.02
                   38.02,
2009-12  5-5-09    38.04,
                   38.09
2009-13  6-9-09    Ch. 74, Schs. I,
                   II
2009-14  6-9-09    T.S.O. VII
2009-15  6-9-09    T.S.O. VII
2009-16  6-9-09    52.41,
                   52.46
                   51.01 -
                   51.03,
                   51.15 -
2009-17  6-9-09    51.20,
                   51.30 -
                   51.32,
                   51.99,
                   150.35
2009-18  6-23-09   33.60 -
                   33.62
2009-19  7-7-09    T.S.O. I
2009-20  7-28-09   Ch. 74, Sch. V,
                   Ch.75, Sch. I
2009-21  7-28-09   T.S.O. II
2009-22  8-4-09    T.S.O. VI
2009-23  8-11-09   T.S.O. VII
2009-24  8-11-09   T.S.O. VII
2009-25  8-11-09   T.S.O. VII
                   123.01 -
2009-26  8-11-09   123.17,
                   123.99
2009-28  9-1-09    T.S.O. VIII
2009-29  9-1-09    T.S.O. VIII
2009-30  9-1-09    T.S.O. VIII
2009-31  10-27-09  52.20 -
                   52.24
2009-32  11-17-09  T.S.O. VII
2009-33  11-17-09  T.S.O. VII
2010-01  1-12-10   T.S.O. VIII
2010-02  2-9-10    T.S.O. VI
2010-03  2-9-10    150.02 -
                   150.04
2010-04  2-16-10   T.S.O. II
2010-05  3-9-10    T.S.O. VII
2010-06  3-9-10    T.S.O. VII
2010-07  3-9-10    T.S.O. VII
                   154.01 -
                   154.10,
                   154.20 -
                   154.26,
2010-08  3-9-10    154.35 -
                   154.45,
                   154.55,
                   154.60 -
                   154.63
2010-09  3-25-10   130.20 -
                   130.25
2010-11  5-11-10   Ch. 74, Sch. V
2010-12  5-11-10   T.S.O. VI
2010-13  6-8-10    T.S.O. VII
2010-14  6-8-10    T.S.O. VII
2010-15  6-8-10    Ch. 74, Sch. V
2010-17  7-3-10    Ch. 74, Sch. VI
2010-18  7-3-10    T.S.O. VI
2010-19  7-3-10    T.S.O. VII
2010-20  7-27-10   T.S.O. III
2010-21  8-24-10   Ch. 74, Sch. V
2010-23  9-7-10    T.S.O. VIII
2010-24  9-7-10    T.S.O. VIII
2010-25  9-14-10   T.S.O. VI
2010-26  9-14-10   155.003,
                   155.021
2010-27  9-28-10   155.203
2010-28  9-14-10   T.S.O. VIII
2010-29  10-12-10  T.S.O. VII
2010-30  10-12-10  T.S.O. VII
2010-31  10-12-10  T.S.O. VII
2010-32  10-12-10  155.020,
                   155.040
                   34.01,
                   34.04 -
2010-33  11-9-10   34.06,
                   34.08 -
                   34.13
2010-34  11-9-10   T.S.O. VII
2010-35  11-9-10   T.S.O. VII
2010-36  12-14-10  Ch. 74, Sch. V
                   53.01 -
                   53.07,
                   53.20 -
2011-01  1-25-11   53.30,
                   53.40 -
                   53.46,
                   53.99
2011-02  1-25-11   T.S.O. I
2011-03  2-8-11    T.S.O. VII
2011-04  2-8-11    T.S.O. VII
2011-05  3-8-11    T.S.O. VII
2011-06  4-12-11   T.S.O. VII
                   33.80 -
                   33.83,
2011-07  4-12-11   150.02,
                   160.01 -
                   160.16
2011-08  4-19-11   155.020,
                   155.039
2011-09  4-19-11   T.S.O. II
2011-10  5-10-11   T.S.O. VII
2011-11  5-10-11   T.S.O. VII
2011-12  5-24-11   T.S.O. II
2011-13  6-14-11   T.S.O. VII
2011-14  6-28-11   T.S.O. VII
2011-15  6-28-11   T.S.O. VII
2011-16  7-12-11   T.S.O. VII
2011-17  7-12-11   131.20 -
                   131.29
2011-18  8-9-11    T.S.O. VII
2011-19  8-9-11    T.S.O. VII
2011-20  8-9-11    T.S.O. VII
                   33.70 -
                   33.73,
2011-21  8-9-11    102.01 -
                   102.03,
                   102.99
2011-22  8-9-11    T.S.O. II
2011-23  8-23-11   Ch. 74, Sch. V,
                   Sch. VI
2011-24  8-23-11   36.06
2011-25  9-6-11    T.S.O. VIII
2011-26  9-6-11    T.S.O. VIII
2011-27  9-6-11    T.S.O. VIII
2011-28  9-13-11   T.S.O. VII
2011-29  9-13-11   T.S.O. VII
                   90.01,
                   90.02,
                   90.35,
2011-30  9-13-11   90.36,
                   90.60,
                   90.62,
                   90.65
2011-31  11-8-11   T.S.O. VI
                   52.20 -
                   52.24,
2011-32  12-13-11  52.40 -
                   52.52,
                   52.99
2012-01  2-14-12   155.023,
                   155.025
2012-02  2-14-12   160.09
2012-03  3-13-12   Ch. 74, Sch. I
2012-04  3-27-12   155.023,
                   155.025
2012-05  3-27-12   T.S.O. VIII
2012-06  4-24-12   T.S.O. VIII
2012-07  4-24-12   T.S.O. VIII
2012-08  5-22-12   Ch. 74, Sch. I
                   Ch. 74, Sch. V,
2012-09  5-22-12   Sch. VI,
                   Ch. 75, Sch. I
2012-11  7-10-12   T.S.O. VII
2012-13  7-24-12   T.S.O. II
2012-14  8-14-12   T.S.O. VII
2012-15  8-14-12   T.S.O. VII
2012-16  8-28-12   37.12
2012-20  9-11-12   156.98
                   154.01,
2012-21  10-9-12   154.20,
                   154.21
2012-23  9-25-12   150.02
2012-24  10-9-12   T.S.O. VII
2012-25  10-9-12   T.S.O. VII
2012-26  11-20-12  T.S.O. VII
2012-27  11-20-12  T.S.O. VII
2013-01  1-8-13    T.S.O. VI
2013-02  2-12-13   T.S.O. VII
2013-03  2-12-13   T.S.O. VII
2013-04  2-12-13   T.S.O. VII
2013-05  2-12-13   T.S.O. VII
2013-06  2-12-13   T.S.O. VII
2013-07  2-12-13   T.S.O. VII
2013-08  3-12-13   Ch. 74, Sch. II,
                   Sch. V
2013-09  3-26-13   130.20 -
                   130.25
2013-10  4-9-13    T.S.O. II
2013-11  4-30-13   150.34
2013-12  5-14-13   T.S.O. VII
2013-14  5-14-13   T.S.O. VIII
2013-15  5-28-13   Ch. 74, Sch. II
2013-16  6-11-13   T.S.O. VII
2013-17  6-11-13   T.S.O. VII
                   52.02 -
2013-18  7-9-13    52.04,
                   52.06,
                   52.99
2013-19  8-13-13   155.036
2013-20  8-13-13   T.S.O. VI
                   130.41,
2013-21  8-13-13   130.45,
                   130.46
2013-22  8-27-13   T.S.O. VI
2013-23  8-27-13   Ch. 74, Sch. I
2013-24  9-10-13   T.S.O. VIII
2013-25  9-10-13   T.S.O. VIII
2013-26  9-10-13   T.S.O. VIII
2013-27  9-24-13   T.S.O. VIII
2013-28  9-24-13   T.S.O. III
2013-29  10-22-13  T.S.O. VII
2013-30  10-22-13  T.S.O. VII
2013-31  10-22-13  T.S.O. II
2013-32  11-12-13  T.S.O. VII
2013-33  11-12-13  T.S.O. VII
2013-34  12-10-13  T.S.O. VII
2013-35  12-10-13  T.S.O. VII
2013-36  12-10-13  155.041 ,
                   T.S.O. VII
2013-37  12-10-13  T.S.O. VIII
                   Ch. 74, Sch. I,
2014-01  1-14-14   Sch. II
                   Ch. 75, Sch. I
2014-03  2-11-14   T.S.O. VII
2014-04  2-25-14   T.S.O. III
2014-05  4-8-14    T.S.O. VII
2014-06  4-22-14   T.S.O. VIII
2014-07  5-13-14   T.S.O. VII
2014-08  5-13-14   T.S.O. VII
2014-09  5-13-14   T.S.O. VII
2014-10  5-27-14   161.01
2014-11  6-10-14   T.S.O. VII
2014-12  6-24-14   T.S.O. VIII
2014-13  7-8-14    T.S.O. VII
2014-14  8-12-14   T.S.O. VII
2014-15  9-9-14    T.S.O. II
2014-16  9-9-14    T.S.O. VIII
2014-17  9-9-14    T.S.O. VIII
2014-18  9-9-14    T.S.O. VIII
2014-19  9-9-14    T.S.O. VIII
2014-20  9-9-14    T.S.O. VII
2014-21  9-9-14    T.S.O. VII
2014-22  9-9-14    T.S.O. VII
2014-23  8-26-14   153.20
2014-24  9-23-14   31.02
2014-25  10-28-14  33.47
                   154.20 ,
                   154.21 ,
2014-26  10-28-14  154.25 ,
                   154.35 ,
                   154.36 ,
                   154.40
2014-27  11-18-14  T.S.O. VI
2014-28  11-18-14  T.S.O. VII
2014-29  11-18-14  150.02
                   90.01 -
                   90.03,
                   90.42,
                   90.44,
                   90.46,
                   90.50,
2014-30  11-18-14  90.60,
                   90.62 -
                   90.65,
                   90.67,
                   90.68,
                   90.96,
                   90.98
2015-01  1-13-15   33.60
2015-02  2-10-15   T.S.O. VII
                   52.20 -
                   52.24,
2015-03  2-24-15   52.40 -
                   52.52,
                   52.99
2015-05  3-10-15   T.S.O. VI
2015-06  3-31-15   Ch. 74, Sch. I
2015-07  4-14-15   T.S.O. VII
2015-08  4-28-15   T.S.O. VI
2015-09  4-28-15   T.S.O. VI
2015-10  5-12-15   T.S.O. VII
2015-11  5-26-15   T.S.O. II
2015-12  6-9-15    T.S.O. VII
2015-13  7-14-15   T.S.O. VII
2015-14  7-28-15   T.S.O. II
2015-15  8-11-15   T.S.O. VII
2015-16  9-8-15    T.S.O. VIII
2015-17  9-8-15    T.S.O. VIII
2015-18  9-8-15    T.S.O. VIII
2015-19  9-8-15    T.S.O. VII
2015-20  10-13-15  T.S.O. VII
2015-21  10-27-15  T.S.O. IV
2015-22  10-27-15  161.02
2015-23  11-10-15  T.S.O. VII
2015-24  12-8-15   T.S.O. VII
2015-25  12-8-15   150.02
2015-26  12-8-15   36.07
2016-1   1-12-16   T.S.O. I
2016-03  2-9-16    150.02
2016-04  3-8-16    T.S.O. VII
2016-05  3-8-16    T.S.O. VII
2016-06  3-8-16    T.S.O. VII
2016-07  3-22-16   130.20 -
                   130.25
2016-08  4-12-16   T.S.O. VII
                   124.01 -
                   124.13,
2016-09  4-26-16   124.20 -
                   124.24,
                   121.99
2016-10  5-10-16   90.10
2016-11  5-10-16   T.S.O. VII
2016-12  5-10-16   T.S.O. VII
2016-13  5-24-16   T.S.O. IV
2016-15  7-12-16   T.S.O. VII
2016-16  7-12-16   T.S.O. VII
2016-17  8-9-16    T.S.O. VII
2016-18  9-13-16   T.S.O. VII
2016-19  9-13-16   T.S.O. VII
2016-20  9-13-16   T.S.O. VII
2016-21  9-13-16   T.S.O. VIII
2016-22  9-13-16   T.S.O. VIII
2016-23  9-13-16   T.S.O. VIII
                   155.004,
                   155.0221,
2016-24\ 10-11-16  155.023,
                   155.024,
                   155.068
2016-25  10-11-16  T.S.O. VII
2016-27  12-13-16  T.S.O. VII
2016-28  12-13-16  T.S.O. VII
2017-01  1-10-17   T.S.O. VI
2017-02  1-10-17   T.S.O. VII
2017-03  4-11-17   T.S.O. VII
2017-04  4-25-17   T.S.O. III
2017-05  5-9-17    T.S.O. VI
2017-06  5-9-17    T.S.O. VI
2017-07  5-23-17   Ch. 74, Sch. I
2017-08  5-23-17   T.S.O. II
2017-09  5-23-17   103.01 -
                   103.09
2017-10  5-23-17   160.07
2017-11  6-13-17   154.40
2017-12  6-13-17   111.02
2017-13  6-13-17   T.S.O. VII
2017-14  7-11-17   T.S.O. VII
2017-15  7-11-17   T.S.O. VII
2017-16  8-8-17    T.S.O. VII
2017-17  8-8-17    T.S.O. VII
2017-18  8-8-17    T.S.O. VII
2017-19  8-8-17    T.S.O. VII
2017-20  8-8-17    T.S.O. VII
2017-21  8-22-17   T.S.O. V
                   104.11 -
2017-22  8-22-17   104.21,
                   104.28,
                   104.29
2017-23  9-12-17   T.S.O. VIII
2017-24  9-12-17   T.S.O. VIII
2017-25  9-12-17   T.S.O. VIII
2017-26  9-12-17   T.S.O. VII
2017-27  10-10-17  155.0221
                   155.004,
2017-28  10-10-17  155.0231,
                   155.024,
                   155.068
2017-29  11-14-17  T.S.O. VII
2017-30  11-14-17  T.S.O. VIII
2017-31  12-12-17  T.S.O. VII
2018-01  1-9-18    T.S.O. VII
2018-02  1-9-18    T.S.O. VII
2018-03  1-9-18    T.S.O. VII
                   90.01,
                   90.50 -
2018-04  1-9-18    90.59,
                   90.97,
                   90.98
2018-05  1-9-18    90.60
2018-07  2-13-18   T.S.O. VII
2018-08  2-13-18   T.S.O. VII
2018-09  2-13-18   150.02
2018-10  3-13-18   T.S.O. VIII
2018-11  4-10-18   T.S.O. VII
2018-12  4-10-18   51.16
2018-13  4-24-18   T.S.O. II
2018-14  5-8-18    T.S.O. VII
2018-15  5-8-18    T.S.O. VII
2018-16  5-8-18    T.S.O. VI
2018-17  6-12-18   T.S.O. VII
2018-18  7-10-18   T.S.O. VII
                   151.015,
2018-19  8-7-18    151.016,
                   151.096
2018-20  8-14-18   T.S.O. VII
2018-21  9-11-18   T.S.O. VIII
2018-22  9-11-18   T.S.O. VIII
2018-23  9-11-18   T.S.O. VIII
2018-24  9-11-18   T.S.O. VII
2018-25  10-23-18  Ch. 74, Sch. II
2018-26  10-23-18  T.S.O. VIII
2018-27  12-11-18  T.S.O. VII
2018-28  11-13-18  T.S.O. VII
2018-29  11-13-18  T.S.O. VII
2018-30  11-13-18  T.S.O. VII
2018-31  12-11-18  T.S.O. VII
2018-32  12-11-18  T.S.O. II
2019-03  2-12-19   T.S.O. VII
2019-04  2-12-19   T.S.O. VII
2019-05  2-26-19   T.S.O. VI
2019-06  3-26-19   T.S.O. VII
2019-07  3-12-19   T.S.O. VII
2019-08  3-12-19   T.S.O. VII
2019-09  4-9-19  130.20 -
                   130.25
                   90.01,
                   90.80 -
2019-10  4-23-19   90.83,
                   90.97,
                   T.S.O. VIII
2019-11  4-23-19   T.S.O. VIII
2019-12  5-14-19   T.S.O. VII
2019-13  5-14-19   Ch. 74, Sch. VI
2019-14  5-28-19   155.003,
                   155.031
2019-15  6-11-19   T.S.O. VII
2019-16  6-11-19   T.S.O. VII
2019-17  6-11-19   T.S.O. VII
2019-18  6-11-19   T.S.O. VIII
2019-19  7-9-19  T.S.O. VII
2019-20  7-23-19   T.S.O. VII
                   54.01 -
                   54.07,
                   54.20 -
2019-22  8-13-19   54.26,
                   54.98,
                   54.99,
                   150.02,
                   T.S.O. VIII
2019-23  8-13-19   52.22
2019-24  8-27-19   Ch. 75, Sch. I
2019-25  9-10-19   T.S.O. VII
2019-26  9-10-19   T.S.O. VII
2019-27  9-10-19   T.S.O. VII
2019-28  9-10-19   T.S.O. VII
2019-29  9-10-19   T.S.O. VIII
2019-30  9-10-19   T.S.O. VIII
2019-31  9-10-19   T.S.O. VIII
2019-32  9-24-19   T.S.O. VII
2019-33  9-24-19   T.S.O. VIII
                   105.01 -
2019-34  10-22-19  105.09,
                   105.98,
                   105.99
2019-35  10-22-19  T.S.O. VIII
                   90.11,
2019-36  10-22-19  90.60,
                   90.62,
                   90.68
2020-01  1-14-20   T.S.O. VII
2020-02  1-14-20   T.S.O. VII
2020-03  3-10-20   T.S.O. VII
2020-07  4-14-20   155.005
                   150.32 -
2020-08  4-14-20   150.34,
                   150.36,
                   150.39
2020-09  4-14-20   155.0231
                   125.01 -
                   125.05,
                   125.15 -
2020-10  4-14-20   125.25,
                   125.35 -
                   125.49,
                   125.60 -
                   125.63
2020-12  4-28-20   154.36
2020-13  4-28-20   125.18
2020-15  5-12-20   T.S.O. VII
2020-16  5-12-20   T.S.O. VII
2020-17  5-12-20   125.47
2020-19  6-6-20    T.S.O. VII
2020-20  6-9-20    T.S.O. VII
2020-21  6-9-20    Ch. 74, Sch. V
2020-23  7-14-20   T.S.O. VII
2020-24  7-14-20   T.S.O. VII
2020-25  7-14-20   T.S.O. VII
2020-26  7-14-20   T.S.O. VII
                   Ch. 74, Sch. I,
2020-27  7-28-20   Sch. II,
                   Sch. V
                  
 
 
 
