CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF HELOTES, TEXAS 
____________ 
Adopted May 14, 2009 
____________ 
Republished in 2016 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

> 
CITY OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Thomas A. Schoolcraft 
Mayor 
____________ 
Bert Buys 
Mayor Pro Tempore 
____________ 
Edward Villanueva 
Alex Blue 
Cynthia Massey 
Paul Friedrichs 
City Council 
____________ 
Rick Schroder 
City Administrator 
____________ 
Grace Tamez 
City Secretary 
____________ 
Frank Garza 
City Attorney 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a republication of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Helotes, Texas. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 2009 Code, as adopted May 14, 2009, and maintained by the City until republication, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the City Council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 RELATED LAWS RL:1 SPECIAL ACTS SA:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE RLCT:1 SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE SACT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Dennis Sinnett, Vice President, and Stephanie Benesh and April McDermid, Editors, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Grace Tamez, City Secretary, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that the City's efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the City readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the City's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Helotes, Texas. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Helotes, Texas. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Helotes, Texas. 2016. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Municipal Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord./Res. No. Date Adopted Include/Omit Supp. No. 589  3-24-2016 Include 1 590  5-12-2016 Include 1 597  9-22-2016 Include 1 600 12- 8-2016 Include 1 601 12- 8-2016 Include 1 17-04  4-27-2017 Include 1 17-06  6- 8-2017 Include 1 587  3-10-2016 Include 2 588  3-10-2016 Include 2 18-02  1-25-2018 Include 2 18-06  5-10-2018 Include 2 18-07  5-10-2018 Include 2 18-08  6-14-2018 Include 3 18-09  6-28-2018 Include 3 18-13  7-12-2018 Include 3 18-17  8- 9-2018 Include 3 18-23  9-27-2018 Include 3 18-27 10-11-2018 Include 3 18-28 11- 8-2018 Include 3 18-29 11- 8-2018 Include 3 18-30 11- 8-2018 Include 3 19-05  3-14-2019 Include 4 19-06  4-11-2019 Include 4  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Helotes, Texas" and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as "Helotes City Code." 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council: 
    City. The terms "the city" and "this city" mean City of Helotes, in the County of Bexar and State of Texas. 
    City clerk/secretary, chief of police and other city officers, employees, departments, boards, commissions or agencies. The term "city clerk/secretary" or "chief of police" or references to other city officers, employees, departments, boards, commissions or agencies shall be construed to mean the city clerk/secretary, chief of police or such other municipal officers, employees, departments, boards, commissions or agencies, respectively, of the City of Helotes, Texas. 
    Code. Whenever the term "Code" or "this Code" is used without further qualification, it means the Code of Ordinances, City of Helotes, Texas, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Computation of time. 
(1)  In computing a period of days, the first day is excluded and the last day is included. 
(2)  If the last day of any period is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the period is extended to include the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday. 
(3)  If a number of months is to be computed by counting the months from a particular day, the period ends on the same numerical day in the concluding month as the day of the month from which the computation is begun, unless there are not that many days in the concluding month, in which case the period ends on the last day of that month. 
    Council. The terms "council," "this council," "the council" and "city council" mean the City Council of the City of Helotes, Texas. 
    Councilmember. The term "councilmember" means a member of the city council. 
    County. The terms "county," "the county" and "this county" mean Bexar County, Texas. 
    Gender. Words of one gender include the other genders. 
    Highway. The term "highway" means the width between the boundary lines of a publicly maintained way any part of which is open to the public for vehicular travel. 
    Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
    Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural and any word importing the plural number shall include the singular. 
    Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation, and the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Or, and. The word "or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The term "person" includes an individual, corporation, organization, government or governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, association, and any other legal entity. 
    Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Roadway. The term "roadway" means the portion of a highway, other than the berm or shoulder, that is improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. If a highway includes at least two separate roadways, the term applies to each roadway separately. 
    Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory. The term "may" is permissive. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means the portion of a street that is: 
(1)  Between a curb or lateral line of a roadway and the adjacent property line; and 
(2)  Intended for pedestrian use. 
    Signature, subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include any symbol executed or adopted by a person with present intention to authenticate a writing. 
    State. The terms "the state" and "this state" mean the State of Texas. 
    Street. The term "street" means the width between the boundary lines of a publicly maintained way any part of which is open to the public for vehicular travel. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. The abbreviation "Vernon's Ann. C.C.P." means Vernon's Annotated Code of Criminal Procedure, as amended from time to time. 
    Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. The abbreviation "Vernon's Ann. Civ. St." means Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes, as amended from time to time. 
    V.T.C.A. The term "V.T.C.A." means Vernon's Texas Codes Annotated, as amended from time to time. 
    Written, in writing. The terms "written" and "in writing" include any representation of words, letters, symbols or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
    Year. The term "year" means 12 consecutive months. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, or any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. No provision of this Code shall be held invalid by reason of deficiency in any such catchline or in any heading or title to any chapter, article or division. 
Sec. 1-4. - History notes. 
    The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the sections. 
Sec. 1-5. - Editor's notes and reference notes. 
    The editor's notes, cross references and state law references in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to assist the user of this Code. 
Sec. 1-6. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code, or its application to any persons or circumstances, shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code or their application, since such provisions would have been enacted by the City Council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional or invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
Sec. 1-7. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
    Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or wherever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding $500.00, however, a fine or penalty for the violation of this Code or any ordinance that governs fire safety, zoning, or public health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse, may not exceed $2,000.00; provided, however, that no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or a similar offense under the laws of the state. Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
Sec. 1-8. - Certain actions and ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness. 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(4)  Any administrative ordinance not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the city. 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(7)  Any ordinance relating to municipal street maintenance agreements with the state. 
(8)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing grades for streets in the city. 
(9)  Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance providing for the levy of taxes or for an annual budget. 
(10)  Any ordinance amending the zoning map or zoning ordinances not inconsistent with this Code. 
(11)  Any ordinance relating to local improvements and assessments for such improvements. 
(12)  Any ordinance annexing territory to the city or discontinuing territory as a part of the city. 
(13)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city. 
(14)  Ordinances or resolutions prescribing traffic regulations for specific streets, such as ordinances or resolutions designating one-way streets, no parking areas, stop intersections where traffic is to be controlled by signals, etc. 
All such actions and ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Sec. 1-9. - Amendments or additions to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _______ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Helotes, Texas, is hereby amended to read as follows: ..." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not theretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Helotes, Texas, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _______, which said section reads as follows: ..." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, divisions, articles, chapters or other provisions desired to be repealed shall be specifically repealed by section, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-10. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive parts of permanent and general ordinances passed by the council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of adoption of the latest ordinances included in the supplement. 
(b)  In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _______ to _______" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated in the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of the ordinance sections inserted into the Code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Municipal name. 
    The municipality shall hereafter be known as the City of Helotes, Texas. 
Sec. 2-2. - Official seal. 
(a)  The official seal of the city is hereby established and approved and is to be used on all official papers of the city. 

(b)  The seal is described as follows: The seal of the city being a circular seal with the State of Texas represented in the centermost circle with an ear of corn marking the location of Helotes within the state. Surrounding the State of Texas are the words: "CITY OF HELOTES, COUNTY OF BEXAR, INCORPORATED 1981." This is enclosed by a thinly lined circle with a more thickly lined circle surrounded by five-pointed stars around the outer edge of the circle. 
Sec. 2-3. - Term "city," city seal, and other insignia restricted. 
(a)  No person shall use as its business name or part thereof, the word "city" within the corporate limits of the City of Helotes in a deceptive manner designed or intended to imply municipal sponsorship or approval for any purpose. A person commits an offense if he uses the official flag, seal, shield, service mark, badge, or other official insignia of the city or a department of the city or a facsimile of the flag, seal, shield, service mark, badge, or other official insignia of the city or a department of the city: 
(1)  For a commercial purpose; or 
(2)  To signify sponsorship or approval by the city or any agency or department of the thereof; or 
(3)  In any medium physical, electronic, or otherwise that is apparent, present or viewable in the municipal boundaries of Helotes. 
(b)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished in the municipal court by a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $200.00 with each day of continuing violation constituting a separate offense punishable by the imposition of a separate fine. In the prosecution of an offense under this section, proof of a culpable mental state shall not be a necessary element of proof. 
(c)  In addition to the criminal penalties provided for herein, the city attorney is authorized to obtain civil injunctive relief against any person or entity violating the provisions hereof. 
(d)  It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the offending party first obtained written authorization from the city administrator for such use and the use is consistent with said authorization. 
Sec. 2-4. - Notice of claim against city. 
(a)  The city shall never be liable for any claim for property damage or for personal injury, whether such personal injury results in death or not, unless the person damaged or injured, or someone in his behalf, or in the event the injury results in death, the person or persons who may have a cause of action under the law by reason of such death or injury, shall, within 60 days or within six months for good cause shown from the date the damage or injury was received, give notice in writing to the mayor and city council of the following facts: 
(1)  The date and time when the injury occurred and the place where the injured person or property was at the time when the injury was received. 
(2)  The nature of the damage or injury sustained. 
(3)  The apparent extent of the damage or injury sustained. 
(4)  A specific and detailed statement of how and under what circumstances the damage or injury occurred. 
(5)  The amount for which each claimants will settle. 
(6)  The actual place of residence of each claimant by street, number, city and state on the date the claim is presented. 
(7)  In the case of personal injury or death, the names and addresses of all persons who, according to the knowledge or information of the claimant, witnessed the happening of the injury of any part thereof and the names of the doctors, if any, to whose care the injured person is committed. 
(8)  In the case of property damage, the location of the damaged property at the time the claim was submitted along with the names and addresses of all persons who witnessed the happening of the damage or any part thereof. 
(b)  No suit of any nature whatsoever shall be instituted or maintained against the city unless the plaintiff therein shall prove that previous to the filing of the original petition the plaintiff applied to the city council for redress, satisfaction, compensation, or relief, as the case may be, and that the same was by vote of the city council refused. 
(c)  All notices required by this section shall be effectuated by serving them upon the mayor, city administrator or city secretary at the following location: 12951 Bandera Road, Helotes, Texas 78023, and all such notices shall be effective only when actually received in the office of the person named above. 
(d)  The above written notice requirement shall be waived if the city has actual knowledge of death, injury or property damage likely to result in a claim against the city. The city shall not be deemed to have actual knowledge unless that knowledge is attributable to an appropriate city official whose job duties include the authority to investigate and/or settle claims against the city. 
(e)  The written notice required under this section shall be sworn to by the person claiming the damage or injuries or by someone authorized by him to do so on his behalf. Failure to swear to the notice as required herein shall not render the notice fatally defective, but failure to so verify the notice may be considered by the city council as a factor relating to the truth of the allegations and to the weight to be given to the allegations contained therein. 
Sec. 2-5. - Authority of city officers, agents and employees responding to emergency situation; exemption from liability. 
    Every officer, agent or employee of the city, while responding to emergency situations is hereby authorized to act in such a manner as to most effectively deal with the emergency. This provision shall prevail over every other ordinance of the city and, to the extent to which the city has the authority to so authorize, over any other law establishing a standard of care in conflict with this section. Neither the city nor the employee shall be liable for any failure to use ordinary care in such emergency. 
Sec. 2-6. - City vehicles to be used for official business only. 
    All motor vehicles owned by the city shall be used only for the official business of the city and it shall be a violation of city policy for any employee of the city to transport or carry in any vehicle owned by the city any person not an employee of the city except when such transporting or carrying is authorized for and done in furtherance of official business. 
Sec. 2-7. - Disclaimer of warranties-Inspection services. 
    Inspection services performed by the city, including, but not limited to, fire, police, building, health, and code enforcement inspection services, are done solely for the purpose of verifying compliance with the law as a part of the city's governmental interests in law enforcement and public safety. All such inspections are provided "as-is" and without warranty, expressed or implied. No special relationship between the city and any person affected by such inspections is created or intended. Nothing contained herein shall ever be considered a waiver, or reviver of governmental or sovereign immunity disclaimed herein or by other law. 
(Ord. No. 039, § 1, 11-25-1985; Ord. No. 59, § 1, 12-22-1988; Ord. No. 64, §§ 1-5, 7-27-1989; Ord. No. 520, § 1, 4-10-2014) 
Secs. 2-8-2-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-11. - Appointment and removal; non-discrimination; nepotism. 
(a)  Non-discrimination. It is the policy of the city, in the recruitment, appointment, removal, suspension and discipline of employees of the city, not to discriminate against any person in any way, whether such person be an employee, applicant or otherwise, on grounds of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, handicap, creed or political affiliation or belief. 
(b)  Appointment; term of office. Any and all employees of the city shall be appointed for an indefinite term by a majority vote of the city council, and, after appointment, shall serve at the will and pleasure of the city council. 
(c)  Suspension and removal. Any and all employees of the city may be suspended, disciplined, or removed by a majority vote of the city council. 
(d)  Nepotism. No person related within the second degree of affinity or within the third degree by consanguinity to any elected official of the city shall be appointed to any office, position or clerkship or other service of the city either on a full-time or part-time basis. This provision will not apply retroactively to city personnel employed prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(Ord. No. 027, §§ 1-4, 6-23-1983) 
Secs. 2-12-2-20. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY ADMINISTRATOR 

Sec. 2-21. - Position established. 
(a)  The position of administrative assistant of the city as created in Ordinance No. 35 on February 21, 1985, is hereby abolished. 
(b)  The position of city administrator is hereby created and established. 
(Ord. No. 84, §§ 1, 2, 4-22-1993) 
Sec. 2-22. - Appointment. 
    This position will be filled by a person selected by the council. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 3, 4-22-1993; Ord. No. 347, § 1, 10-11-07) 
Sec. 2-23. - Term. 
    The city administrator will have no term of office but will serve at the will and pleasure of the city council and mayor. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 4, 4-22-1993) 
Sec. 2-24. - Duties. 
    The city administrator will function as an assistant to the mayor and council and will assume such administrative duties and responsibilities as the city council may direct. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 5, 4-22-1993) 
Sec. 2-25. - Hours of work; salary. 
    The position of city administrator is a full-time position. The hours of work will be established by the city council. The salary for the administrator will be according to the city's master salary plan and the grade level assigned to the position by the city council. Additional compensation will be made in the form of benefits available to all city employees. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 6, 4-22-1993) 
Sec. 2-26. - Qualifications. 
    Qualifications required for the position of city administrator will be determined by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 7, 4-22-1993) 
Secs. 2-27-2-30. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CITY CLERK/SECRETARY 

Sec. 2-31. - Office created; duties. 
    The office of city clerk/secretary is created and the duties of the office are those prescribed by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 22.071 et seq. Those duties are: 
(1)  Attend every meeting of the city council and keep accurate minutes of the proceedings. 
(2)  Engross and enroll all laws, resolutions, and ordinances of the city. 
(3)  Keep the corporate seal. 
(4)  Take charge of and preserve all books, records, papers, documents, and files of the city. 
(5)  Countersign all commissions issued to the city officers and licenses issued by the mayor, and keep a record and register thereof. 
(6)  Draw all warrants on the treasurer and countersign the same and keep an accurate account thereof. 
(7)  Keep in books regular accounts of the receipts and disbursements of the city. 
(8)  Keep a register of all bonds and bills issued by the city. 
(9)  Keep all records of all contracts of the city. 
(10)  Countersign all bonds issued by the city. 
(11)  Perform such other duties as the city council may require. 
(12)  Be the clerk of the municipal court, unless otherwise determined. 
(13)  Serve as secretary to other boards of the city as directed by the council. 
(Ord. No. 006, 1-22-1982) 
Secs. 2-32-2-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RETIREMENT 

Sec. 2-41. - Participation in Texas Municipal Retirement System. 
(a)  The city council, on behalf of the city, hereby exercises its option and elects to have the city and all of the employees of all departments now existing and those hereafter created participate in the Texas Municipal Retirement System as provided in the TMRS Act. 
(b)  The city administrator is hereby directed to notify the Board of Trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System that the city has elected to participate and have the employees of the city covered in said system. 
(c)  Each person who becomes an employee of a participating city on or after the effective date of participation of such city whose position shall require more than 999 hours per year shall become a member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System as a condition of his/her employment. 
(d)  Each employee who qualifies for such credit shall be allowed "prior service credit" (as defined in section 63.101 of the TMRS Act) at the rate of 100 percent of the "base credit" of such member, calculated in the manner prescribed in section 63.105 of said Act. 
(e)  The city administrator is hereby directed to remit to the Board of Trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, at its office in Austin, Texas, the city contributions to the system and the amounts which shall be deducted from the compensation or payroll of employees, all as required by said board under the provisions of the TMRS Act, and the said official is hereby authorized and directed to ascertain and certify officially on behalf of this city the prior service rendered to the said municipality by each of the employees of the participating departments, and the average prior service compensation received by each, and to make and execute all prior service certifications and all other reports and certifications which may be required of the city under the provisions of the TMRS Act, or in compliance with the rules and regulations of the Board of Trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System. 
(f)  The city hereby elects to participate in the supplemental death benefits fund of the Texas Municipal Retirement System for the purpose of providing in-service death benefits for each of the city's employees who are members of said system, and for the purpose of providing post-retirement death benefits for annuitants whose last covered employment was as an employee of the city, in the amounts and on the terms provided for in V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 852.004, 854.601-854.605, 855.314, 855.409 and 855.502, as amended. 
(g)  The city is hereby authorized and directed to notify the director of the system of the adoption of the ordinance codified by this division, and of the participation of the city in said fund. 
(Ord. No. 46, §§ 1-9, 9-9-1987; Ord. No. 481, § 1, 9-13-2012) 
Sec. 2-42. - Authorization of restricted prior service credit; authorization of military service credit. 
(a)  Authorization of restricted prior service credit. 
(1)  On the terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.305, of Subtitle G of Title 8, Texas Government Code (V.T.C.A., Government Code § 851.001 et seq.), as amended (hereinafter referred to as the "TMRS Act"), each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereinafter referred to as the "system") who is now or who hereafter becomes an employee of this city shall receive restricted prior service credit for service previously performed as an employee of any of the entities described in said Section 853.305 provided that (i) the person does not otherwise have credited service in the system for that service, and (ii) the service meets the requirements of V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.305. 
(2)  The service credit hereby granted may be used only to satisfy length-of-service requirements for retirement eligibility, has no monetary value in computing the annuity payments allowable to the member, and may not be used in other computations, including computation of updated service credits. 
(3)  A member seeking to establish restricted prior service credit under this section must take the action required under V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.305 while still an employee of this city. 
(b)  Authorization of military service credit. 
(1)  Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.502, as amended, the city hereby elects to allow eligible members in its employment to establish credit in the Texas Municipal Retirement System for active military service performed as a member of the armed forces or armed forces reserves of the United States or an auxiliary of the armed forces or armed forces reserves. Eligible members as used herein shall be those employees meeting the criteria set forth in V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 853.502(b) and 853.503, and the amount and use of creditable military service shall be as further set forth in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.505. 
(2)  In order to establish credit for military service hereunder, a member must deposit with the Texas Municipal Retirement System (in that member's individual account in the employees saving fund), an amount equal to the number of months for which credit is sought, multiplied by $15.00. The city agrees that its account in the municipality accumulation fund is to be charged at the time of the member's retirement with an amount equal to the accumulated amount paid by the member for military service credit, multiplied by the city's current service matching ratio in effect at the date the member applies for such military service credit. 
(Ord. No. 46A, §§ 1, 2, 2-8-2001; Ord. No. 481, § 1, 9-13-2012) 
Sec. 2-43. - Employee/employer participation rate. 
(a)  All employees of the city who are members of the Texas Municipal Retirement System shall make deposits to the system at the rate of six percent of their individual earnings. 
(b)  For each month of current service rendered by each of its employees who are members of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, the city will contribute to the current service annuity reserve of each such member, at the time of his retirement, a sum that is 200 percent of such member's accumulated deposits for such month of employment; and said sum shall be contributed from the city's account in the municipality accumulation fund 
(Ord. No. 219, §§ 1, 2, 9-26-2002; Ord. No. 481, § 1, 9-13-2012) 
Sec. 2-44. - Eligibility for retirement after 20 years of service. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of V.T.C.A., Government Code § 854.202(g), of subtitle G of Title 8, Texas Government Code (V.T.C.A., Government Code § 851.001 et seq.), as amended, which subtitle shall herein be referred to as the "TMRS Act," the city adopts the following provisions affecting the participation of its employees in the Texas Municipal Retirement System (herein referred to as the "system"): 
(1)  Any employee of the city who is a member of the system is eligible to retire and receive a service retirement annuity if the member has at least 20 years of credited service in the system performed for one or more municipalities that have adopted a like provision under V.T.C.A., Government Code § 854.202(g). 
(2)  Prior to adopting this section, the governing body of the city has: (i) prepared an actuarial analysis of member retirement annuities at 20 years of service; and (ii) held a public hearing pursuant to the notice provisions of the Texas Open Meetings Act, V.T.C.A., Government Code Ch. 551. 
(3)  The rights hereinabove authorized shall be in addition to the plan provisions heretofore adopted and in force at the effective date of this section pursuant to the TMRS Act. 
(Ord. No. 220, § 1, 9-26-2002; Ord. No. 481, § 1, 9-13-2012) 
Secs. 2-45-2-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RECORDS MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 2-51. - Applicability. 
    All documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilms, magnetic tape, electronic media, or other information recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and regardless of whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by the city or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business are hereby declared to be the records of the city and shall be created, maintained, and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this article or procedures authorized by it and in no other manner. 
(Ord. No. 73, § 1, 5-23-1991) 
Sec. 2-52. - City records declared public property. 
    All city records as defined in section 2-51 are hereby declared to be the property of the city. No city official or employee has, by virtue of his position, any personal or property right to such records even though he may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files, or use of such records is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 73, § 3, 5-23-1991) 
Sec. 2-53. - Policy. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient, economical, and effective controls over the creation, distribution, organization maintenance, use, and disposition of all city records through a comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records from their creation to their ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the Texas Local Government Records Act and accepted records management practice. 
(Ord. No. 73, § 4, 5-23-1991) 
Sec. 2-54. - Records management officer. 
    The city secretary will serve as records management officer for the city as provided by law and will ensure that the maintenance, destruction, electronic storage, or other disposition of the records of this office are carried out in accordance with the requirements of the Local Government Records Act. 
(Ord. No. 73, § 5, 5-23-1991; Ord. No. 402, § 2, 5-14-2009) 
Sec. 2-55. - Records control schedules. 
    Appropriate records control schedules issued by the Texas State Library and Archives Commission shall be adopted by the records management officer for use in the city, as provided by law. Any destruction of records of the city will be in accordance with these schedules and the Local Government Records Act. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 2, 5-14-2009) 
Secs. 2-56-2-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ETHICS 

Sec. 2-61. - Title; purpose. 
(a)  Popular name. This subchapter shall hereinafter be referenced as the city's "code of governmental ethics." 
(b)  Purpose. It is the policy of the city that all municipal officers and employees shall conduct themselves both inside and outside the city's service so as to give no occasion for distrust of their integrity, impartiality, and devotion to the best interest of the city and the public trust which the city representatives hold. To this end and to expressly ensure its accomplishment, the city council establishes this code of governmental ethics to serve as a guide for official conduct of the city's public servants and as a basis for discipline for those who violate its terms. 
(Ord. No. 299, § 1, 1-26-2006; Ord. No. 335, § 1, 04-26-2007) 
Sec. 2-62. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Words and phrases which are not defined in this subchapter but are defined in other ordinances or code provisions of the city shall be given the meanings set forth in those provisions: 
    Business entity. A sole proprietorship, firm, partnership, corporation, holding company, limited liability company, receivership, trust, joint-stock company, enterprise, franchise, association, organization, or any other entity recognized by law and organized for profit. 
    City. The City of the Helotes, an incorporated municipality located in Bexar County, Texas, its agents and employees including employed or volunteer personnel of the fire, police and EMS departments. 
    Employee. Any person employed or working for the city full-time or part-time, or for the purposes of this ordinance only, any independent contractor. 
    Immediate family. The spouse, children, siblings, and parents of an officer (official) or an employee, and the children, siblings, and parents of the spouse of the officer (official) or employee. These relationships are established by either consanguinity (blood) or affinity (adoption). 
    Lobbyist. 
(1)  A person who either: 
a.  Makes a total expenditure of an amount more than $200.00 in a calendar year, not including the person's own travel, food, or lodging expenses or the person's own membership dues, on activities to communicate directly with one or more city officers or employees in an attempt to influence city regulations, financial procurements, or administrative action; or 
b.  Receives compensation or reimbursement, not including reimbursement for the person's own travel, food, or lodging expenses or the person's own membership dues, of more than $200.00 in a calendar year from another person to communicate directly with city officers or employees to influence legislation or administrative action. 
(2)  This term shall not include employees of government entities. 
    Officer. The mayor or any member of the city council, and any appointed member of a city commission, board, or committee. 
    Person. Any human individual or corporation, organization, government or governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, association, and any other legal entity. 
    Substantial interest. 
(1)  A person has a substantial interest if: 
a.  The person owns ten percent or more of the voting stock or shares of a business entity or owns either ten percent or more or $15,000.00 or more of the fair market value of a business entity; or 
b.  Funds received by the person from the business entity exceed ten percent of the person's gross income for the previous year; or 
c.  The person has an interest in real property that is an equitable or legal ownership interest with a fair market value of $2,500.00 or more. 
(2)  An officer or employee is considered to have a substantial interest under this definition if a person related to the official in the first degree of consanguinity or affinity, as determined by the definition of degrees of relationship as provided in the V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 573, as amended, has a substantial interest under this section. 
    Volunteer. Any unpaid person acting in an unpaid official capacity on behalf of the city. 
(Ord. No. 299, § 1, 1-26-2006; Ord. No. 335, § 1, 04-26-2007) 
Sec. 2-63. - Ethics commission. 
(a)  Establishment. In order to guarantee that citizens are assured of their ability to hold city officials and employees accountable for their actions, an ethics commission is hereby established. This commission is to be composed of seven members. The city council and mayor shall each appoint one member to the commission. A seventh member shall be appointed by majority vote of the city council. If a vacancy occurs on the commission, the city council shall appoint a person to fill the unexpired term. Each commission member shall take an oath of office comparable to that taken by city council members. Ethics commissioners shall serve without compensation but shall be eligible to be reimbursed for actual expenses in accordance with city policy. 
(b)  Terms of commissioners. At the first regular meeting, all commissioners shall either agree among themselves, or draw lots to determine which three members shall serve an initial term of one year. Thereafter, all terms shall be two years. No member may serve more than two consecutive terms. The city council may by majority vote remove a commissioner with or without cause. Any commissioner who misses three consecutive meetings within a 12-month time period or one-third of all regular meetings shall be deemed to have automatically vacated his or her position on the commission. This section shall not apply to a commissioner who applied for and received an excused absence from the commission chairperson prior to the meeting(s) at issue. Any commissioner who no longer resides within the corporate boundaries or extraterritorial jurisdiction, as provided above, is deemed to have automatically vacated his or her position on the commission. All vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired terms. Members hold office until their successors have been appointed. 
(c)  Commission officers. From among its members the commission shall elect its officers, those being the chairperson, vice-chairperson, and secretary. Officers shall be elected for terms of one year. The chairperson shall preside over all meetings and may vote. If the chairperson fails or refuses to act, the vice-chairperson shall perform the duties of the chairperson. If the chairperson and vice-chairperson are absent, any commissioner may be appointed by the remaining members of the commission to preside over the meeting. 
(d)  Qualifications. 
(1)  Commission members must be registered voters who are residents of the city or the extraterritorial jurisdiction, with no more than three members of the commission being residents of the extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(2)  No member of the ethics commission may be: 
a.  A City of Helotes official or spouse of a City of Helotes official; 
b.  A City of Helotes employee or spouse of a City of Helotes employee; 
c.  An elected public official; 
d.  A candidate for elected public office; 
e.  An officer of a political party; 
f.  A campaign treasurer, campaign manager, officer or other policy or decision-maker for any political action committee; 
g.  A member of any board or commission for which the position is appointed by city council; 
h.  A lobbyist; 
i.  Anyone having any substantial interests with any city officer; 
j.  Anyone who has been a paid campaign worker or paid political consultant for any city council or mayoral candidate; 
k.  Any person contracted with the city or any person who is employed by a business entity that is contracted with the city; or 
l.  A convicted felon. 
(e)  Legal counsel. The city attorney shall serve as legal counsel to the commission. 
(f)  Commission rules and procedures. The commission shall establish procedures in accordance with the City of Helotes policies and procedures and Robert's Rules of Order which shall be submitted in writing for approval to the city council and mayor. The commission shall establish, amend, and rescind its procedures and maintain proper records of its proceedings and its opinions. 
(g)  Authority and duties. 
(1)  The commission shall meet as often as necessary to fulfill its responsibilities but must meet at least once a year in February to review the code of governmental ethics and may make recommendations to the city council. 
(2)  The commission shall be authorized to conduct public hearings and make written rulings on allegations of violations of this subchapter. 
(3)  The commission shall have the power to investigate, request, and gather evidence necessary to determine if a violation has occurred. The commission shall have the power to enforce the provisions of this subchapter, including recommending to the city council the prosecution of alleged violators. Upon the recommendation of the commission, the city council may employ or appoint any qualified attorney to investigate or prosecute any alleged violation or series of violations by one or more persons. Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed, however, to prevent complainants, including the city, from instituting direct legal action on their own behalf through the appropriate judicial authority. 
(4)  The commission shall receive from the city such administrative support as reasonably necessary to carry out the duties of the commission. 
(5)  The commission shall maintain with the city secretary or city administrator, sworn complaints in compliance with the city's records retention schedule. 
(Ord. No. 299, § 1, 1-16-2006; Ord. No. 335, § 1, 04-26-2007) 
Sec. 2-64. - Ethics complaints; procedures. 
(a)  Ethics complaints. 
(1)  Any person, officer, or employee who is not currently under indictment in the county may submit a complaint in writing to the city secretary, city administrator, or mayor. The complaint must be notarized and include the address and phone number of the complainant. The complaint must specify grounds for the allegation of a violation of this subchapter in plain and intelligible language and must cite specific details of the alleged violation, including the following, when available: 
a.  The name, title, address, and telephone number of the alleged violator; 
b.  The act or acts complained of; 
c.  The date(s) on or about of the alleged violation; 
d.  Other person(s) involved in the act(s); and 
e.  To the extent known, the specific section(s) of this subchapter that are alleged to have been violated. 
(2)  Complaints must be submitted within one calendar year after the date of the alleged violation. The commission shall not consider any alleged violation that occurred before the effective date of this subchapter. 
(3)  Within five business days after a complaint has been filed, the city secretary will forward the complaint to the commission who shall, at the first available regularly scheduled meeting, make a preliminary determination as to the following: 
a.  Whether the complaint is administratively complete in accordance with subsection (a)(1) of this section and if so; 
b.  Whether the facts alleged in the complaint, if true, would at face value constitute a violation of this subchapter. 
(4)  Commission's preliminary ruling. 
a.  If it is determined by a majority of commission members (not named in the complaint) that the facts, as alleged, would not constitute a violation of this subchapter, the complaint is to be rejected. 
b.  If it is determined by a majority of commission members (not named in the complaint) that the facts, as alleged, would or could constitute a violation of this subchapter, the commission shall make preliminary findings and conclusions as to a possible violation of this subchapter. 
(5)  Within five business days after the city secretary has received the commission's preliminary findings, such findings shall be sent to the complainant and the person charged with the complaint by U.S. certified mail. 
(6)  Upon commission determination, that the allegations, if true could constitute a violation of this subchapter, the person charged shall have the opportunity to submit a sworn statement together with information he or she believes is relevant to the complaint to the city secretary. Such sworn statement and additional information must be delivered to the commission no later than 30 days after the person charge has actual knowledge of the complaint and the commission's findings. Actual knowledge of the complaint and the commission's findings shall be conclusively presumed by the city secretary's receipt of proof of delivery by U.S. mail. Both the complainant and the person charged in the complaint shall be advised, in writing, that a false accusation or false response to an accusation may result in criminal prosecution. 
(7)  Frivolous complaint. For purposes of this section, a "frivolous complaint" is a sworn complaint that is groundless and brought in bad faith or groundless and brought for the purpose of harassment. 
a.  In deciding if a complaint is frivolous, the commission will be guided by the Texas Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 13, and interpretations of that rule. 
b.  Before making a determination that a sworn complaint is a frivolous complaint, the commission shall hold a hearing at which time the complainant may be heard; the complainant may be accompanied by counsel retained by the complainant. 
c.  By a record vote of at least two-thirds of those present after the hearing, the commission may determine that a complainant filed a frivolous complaint and may recommend sanctions against that complainant. 
d.  Before imposing a sanction for filing a frivolous complaint, the commission shall consider the following factors: 
1.  The seriousness of the violation, including the nature, circumstances, consequences, extent, and gravity of the violation; 
2.  The sanction necessary to deter future violations; and 
3.  Any other matters that justice may require. 
e.  The commission may impose the following sanctions: 
1.  A civil penalty of not more than $500.00; 
2.  Imposition of attorneys' fees incurred by the respondent of the frivolous complaint; or 
3.  Any other sanction permitted by law. 
f.  Upon a finding by the commission that a complaint is frivolous, the complainant may appeal the decision to city council provided such appeal is made in writing and within 30 days after the finding was made. 
g.  No person, who has been deemed to have filed a frivolous complaint, may file any subsequent complaint with the commission until such time as all penalties imposed, under subsection e. immediately above, for filing the frivolous complaint have been paid. 
(b)  Commission hearing. 
(1)  Upon receipt of a response by the person charged in the complaint or, in the case of no response after the expiration of the 30 days the ethics commission shall set the matter for hearing at the first available meeting. The person(s) charged in the complaint, and the complainant shall be provided at least ten days' notice of the date, time and location of the hearing. The person(s) charged in the complaint shall have the right to a full and complete hearing with the opportunity to call witnesses and present evidence, with the right to be represented by legal counsel at his, her, or their own expense. The ethics commission shall not be bound by the state Rules of Evidence or the state Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(2)  The commission shall hear and deliberate complaints in closed session in accordance with V.T.C.A., Government Code § 551.074 unless the officer or employee, who is the subject of the deliberation or hearing, requests a public hearing. No final action, decision, or vote with regard to the matter shall be made except in an open meeting that complies with the state Open Meetings Act. 
(3)  Upon completion of the commission's deliberations, the commission shall submit a written report to the city council. The minutes of the ethics commission meetings and hearings shall be sufficient to constitute a report. The report may include recommendations of the commission. If the commission finds that a violation of this subchapter has been committed or recommends disciplinary action be taken against person(s) charged in the complaint, the commission's report must include specific findings of fact and conclusions based on the complaint and applicable sections of this subchapter. 
(c)  Council action. 
(1)  The commission's findings of violations of this subchapter and recommendations that disciplinary action be taken may be appealed to the city council by the person(s) charged in the complaint. Upon receipt of a written request for an appeal, the city council shall promptly schedule a public hearing. The hearing may be open or closed to the public, at the discretion of the person(s) charged in the complaint. 
(2)  Upon receipt of the commission's report and upon conclusion of an appeal, if any, the city council shall determine by majority vote what, if any, action is appropriate pursuant to this subchapter. Any disciplinary action shall require the affirmative vote of a super majority of the full city council, without the participation of an affected member. No final action, decision, or vote with regard to the matter shall be made except in an open meeting that complies with the state Open Meetings Act. 
(d)  Confidentiality. No officer or employee shall reveal information relating to the filing or processing of a complaint, except as required pursuant to this subchapter, the state Public Information Act, and the city's applicable public information policies. Ex parte communications, being those occurring outside of duly posted commission meetings and hearings, among person(s) charged in the complaint or those making the charge and members of the commission, are prohibited. All information constituting confidential information or information protected by the attorney-client privilege, attorney work-product privilege, are to be withheld from public disclosure to the extent allowed by law, except that all evidence submitted to the commission shall be public information. The unauthorized release of confidential information within the city's control shall itself constitute grounds for disciplinary action against officials, officers, employees, and volunteers. 
(e)  Disciplinary action. 
(1)  Elected officials; city council and mayor. The failure of any city council member or the mayor to comply with one or more of the applicable standards of conduct set forth in this subchapter shall constitute grounds for reprimand. Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 22.007(a) a member of city council is subject to removal for acts of incompetency, corruption, misconduct, or malfeasance in office. 
(2)  Officers other than the mayor or council. The failure of a city officer, other than the mayor or a council member, to comply with one or more of the standards of conduct set forth in this subchapter shall constitute grounds for reprimand or removal from office to the extent allowed by law. Officers, other than the mayor or council members, may be removed at will, subject to applicable city regulations. Any officer removed from office shall be ineligible to hold a position on any city advisory board, committee, or commission, or employment for five years after removal, in addition to any other penalty provided by law. 
(3)  Employees. The failure of an employee to comply with one or more of the standards of conduct set forth in this subchapter shall constitute grounds for disciplinary action, up to and including termination of employment, to the extent allowed by law. All disciplinary action and any appeals there from shall be in conformity with applicable procedures established by the personnel policies of the city. Any employee dismissed from employment shall be ineligible for city employment for five years after dismissal, in addition to any other penalty provided by law. Nothing in this ordinance shall be interpreted to authorize the commission to hire an employee or terminate an employee's employment with the city. 
(4)  Other remedies available for violations. 
a.  Penalties prescribed in this chapter do not limit the power of the mayor, city council, or city administrator to discipline employees under their supervision pursuant to applicable city policies. 
b.  The penalties prescribed above do not limit the power of the city council to discipline its own members or members of appointed boards or commissions for violations of other city policies or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 299, § 1, 1-16-2006; Ord. No. 335, § 1, 04-26-2007) 
Sec. 2-65. - Standards of conduct. 
(a)  Officers or employees. 
(1)  Shall not intentionally or knowingly: 
a.  Accept, or agree to accept, any gift, favor, or service cumulatively valued over $25.00 that might reasonably tend to influence the officer or employee in the discharge of official duties or that the officer or employee knows or should know is being offered with the intent to influence the officer's or employee's official conduct; 
b.  Accept other employment or engage in a business or professional activity that the officer or employee might reasonably expect would require or induce the officer or employee to disclose confidential information acquired by reason of his or her official position; 
c.  Accept other employment or compensation or engage in any outside activity that could reasonably be expected to impair the officer's or employee's independence of judgment in the performance of the officer's or employee's official duties or which are incompatible with the full and proper discharge of city duties; 
d.  Make personal investments that could reasonably be expected to create a conflict between the officer's or employee's private interest and the public interest; 
e.  Accept, or agree to accept, any benefit cumulatively valued over $25 for having exercised the officer's or employee's official power or performed the officer's or employee's official duties in favor of another person; 
f.  Accept, or agree to accept, compensation in exchange for appearing before the city council or any city commission, board, or committee, of which the officer or employee is a member, as a representative for any private person, including the officer or employee, any immediate family member, or any group. This division does not prohibit an officer or employee from voting when that officer or employee undertakes pro bono representation; or 
g.  Solicit any gift, favor, or service that might reasonably tend to influence the officer or employee in the discharge of official duties of that officer or employee. 
(2)  These standards shall not be construed to deprive an officer or employee of the right to due process under the law, including the right to represent himself or herself in an administrative or court proceeding. 
(b)  Immediate family. 
(1)  No immediate family member of an officer, employee, or volunteer shall intentionally or knowingly: 
a.  Accept, or agree to accept, from another person any benefit that the member's relative, who is a city officer, employee, or volunteer, is prohibited from soliciting, accepting, or agreeing to accept under this subchapter; 
b.  Misuse any official information obtained from the member's relative, who is a city officer, employee, or volunteer, to which the relative has access by virtue of the relative's office or employment and that has not been made public, in a manner prohibited to the relative under state law; or 
c.  Misuse, as defined in V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 39.01, any city property, services, personnel, or any other thing of value belonging to the city that has come into the member's custody or possession by virtue of the office or employment of the member's relative, who is a city officer or employee. 
(2)  Any prohibitions described in this division are in addition to those provided by state law. 
(c)  No city council member shall intentionally or knowingly represent any private person, including the city council member or any immediate family member, or any group or interest before any department, agency, commission, or board of the city, except that a city council member may represent his or her interests in regards to any private property owned by the city council member before a board, agency, commission, or department of the city other than the city council. 
(d)  In any action or proceeding in the municipal court which is instituted by an officer or employee in the course of official duties: 
(1)  No city council member shall intentionally or knowingly represent any private person other than herself or himself including any immediate family member or any group, or interest. If a city council member elects to have a trial in municipal court, the city council, without the participation of the affected city council member, will appoint a special judge to preside over the trial; and 
(2)  No officer or employee shall intentionally or knowingly represent, directly or indirectly, any private person, other than the officer or employee or any immediate family member, any group or interest in any action or proceeding against the interests of the city or in any litigation in which the city or any department, agency, commission, or board thereof is a party. 
(Ord. No. 299, § 1, 1-16-2006; Ord. No. 335, § 1, 04-26-2007) 
Sec. 2-66. - Conflict of interest. 
(a)  Certain actions prohibited. 
(1)  No officer shall participate in deliberations, including a vote or decision, on a matter involving the city's procurement or disposition of any land, materials, supplies, or services in which the officer has a substantial interest if the vote or decision will have a special economic effect on the officer that is distinguishable from the effect on the general public. 
(2)  Any violation of this division with the actual or constructive knowledge of the officer shall render the contract voidable by the city council. 
(b)  Disclosure of conflict of interest. 
(1)  All officers shall disclose in writing the existence of any substantial interest which the officer may have in a matter which would be affected by a vote or decision of the body of which the officer is a member. 
(2)  Any officer having specific knowledge of any other officer that may have substantial interest in a matter, unknown to other officers, which would be affected by a vote or decision of the body of which the knowing officer is a member, shall disclose same in confidence to the mayor or city attorney. 
(3)  In the event of a conflict of interest, officers shall, prior to the vote or decision on the matter, file an affidavit with the city secretary stating the nature and extent of the officer's interest. 
(4)  Employees shall notify their supervisors in writing of any substantial interest, that employees have in a matter, that would be affected by an exercise of discretionary authority by the employee if the exercise of the employee's authority will have a special economic effect on the employee that is distinguishable from the effect on the general public. Upon receipt of this notice, the employee's supervisor shall reassign the matter. 
(c)  Serving as surety prohibited. No officer or employee shall serve as a surety on any official bond required of an officer or employee of the city, or as a surety for any person or entity doing business with the city. 
(Ord. No. 299, § 1, 1-26-2006; Ord. No. 335, § 1, 04-26-2007) 
Sec. 2-67. - Financial disclosure. 
(a)  Candidates. A candidate for city council or mayor shall file a sworn financial disclosure, as defined in division (d) below, with the city secretary not later than ten calendar days from the date the candidate files with the city secretary an application to be placed on the official ballot or to run as a write-in candidate. 
(b)  New officers. A newly appointed or elected officer shall file a sworn financial disclosure, as defined in division (d) below, with the city secretary within 30 calendar days from the date the position is assumed. 
(c)  Contents. Financial disclosures shall include: 
(1)  A list of any substantial interests the officer has in real property located within the corporate boundaries (such as city limits) or within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city; and 
(2)  A list of any substantial interest the person has in any business entity located within the corporate limits or within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city. 
(d)  Retention of statements. 
(1)  The city secretary shall maintain all financial disclosures required to be filed with the city secretary under this section, in compliance with the city's records retention schedule. 
(2)  The financial disclosure file maintained by the city secretary under this section shall be kept in alphabetical order for each year in which disclosures are filed. This file is subject to the state Public Information Act and any applicable city policy on public information. 
(e)  Form of disclosure. Financial disclosures other than those mandated by V.T.C.A., Election Code ch. 254 and V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 176, shall be filed on a form provided by the city secretary. The city secretary will provide a form to any person requesting one and, not less than ten business days before the last day set for filing a statement by any person, shall send a form to the person by U.S. mail. 
(Ord. No. 299, § 1, 1-26-2006; Ord. No. 335, § 1, 04-26-2007; Ord. No. 507, § 1, 7-11-2013) 
Sec. 2-68. - Conflicts. 
    This subchapter shall not be construed to require or allow any act which is prohibited by any other ordinance or Code provision. 
(Ord. No. 299, § 1, 1-26-2006; Ord. No. 335, § 1, 04-26-2007) 
Secs. 2-69-2-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-81. - Creation and purpose. 
    A planning and zoning commission is hereby created in order to accomplish the following purposes: 
(a)  To identify community needs and to advise the city council of the short- and long-range implications of development within the city; 
(b)  To recommend achievable community goals as a basis for long-range planning and development programs; 
(c)  To recommend plans, programs, and policies that will aid the entire community in achieving its defined goals; and 
(d)  To interpret adopted plans and programs so that private activities and desires may be accomplished in harmony with public needs and policies. 
(Ord. No. 001, 11-20-1981; Ord. No. 402, § 2, 5-14-2009) 
Sec. 2-82. - Membership and appointment. 
    The planning and zoning commission shall be composed of eight persons. The city council, upon recommendation by the mayor, will consider for appointment to the commission only those persons who have demonstrated their civic interest, general knowledge of the community, independent judgment, interest in planning and zoning, and availability to prepare for and attend meetings. It is the intent of the city council that members shall, by reason of diversity of their individual occupations and their geographic area of residence, constitute a commission which is broadly representative of the Community. 
(Ord. No. 001, 11-20-1981; Ord. No. 1C, 6-23-2005; Ord. No. 402, § 2, 5-14-2009; Ord. No. 502, § 1, 4-11-2013) 
Sec. 2-83. - Terms of office. 
    The term of all commissioners shall run in conjunction with the mayor's term. However, commissioners will continue to serve until a replacement has been appointed. Members shall be appointed and/or re-appointed at the first city council meeting in June of odd-numbered years following the election of the mayor. commissioners may be appointed to succeed themselves. Newly-appointed commissioners shall be installed at the first regular commission meeting after their appointment. Vacancies shall be filled for un-expired terms, but no commissioner shall be appointed for a term in excess of two years. Any commissioner may be removed from office by the city council for cause. Causes for removal include malfeasance, failure to maintain reasonable familiarity with statutes, ordinances, and rules affecting the commission, and/or failure to be governed thereby, to disclose a conflict of interest, and to attend three consecutive meetings without the recorded consent of the chairman. 
(Ord. No. 001, 11-20-1981; Ord. No. 1A, 6-10-1993; Ord. No. 402, § 2, 5-14-2009) 
Sec. 2-84. - Organization. 
    The commission shall have an organizational meeting following, as soon as practical, the election of the office of the mayor. The commission shall elect a chairman and a vice-chairman from its membership within the first three regular meetings following the election of the office of the mayor. The commission may elect a secretary and such other officers as it deems necessary at any time. The commission shall meet regularly and shall designate the time and place of its meetings. The commission shall follow Robert's Rules of Order and keep a record of its proceedings consistent with the provisions of this article and state law. 
(Ord. No. 001, 11-20-1981; Ord. No. 01B, 11-15-2001; Ord. No. 402, § 2, 5-14-2009) 
Sec. 2-85. - Duties and powers. 
    The planning and zoning commission is hereby charged and invested with the following duties and authority: 
(a)  Inspect property and premises during reasonable hours where required in the discharge of its responsibilities under the laws of the State of Texas and of the city. 
(b)  Formulate and recommend adoption to the city council a city plan for the orderly growth and development of the city and its environs, and, from time to time, recommend such changes in the city plan as it finds will facilitate the positive movement of people, goods, and the health, recreation, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(c)  Formulate a zoning plan as may be deemed best to carry out the goals of the city plan; hold public hearings and make recommendations to the city council relating to the creation, amendment, and implementation of zoning regulations and districts, as provided in Articles 1011a to 1011k, Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, as amended, authorizing cities and incorporated villages to pass regulations; all powers granted under said Act are specifically adopted and made a part hereof. 
(d)  Exercise all powers of a commission as to the approval or disapproval of plans, plats, or replats and vacations of plans, plats, or replats, as set out in Article 974a and 970a, Revised Civil Statutes of Texas. 
(e)  Study and recommend to city council on the location, extension, and planning of public rights-of-way, parks, or other public places and on the vacating or closing of same. 
(f)  Study and recommend to city council on the general design and location of public buildings, bridges, viaducts, street fixtures, and other structures and appurtenances. Study and recommend to city council on the design or alteration and on the location or relocation of works of art which are, or may become, the property of the city. 
(g)  Initiate, in the name of the city, for consideration at public hearing all proposals: 
(1)  For the opening, vacating, or closing of public rights-of-way, parks, or other public places; 
(2)  For the original zoning of annexed areas; and 
(3)  For the change of zoning district boundaries on an area-wide basis. No fee shall be required for the filing of any such proposal in the name of the city. 
(h)  Formulate and recommend to the city council for its adoption policies and regulations consistent with the adopted city plan governing the location and/or operation of utilities, public facilities, and services owned or under the control of the city. 
(i)  Keep itself informed with reverence to the progress of city planning in the United States and other countries and recommend improvements in the adopted plans of the city. 
(j)  Submit each six months a progress report to the city council summarizing its activities, major accomplishments for the past year, and a proposed work program for the coming year. The report shall contain for the year the attendance record of all members and the identity of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 001, 11-20-1981; Ord. No. 402, § 2, 5-14-2009) 
Sec. 2-86. - Meeting and quorum. 
(a)  A quorum for the conduct of business shall consist of five members of the commission. Commissioners shall regularly attend meetings and public hearings of the commission and shall serve without compensation, except for reimbursement of authorized expenses attendant to the performance of their duties. 
(b)  On a tie vote of the commissioners present, a motion requiring a majority vote on the matter before the commission is lost, since a tie is not a majority. 
(Ord. No. 001, 11-20-1981; Ord. No. 1C, 6-23-2005; Ord. No. 402, § 2, 5-14-2009; Ord. No. 502, § 1, 4-11-2013) 
Sec. 2-87. - Commission action. 
(a)  A motion may be made by any member other than the presiding officer. 
(b)  A motion to approve any matter before the commission or to recommend approval of any request requiring city council action shall require a simple majority of those commissioners present. 
(Ord. No. 001, 11-20-1981; Ord. No. 1C, 6-23-2005; Ord. No. 402, § 2, 5-14-2009) 
Sec. 2-88. - Disqualification from voting. 
(a)  A commissioner shall disqualify himself from voting whenever he finds that he has a personal or monetary interest in the property under appeal, or that he will be directly affected by the decision of the commission. 
(b)  A commissioner may disqualify himself from voting whenever any applicant, or his agent, has sought to influence the vote of the commissioner on his application, other than in the public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 001, 11-20-1981; Ord. No. 402, § 2, 5-14-2009) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 

Sec. 6-1. - Permit fees and gross receipt taxes. 
(a)  A biennial permit fee equal in amount to exactly one-half of that levied by the state is hereby levied upon all package stores and upon all wine and beer retailers located within the limits of the City of Helotes for the use and benefit of the city. The fee shall be, and the same hereby is levied, on package stores, whether they sell all or any part of the classifications of intoxicating beverages, and upon wine and beer retailers upon the same basis, and whether holding a permit for sale of same for consumption on or off the premises. These fees are levied pursuant to the provisions of the "Alcoholic Beverage Code," Vernon's Amended Texas Statutes. 
(b)  A biennial permit fee or gross receipts tax or occupation tax or other tax permitted by state law is hereby levied upon all businesses in the city in the business of selling mixed drinks in the manner and for the time and in the maximum amount permitted by state law. 
(c)  Such permit fees and gross receipt taxes shall be paid to the city on or before the 31st day of January in every odd numbered calendar year. 
(d)  Upon payment of said permit fees and gross receipt taxes, the city alcoholic beverage sales license issued by the development services department shall be posted and displayed conspicuously with the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission License within the business. 
(Ord. No. 47, §1-3, 9-9-1987; Ord. 432, §1, 6-10-2010; Ord. No. 494, §1, 1-24-2013) 
Chapter 10 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS 
ARTICLE I. - CHARITABLE BINGO 

Sec. 10-1. - Prize fee. 
    In accordance with V.T.C.A., Occupations Code §§ 2001.502 and 2001.503, the city shall now collect 50 percent of the five percent prize fee as permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 270, § 1, 11-4-2004) 
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: 
    Abandon means to dump, desert, or leave any animal on public or private property with the intent of terminating any further responsibility for said animal; and shall also mean failing to timely redeem any animal impounded or quarantined by the city, as specified herein. 
    Abuse shall mean to mistreat through intent or neglect any animal in a manner that causes or is likely to cause stress or physical injury or as otherwise stated in this chapter. 
    Adult dog or cat means any dog or cat over the age of four months. 
    Animal means any living creature classified as a member of the animal kingdom, including, but not limited to, birds, fish, fowl, mammals, and reptiles, but specifically excluding human beings. 
    Animal control officer means the person designated by the City of Helotes to enforce this chapter. 
    Animal control facility/shelter means any facility operated by a humane society, or municipal/county agency, or its authorized agents for the purpose of impounding or caring for animals held under the authority of this chapter or state law. 
    At large shall mean off the premises of the owner and not under the control of the owner or his employee or his agent by means of a leash, chain, rope, cord, or such other personal presence and attention as will reasonably control a dog's actions and conduct. 
    Cat means any domestic feline animal ( Felis domesticus ). 
    Circus means any commercial variety show featuring animal acts for public entertainment. 
    Commercial animal establishment means any pet shop, grooming shop, kennel, auction, riding school or stable, zoological park, circus, or performing animal exhibition. 
    Cruelly treated means tortured, seriously overworked, abandoned, deprived of necessary food, care, or shelter, cruelly confined, or caused to fight with another animal. 
    Currently vaccinated means vaccinated against rabies and satisfies the following criteria: 
(1)  The animal must have been vaccinated against rabies according to the label recommendations of a United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) approved vaccine. 
(2)  At least 30 days have elapsed since the initial vaccination. 
(3)  The time elapsed since the most recent vaccination has not exceeded 36 months, depending on the vaccine utilized. 
    Dangerous dog means a dog that makes an unprovoked attack on a person that causes bodily injury and occurs in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own; or 
    Dog means any domestic canine animal ( Canis familiaris ). 
    Domestic animal means any animal which is not prohibited and commonly kept as pets at the owner's residence, including but not limited to, domestic cats and dogs, domestic ferrets, rabbits, and domestic birds. 
    Enclosure means any structure used to immediately restrict an animal or animals to a limited amount of space, such as a room, pen, run, cage, compartment, or hutch. 
    Euthanized means to cause death by a method which: 
(1)  Rapidly produces unconsciousness and death without visible evidence of pain or distress; or 
(2)  Utilizes anesthesia produced by an agent which causes painless loss of consciousness followed by death of the animal. 
    Hybrid means any offspring of two animals of different species. 
    Impound means to place an animal in the city's animal control facility; or the taking into custody of an animal for purposes of transportation to the city's animal control facility. 
    Isolation means the keeping of an animal so confined so as not to have any human or other animal contact and is incapable of escape 
    Kennel means any premises wherein any person engages in the business of boarding, breeding, letting for hire, training for a fee, or selling animals. 
    License means the written or printed permission issued by the City of Helotes for the holder of a dog or cat within the city. 
    License tag means a metal tag issued by the City of Helotes and bearing the corresponding number of the license. 
    Licensed veterinarian means a person licensed by the State of Texas to practice veterinary medicine. 
    Livestock means bovine, equine, goat, sheep or poultry. 
    Local health authority means a person designated by the city to enforce the provisions of the Rabies Control Act and this chapter. 
    Own means to keep, harbor, or have control, charge, or custody of an animal. 
    Owner means any person who keeps, harbors, or has charge or control of, or permits any animal to habitually be or remain on, or be lodged or fed within his/her house, yard, or premises. This term shall not apply to veterinarians or kennel operators who have temporary custody of an animal for a period of less than 60 days or animals owned by others. 
    Performing animal exhibitions means any spectacle, display, act, or event other than circuses, in which performing animals are used, excluding certified therapy animals or demonstration animals used in school educational programs except swine. 
    Public nuisance shall mean the following: 
(1)  An owner's failure to control, restrain or otherwise allow, either by conduct or condition, any animal to: 
a.  Engage in conduct which establishes such animal as a dangerous animal; 
b.  Be at large as defined herein; 
c.  Cause a disturbance by excessive, continuous, or untimely barking, howling, crowing, or otherwise make excessive noise near the private residence of another; or continual barking, howling, whining, crowing, or other audible noise, in excess of 15 minutes, even if in sporadic bursts; 
d.  Produce maggots, flies, odors, or unclean conditions sufficient to annoy adjacent property owners or residents; 
e.  Chase vehicles or molest, attack, or interfere with other animals or persons on public property; 
f.  Damage, soil, defile or defecate on private property, other than the owners' property or on public walks or recreation areas, unless such waste is immediately removed and properly disposed of by the owner; or 
g.  Allow such fecal matter or other animal waste to accumulate to such a degree as to cause unsanitary, dangerous, or offensive conditions; or 
(2)  Any animal normally found in the wild that has entered onto any public or private property and, by its presence, is committing a threat to public health and safety or is generally interrupting the tranquility of the location. 
    Quarantine means the keeping of an animal so confined so as not to have any human or other animal contact and is incapable of escape. 
    Quarantine period means that portion of the observation period during which a biting animal, or an animal which has been bitten, is physically confined for observation. 
    Restraint means to secure an animal by a leash, lead, cage or within the confines of its owner's home, yard, or property which is fully enclosed by a good, secure and substantial fence. 
    Secure enclosure means a fenced area or structure that is: 
(1)  Locked. 
(2)  Capable of preventing entry of the general public, including children. 
(3)  Capable of preventing escape or release of an animal. 
(4)  Clearly marked, if applicable as containing a dangerous animal. 
    Serious bodily injury means an injury characterized by severe bite wounds or severe ripping and tearing of muscle that would cause a reasonably prudent person to seek treatment from a medical professional and would require hospitalization without regard to whether the person actually sought medical treatment. 
    Vaccinated means properly injected by a licensed veterinarian with a rabies vaccine licensed for use in that species by the United States Department of Agriculture. 
    Vaccination certificate means a certificate showing that the animal described thereon has received an inoculation of antirabic vaccine in an amount sufficient to produce an immunity and bearing the signature of a licensed veterinarian. 
    Veterinary clinic/hospital means an establishment maintained and operated by a licensed veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis, and treatment of a disease and injuries of animals. 
    Vicious animal means any animal or animals that constitute a physical threat to human beings or other animals. 
    Wild animal means any warm blooded animal which is normally found in the wild, including but not limited to, any non-human primate, raccoon, skunk, fox, poisonous snake, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx, or bear. 
    Zoological park means any facility, other than a pet shop or kennel, displaying or exhibiting one or more species of non-domesticated animals operated by a person, partnership, corporation, or government agency. 
(Ord. No. 240, § 2(app. A, art. V, § 2), 7-24-2003; Ord. No. 274, § 2(App. A), 1-27-2005; Ord. No. 393, § 1, 2-12-2009) 
Sec. 14-2. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Wild animals. It shall be unlawful for anyone to keep or harbor any wild animal. This section does not apply to zoological parks, performing animal exhibitions, or circuses. 
(b)  Vicious animals. It shall be unlawful for anyone to keep or harbor any vicious animal. 
(c)  Animal fighting. No person shall possess or harbor any animal for fighting contests, nor shall any person train, torment, badger, bait, or use any animal for the reason of causing or encouraging the animal to attack human beings or domestic animals. 
(d)  Other prohibited animals. It shall be unlawful for anyone to keep any hog, pig or swine, peacock, emu, ostrich, or hybrid wolf within the City of Helotes except when confined and in transit through the city. 
(e)  Disturbing the peace. No person shall own an animal in such a manner that the peace or quiet of the public is unreasonably disturbed. 
(Ord. No. 240, § 2(app. A, art. V, § 2), 7-24-2003; Ord. No. 2 § 1, 2-12-2009) 74, § 2(App. A), 1-27-2005; Ord. No. 393, § 1, 2-12-2009) 
Sec. 14-3. - Rabies control. 
    V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, Chapter 826, provides the minimum standards for rabies control in Texas and for this section. 
(a)  Vaccination Required. All dogs, cats, and household pets over the age of four months within the City of Helotes shall be immunized against rabies by a licensed veterinarian and by means of any standard vaccine approved by the U.S. Government for the prevention of rabies. The animal must receive a booster within the 12-month interval following the initial vaccination. The animal must be revaccinated against rabies every 12 or 36 months, depending on the vaccine used. The licensed veterinarian who administers such vaccine shall issue to the animal's owner a rabies tag and vaccination certificate which contains the name, address, and telephone number of the owner; the name, species, sex, date of birth, weight, breed, and color of the animal; the type, producer, expiration date, and serial number of the vaccine used; the date vaccinated; the rabies tag number; and the veterinarian license number and signature. The information on the vaccination certificate is confidential and not subject to disclosure under V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 552. 
(b)  Report of exposure to rabies. 
(1)  Any veterinarian who shall find any animal within the city limits afflicted with a disease which is transmissible from the animal to man shall immediately report to the local health authority such case together with the name and address of the owner and the location of the premises where the animal can be found. 
(2)  Persons having knowledge of any animal exhibiting symptoms of, or exposed to rabies, or that has bitten, scratched, or otherwise attacked, without provocation, an individual or another animal, or that the person suspects to be rabid or could reasonably foresee as capable of transmitting rabies, shall report the animal or incident to the city or the local health authority as soon as possible, but not later than 24 hours from the time of the incident. The report shall include the name and address of any victim to the incident or animal. 
(c)  Quarantine procedures. 
(1)  Any animal that bites or reportedly bites a human or is suspected of having rabies shall be isolated in strict confinement at the animal control facility for observation. Such animal shall not be euthanized or released for at least ten days unless, at the discretion of the local health authority, the animal is sacrificed for the purpose of laboratory examination. 
(2)  Any currently vaccinated animal that has been bitten by a known or suspected rabid animal shall be revaccinated immediately (within 48 hours) and placed in isolation under observation for a period of 45 days or euthanized. 
At the discretion of the local health authority, any unvaccinated animal which has been bitten by a known or suspected rabid animal shall be isolated in strict confinement in a place and manner approved by the local health authority and observed for a period of 90 days or euthanized. 
(3)  In the event the owner refuses to surrender such animal on demand, such action shall constitute a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, be punishable by a fine as prescribed by law. 
(4)  The owner of any animal that is isolated shall pay all fees and expenses related to the confinement and disposition, including, when applicable, the charges for preparation and shipment of the animal's head or brain to the nearest Texas Department of Health certified laboratory for rabies diagnosis. All quarantine related payment arrangements shall be at the discretion of the quarantine facility. 
(5)  In no event shall any animal subject to this section be allowed to remain at the owner's home unless a written evaluation by a licensed veterinarian, establishing health and safety, is acquired by the owner and submitted to the local health authority. In addition the following criteria must be met: 
a.  Approval from the animal control officer or authorized police officer at the scene of the incident. 
b.  A secure enclosure must be used to prevent escape. 
c.  The animal has a current vaccination certificate or is an unvaccinated animal under the age of four months. 
d.  The local health authority or a licensed veterinarian must observe the animal, at the very least on the first and last days of the quarantine period. 
(Ord. No. 240, § 2(app. A, art. V, § 2), 7-24-2003; Ord. No. 274, § 2(App. A), 1-27-2005; Ord. No. 274A, § 1, 6-8-2006; Ord. No. 393, § 1, 2-12-2009; Ord. No. 470, § 1, 6-28-2012) 
Sec. 14-4. - Loan of live traps. 
    Live traps for small animals may be obtained from the city for a fee. (The applicant shall pay the fee as prescribed in the most recent adopted fee schedule passed and approved by the city council.) All funds so generated will be used to purchase additional or replacement traps or other equipment needed by the animal control officer. The animal control officer may, but will not be required to assist the property owner with animal relocation or euthanization. 
(Ord. No. 240, § 2(app. A, art. V, § 2), 7-24-2003; Ord. No. 274, § 2(App. A), 1-27-2005; Ord. No. 393, § 1, 2-12-2009) 
Sec. 14-5. - Animal exhibitions. 
(a)  No performing animal exhibition or circus shall be permitted in which animals are induced or encouraged to perform through the use of chemical, mechanical, electrical, or manual devices in a manner which will cause, or likely cause, physical injury or suffering. 
(b)  All equipment used on a performing animal shall fit properly and be in good working condition. 
(Ord. No. 240, § 2(app. A, art. V, § 2), 7-24-2003; Ord. No. 274, § 2(App. A), 1-27-2005; Ord. No. 393, § 1, 2-12-2009) 
Sec. 14-6. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 589, § 1, adopted March 24, 2016, repealed § 14-6, which pertained to use of force in the capture and restraint of animals and derived from Ord. No. 459, § 2, adopted Oct. 27, 2011. 
Secs. 14-7-14-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ANIMAL CARE 

Sec 14-21. - Restraint, animals at large. 
(a)  Animals at large are prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any owner of an animal to allow an animal to chase vehicles or molest, attack, or interfere with other animals or persons on public property, or be at large as defined in section 14-1. The animal control officer or police officer is authorized to impound any animal found and determined to be at large. 
(b)  All animals shall be kept under restraint at all times while in the city. 
(c)  An owner shall exercise proper care and control of their animals to prevent such animals from becoming a public nuisance. 
(d)  Every female dog or cat in season (estrus) shall be kept securely confined in such a manner that it cannot come in contact with a male dog or cat except for planned breeding. 
(e)  Unlawful restraint of an animal. 
(1)  An owner may not leave an animal outside and unattended by use of a restraint that unreasonably limits the animal's movement. 
(2)  In this section, a restraint unreasonably limits an animal's movement if the restraint: 
a.  Uses a collar that is pinch-type, prong-type, or choke-type or that is not properly fitted to the animal; 
b.  Is a length shorter than the greater of: 
1.  Five times the length of the animal, as measured from the tip of the animal's nose to the base of the animal's tail; or 
2.  Ten feet; 
c.  Is in an unsafe condition; or 
d.  Causes injury to the animal. 
(3)  Exceptions. Section 14-21(e) does not apply to: 
a.  An animal restrained to a running line, pulley, or trolley system and that is not restrained to the running line, pulley, or trolley system by means of a pinch-type, prong-type, choke-type, or improperly fitted collar; 
b.  An animal restrained in compliance with the requirements of a camping or recreational area as defined by a federal, state, or local authority or jurisdiction; 
c.  An animal restrained for a reasonable period, not to exceed three hours in a 24-hour period, and no longer than is necessary for the owner to complete a temporary task that requires the dog to be restrained; 
d.  An animal restrained while the owner is engaged in, or actively training for, an activity that is conducted pursuant to a valid license issued by this state if the activity for which the license is issued is associated with the use or presence of a dog; 
e.  An animal restrained while the owner is engaged in conduct directly related to the business of shepherding or herding cattle or livestock; or 
f.  An animal restrained while the owner is engaged in conduct directly related to the business of cultivating agricultural products, if the restraint is reasonably necessary for the safety of the dog. 
(Ord. No. 393, § 1, 2-12-2009) 
Sec 14-22. - Number allowed and space and management requirements. 
(a)  Animals which are normally and customarily kept as pets and not prohibited elsewhere in this chapter are allowed in any zoning district, provided that such animal(s) are kept in accordance with the requirements of all federal, state, or local regulations. The list of animals authorized by this subsection includes pigeons, chickens, pheasants, cows, horses, sheep, goats and other livestock. 
(b)  Pigeons. A maximum of 15 pigeons on a single lot, parcel or tract of land. All pigeons shall be confined at all times in a clean, sanitary cage or loft located at least 75 feet from any residence or adjacent property not owned by the owner of the pigeons. 
(c)  Livestock or fowl. A minimum of one acre (43,560 square feet) is required. Any fraction of an acre does not count when calculating the number of animals allowed. The maximum number of animals allowed per acre is as follows: 
(1)  Farm animals (horses, cows, sheep, goats, et cetera): Two on any one or two acre tract; on tracts larger than two acres, one additional animal is permitted for each additional full acre. 
(2)  Rabbits: Four. 
(3)  Chickens: Five. 
(4)  Turkeys: Three. 
(5)  Other fowl: Two. 
(d)  Livestock and fowl shall not be housed within 25 feet of any residence or adjacent property line. No livestock or fowl shall be allowed to roam, graze, or be housed within 200 feet of any food service establishment or food processing establishment. 
(e)  Exclusions. Clauses (b) and (c) shall not apply to animal control facilities, veterinary establishments, animal hospitals operated by a licensed veterinarian, or commercial animal establishments located on property zoned for such purposes. Such establishment, however, must meet sanitation requirements and keep animals securely caged or penned. The said clauses shall not be construed to prohibit any person engaged in operating any slaughter house, packing house, or stockyard from keeping livestock for a reasonable length of time while awaiting their use. 
(Ord. No. 240, § 2(app. A, art. V, § 2), 7-24-2003; Ord. No. 274, § 2(App. A), 1-27-2005; Ord. No. 393, § 1, 2-12-2009) 
Sec. 14-23. - Treatment and care of animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally or knowingly: 
(1)  Beat, cruelly treat, torment, torture, overload, overwork, or otherwise abuse any animal. 
(2)  Fail unreasonably to provide necessary water, food, care, shelter, and ventilation for an animal in his custody. 
(3)  Abandon unreasonably any animal in his custody. 
(4)  Transport or confine any animal in a cruel manner. 
(5)  Kill, injure, or administer poison to an animal. This shall not apply to rodent control or pets brought to an animal facility or veterinarian for euthanasia. 
(6)  Cause or instigate an animal to fight with another. 
(7)  Give away any live animal, fish, reptile or bird as a prize for, or an inducement to enter, any contest, game, or other competition, a place of business, or business agreement. 
(8)  Fail to stop and render assistance or to report an injury or death of a domestic animal to the owner, police department, or animal control officer when one has struck an animal with a vehicle. 
(9)  Allow an animal to ride in the open bed of a vehicle, unless it is restrained in such a way that it cannot jump or accidentally fall out of the vehicle. 
(10)  Trap an animal by means of a steel jaw leg or neck trap. 
(b)  Seizure and disposition of cruelly treated animal. The procedures for the seizure and disposition of a cruelly treated animal are set out in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 821, subch. B and are the basis for this section. 
(1)  If the animal control officer has reason to believe that an animal has been or is being cruelly treated, he may apply to the municipal court for a warrant to seize the animal. 
(2)  On showing probable cause to believe that the animal has been or is being cruelly treated, the court shall issue the warrant and set a time within 10 days of the date of issuance for a hearing in the court to determine whether the animal has been cruelly treated. 
(3)  The officer executing the warrant shall cause the animal to be impounded and shall give written notice to the owner of the animal of the time and place of the hearing. 
(4)  If the court finds the animal's owner has not cruelly treated the animal, the court shall order the animal returned to its owner. 
(5)  If the court finds the animal's owner has cruelly treated the animal, the court shall: 
a.  Order a public sale of the animal by auction; 
b.  Order the animal given to a nonprofit animal shelter, pound, or society for the protection of animals; or 
c.  Order the animal humanely destroyed if the court decides that such action is in the best interests of the animal or that the public health and safety would be served by doing so. 
(6)  The court may order that the animal disposed under subsection (4)(i) or (4)(ii) be spayed or neutered at the cost of the receiving party. 
(7)  The owner of the animal may appeal the order. While the appeal is pending, the animal may not be sold, destroyed, or given away. 
(8)  Notice of the auction shall be posted where all public notices are posted. 
(9)  At the auction, a bid by the former owner or the owner's representative shall not be accepted. 
(10)  Proceeds from the sale of the animal shall be applied first to the expenses incurred in caring for the animal during impoundment and in conducting the auction. Any excess proceeds shall be paid to the court. 
(11)  If the animal control officer is unable to sell the animal at auction, he may cause the animal to be destroyed or may give the animal to a nonprofit animal shelter, pound, or society for the protection of animals. 
(Ord. No. 240, § 2(app. A, art. V, § 2), 7-24-2003; Ord. No. 274, § 2(App. A), 1-27-2005; Ord. No. 393, § 1, 2-12-2009) 
Sec. 14-24. - Animal waste. 
(a)  The owner of every animal shall be responsible for the immediate removal of any feces deposited by his animal(s) on public walks, recreation areas, or private property, excluding the property of the owner. 
(b)  The owner of every animal shall keep the area where the animals are kept in a sanitary condition so as not to become an odor nuisance to their neighbors. 
(Ord. No. 240, § 2(app. A, art. V, § 2), 7-24-2003; Ord. No. 274, § 2(App. A), 1-27-2005; Ord. No. 393, § 1, 2-12-2009) 
Sec. 14-25. - Inspection of animals and premises. 
    Animals and the premises whereon animals are kept or maintained shall be subject to inspection by the city health officer, city health inspector, animal control officer, or their representative, or city employees in cases of emergency involving serious threats to the public safety or health. 
(Ord. No. 240, § 2(app. A, art. V, § 2), 7-24-2003; Ord. No. 274, § 2(App. A), 1-27-2005; Ord. No. 393, § 1, 2-12-2009) 
Secs. 14-26-14-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - VOCATIONAL EDUCATION PROGRAMS 

Sec. 14-41. - In general. 
(a)  Animals which are normally and customarily kept as approved 4-H and FFA projects, including chickens, turkeys, rabbits, sheep/goats, cattle, and horses, will be allowed in any zoning district except where residential deed restrictions disallow such uses. 
All projects will be based on a confined feeding program with a minimum lot size of one acre with no proration for area less than one acre. Additionally, all projects shall meet the following minimum area requirements: 
Project Maximum Number per Acre Minimum Specifications Chickens 50 20'×20' confined feeding area and shelter Turkeys 50 25'×25' confined feeding area and shelter Rabbits 25 Individual confinement hutches per head Sheep or Goats 2 for first acre 
1 for each additional acre 8'×16' pen with 3'×6' shelter per 2 head Cattle 2 for first acre 
1 for each additional acre 10'×20' pen with a 6'×8' shelter per animal and an additional 100 sq. ft. with 4'×6' shelter per each additional animal Horses 2 for first acre 
1 for each additional acre 10'×20' indoor stall/pen per horse with minimum 40'×40' outside corral allowed  
(b)  Multiple projects on the same acreage shall meet the minimum area specifications for each project. 
(c)  Livestock and fowl shall not be housed within 25 feet of any residence or adjacent property line. 
(d)  Agricultural education project center housing facilities, including those on a high school campus, are exempt from the number of animal provisions of this chapter. 
(e)  The confined area must be kept clear of all manure in order to reduce odor and insects. 
(f)  All livestock must have a feeding program consistent with best management feeding practices and a high quality water source at all times. 
(g)  Licensing requirements do not apply to approved projects. 
(h)  At the discretion of the city administrator, the first complaint of public nuisance or violations of good animal husbandry practices may be mediated by city officials and 4-H and FFA leaders in an attempt to foster responsible project management, good citizenship, and community responsibility. Failure to resolve or abate unsatisfactory conditions within 14 days from the first complaint shall be cause for civil or criminal action under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 240, § 2(app. A, art. V, § 2), 7-24-2003; Ord. No. 274, § 2(App. A), 1-27-2005; Ord. No. 393, § 1, 2-12-2009) 
Secs. 14-42-42-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DOGS AND CATS 

Sec. 14-51. - Number allowed. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to own more than four adult dogs and four adult cats in any residential district within the City of Helotes. Veterinarian facilities, pet shops and animal care facilities are exempt from this requirement. 
(Ord. No. 274, § 2(App. A), 1-27-2005; Ord. No. 393, § 1, 2-12-2009) 
Sec. 14-52. - Rabies vaccination required. 
    All dogs and cats over the age of four months within the City of Helotes shall be immunized against rabies, at a minimum of every 12 or 36 months, depending on the vaccine used, by a licensed veterinarian and by means of any standard vaccine approved by the U.S. Government for the prevention of rabies. 
(Ord. No. 240, § 2(app. A, art. V, § 2), 7-24-2003; Ord. No. 274, § 2(App. A), 1-27-2005; Ord. No. 274A, § 2, 6-8-2006; Ord. No. 393, § 1, 2-12-2009) 
Cross reference- Vaccination required, § 14-3(a). 
Sec. 14-53. - Licensing mandatory. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own a dog or cat over four months of age in the City of Helotes without having obtained a license. 
(b)  Application for license must be made within 30 days after obtaining an animal is over four months old. 
(c)  License tags must be worn at all times when an animal is off the premises of the owner. 
(d)  Rabies vaccinations must be renewed within 30 days of its expiration to maintain lifetime licensing. Rabies vaccination information must be provided to the City of Helotes within 90 days of rabies vaccination. Thereafter, a new lifetime license must be purchased at the time of re-vaccination. 
(e)  The animal control officer shall maintain a record of the identifying numbers of all dog and cat licenses. 
(Ord. No. 240, § 2(app. A, art. V, § 2), 7-24-2003; Ord. No. 274, § 2(App. A), 1-27-2005; Ord. No. 393, § 1, 2-12-2009) 
Sec. 14-54. - Exemptions from licensing. 
    The following dogs and cats are exempt from licensing: 
(a)  Any dog or cat under the age of four months. 
(b)  Any dog or cat belonging to non-residents whose stay in the City of Helotes will not exceed 60 days. 
(c)  Animals in veterinary clinics, boarding kennels, or licensed breeding kennels provided such animals are securely confined at all times. 
(d)  Animals brought into the city and entered in any show or exhibition. This exemption will be effective for a period commencing seven days prior to the show and ending seven days after the show. 
(Ord. No. 240, § 2(app. A, art. V, § 2), 7-24-2003; Ord. No. 274, § 2(App. A), 1-27-2005; Ord. No. 393, § 1, 2-12-2009) 
Sec. 14-55. - Issuance procedures and fees. 
(a)  Written application for licenses shall be made to the City of Helotes which shall include applicant's name, address, home and work phone number; the name and description of the animal; a current rabies vaccination certificate issued by a licensed veterinarian; and the appropriate license fee. If the applicant has withheld or falsified any information on the application, the city shall refuse to issue a license. 
(b)  Upon acceptance of the license application and fee, the city shall issue a durable tag or identification collar, stamped with an identifying number and the year of issuance. 
(c)  Licenses may be purchased annually or for the lifetime of the animal. Annual licenses are due on January 1 of each year. Annual licenses issued after January 1 of the current year will expire January 1 of the following year and shall be prorated. 
(d)  Whenever a license tag is lost or damaged, the owner shall obtain a replacement from the city upon presentation of a current vaccination certificate and the payment of the prescribed fee. 
(e)  A license issued for one animal may not be transferred or attached to any other animal. 
(f)  The address of the owner is presumed to be the address where the animal is kept. Any change of address must be reported to the animal control officer within 30 days following such change. 
(g)  Whenever the ownership of a licensed animal changes, the new owner shall apply for and obtain a new license within 30 days of acquiring the animal. 
(h)  The animal control officer shall keep a record of each license issued. 
(Ord. No. 240, § 2(app. A, art. V, § 2), 7-24-2003; Ord. No. 274, § 2(App. A), 1-27-2005; Ord. No. 393, § 1, 2-12-2009) 
Sec. 14-56. - Revocation of license. 
    The city may revoke a license if: 
(a)  The applicant has falsified information on the application; [or] 
(b)  The person holding the license refuses or fails to comply with this chapter or any law governing the protection and keeping of animals. 
(Ord. No. 240, § 2(app. A, art. V, § 2), 7-24-2003; Ord. No. 274, § 2(App. A), 1-27-2005; Ord. No. 393, § 1, 2-12-2009) 
Sec. 14-57. - Impoundment and violation notice. 
(a)  Unrestrained animals or animals deemed to be a public nuisance shall be taken by the animal control officer or police officer and impounded in the animal control facility. 
(b)  Impounded animals which have a current license tag attached to a collar about the animal's neck or other identifying markings will be kept for at least five business days. Animals with no license tag or identifying marking will be kept at least three business days. However, if, in the opinion of the animal control facility veterinarian, the animal is too sick or injured to survive the impoundment period, it may be immediately euthanized. 
(c)  If the owner of an impounded animal can be identified, the animal control officer shall notify the owner as soon as possible. 
(d)  In addition to, or in lieu of, impounding an animal found at large, the animal control officer or police officer may issue to the known owner of such animal a notice of ordinance violation. Such notice shall impose upon the owner a penalty as prescribed by law. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to rescue or turn loose impounded animals from the animal control vehicle, animal control facility, or live traps without the consent of the animal control officer or police officer. 
(Ord. No. 240, § 2(app. A, art. V, § 2), 7-24-2003; Ord. No. 274, § 2(App. A), 1-27-2005; Ord. No. 393, § 1, 2-12-2009) 
Sec. 14-58. - Redemption or adoption of impounded animals. 
(a)  Any animal may be claimed by its owner upon payment of all fees and expenses related to the impoundment. 
(b)  Animals must have current vaccination and license tags prior to being redeemed or adopted. 
(c)  Any animal not claimed by its owner within three days (unidentified owner), or five days (identified owner), shall become the property of the City of Helotes, or its facility, and shall be placed for adoption in a suitable home or humanely euthanized. 
(d)  Any animal placed for adoption will be surgically sterilized prior to its release to the new owner. 
(e)  Adoption fees will include any fee or expense related to the animal's confinement, medical attention, vaccinations, and surgical procedures. Adoption fees will be paid directly to the animal control facility. 
(Ord. No. 240, § 2(app. A, art. V, § 2), 7-24-2003; Ord. No. 274, § 2(App. A), 1-27-2005; Ord. No. 393, § 1, 2-12-2009) 
Sec. 14-59. - Dangerous dogs. 
    V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 822, provides the minimum regulations for dangerous dogs in Texas and for this section. 
(a)  Requirements for owner of dangerous dog. Not later than the 30th day after a person learns that they are the owner of a dangerous dog, the person shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Confinement. All dangerous dogs shall be confined in a secure enclosure. 
(2)  Leash and muzzle. The owner of a dangerous dog shall not allow the animal to go outside its kennel, pen or structure unless the animal is muzzled, restrained by a chain or leash not more than four feet in length, and under the physical control of a person. The muzzle must not cause injury to the animal or interfere with its vision or respiration, but must prevent the animal from biting any human or animal. 
(3)  Signs. The owner of a dangerous dog shall display in a prominent place on the owner's premises a clearly visible warning sign indicating that there is a dangerous dog on the premises. The sign must be readable from the public roadway or thoroughfare. The owner shall also display a sign with a symbol warning children of the presence of a dangerous dog. Similar signs shall be posted on the animal's kennel, pen or enclosed structure. 
(4)  Registration. Every person who owns a dangerous dog must annually register such animal with the animal control officer. A collar identifying the animal as a dangerous must be worn at all times. Such collars must also have the owner's name and address. A registration fee of $50.00 shall be charged for each dog. 
(5)  Insurance. The owner of a dangerous dog must provide proof to the city secretary that the owner has procured public liability insurance of at least $100,000.00, insuring the owner for any damage or personal injury which may be caused by such animal. 
(6)  The owner of a dangerous dog that does not comply with the requirements of this section shall deliver the dog to the animal control officer not later than the thirtieth (30th) day after the owner learns that the dog is a dangerous dog. 
(b)  Seizure of a dog causing death or serious bodily injury to a person. 
(1)  The municipal court shall order the animal control officer to seize a dog and shall issue a warrant authorizing the seizure: 
a.  On the sworn complaint of any person, including the attorney or a peace officer, that the dog has caused the death of or serious bodily injury to a person by attacking, biting, or mauling the person; and 
b.  On the showing of probable cause to believe that the dog caused the death of or serious bodily injury to the person, as stated in the complaint. 
(2)  The animal control officer or police officer shall seize the dog and shall provide for the impoundment of the dog in a secure and humane condition until the court orders the disposition of the dog. 
(3)  The court shall set a time for the hearing to determine whether the dog caused the death of or serious bodily injury to a person by attacking, biting, or mauling the person. The hearing must be held not later than the tenth day after the date on which the warrant is issued. 
(4)  The court shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing to the owner of the dog or the person from whom the dog was seized and the person who made the complaint. 
(5)  Any interested party, including the city attorney, is entitled to present evidence at the hearing. 
(6)  The court may order the dog destroyed if the court finds that the dog caused the death of a person by attacking, biting, or mauling the person. If that finding is not made, the court shall order the dog released to its owner, the person from whom it was seized or any other person authorized to take possession of the dog. 
(7)  The court may not order the dog destroyed if the court finds that the dog caused the serious bodily injury to a person by attacking, biting or mauling the person and: 
a.  The dog was being used for the protection of a person or a person's property; and the attack, bite, or mauling occurred in an enclosure in which the dog was being kept; and the enclosure was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own and provided notice of the presence of a dog; and the injured person was at least eight years of age, and was trespassing in the enclosure when the attack, bite, or mauling occurred; 
b.  The dog was not being used for the protection of a person or person's property; and the attack, bite or mauling occurred in an enclosure in which the dog was being kept; and the injured person was at least eight years of age and was trespassing in the enclosure when the attack, bite, or mauling occurred; 
c.  The attack, bite, or mauling occurred during an arrest or other action of a peace officer while the peace officer was using the dog for law enforcement purposes; 
d.  The dog was defending a person from an assault or person's property from damage or theft by the injured person; or 
e.  The injured person was younger than eight years of age; the attack, bite, or mauling occurred in an enclosure in which the dog was being kept; and the enclosure was reasonable certain to keep a person younger than eight years of age from entering. 
(8)  Destruction of dog. The destruction of a dog under this Subsection must be performed by a licensed veterinarian; or personnel of a recognized animal shelter or humane society who are trained in the humane destruction of animals; or personnel of a governmental agency responsible for animal control who are trained in the humane destruction of animals. 
(c)  Dangerous dog declaration and procedure. 
(1)  If the animal control officer has cause to believe that an animal is dangerous, he may find and declare that animal dangerous and shall notify the owner, in writing, of that fact. 
(2)  If the owner cannot be located, the animal may be immediately impounded and notice shall be posted on the owner's property or sent by certified mail to the owner's last known address. 
(3)  An owner, not later than the 15th day after the date the owner is notified that a dog owned by the owner is a dangerous dog, may appeal the determination of the animal control officer to the municipal court. An owner may appeal the decision of the municipal court in the same manner as an appeal for other cases from the municipal court. 
(4)  Upon application, the court shall set a time for a hearing to determine whether the dog is a dangerous dog or whether the owner of the dog has complied with the requirement for keeping a dangerous dog. The hearing must be set not later than the tenth day after the date on which the dog is seized or delivered. 
(5)  The court shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing to the owner of the dog or the person from whom the dog was seized and the person who made the complaint. Any interested party, including the city attorney, may present evidence at the hearing. 
(6)  If the animal has attacked, bitten or injured a human being or domestic animal and the circumstances indicate that there is a probability of additional occurrences and that the animal poses a threat of serious harm to the public health and safety, the animal control officer or police officer may order the impoundment and destruction of the animal after notifying the owner. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be issued within two days of the impoundment. 
(7)  The owner shall have the right to a hearing as outlined above. 
(8)  If the owner fails to request a hearing or fails to appear at the hearing, the animal will be destroyed. 
(9)  If a court finds, after notice and hearing as provided in this Subsection, that the owner of a dangerous dog has failed to comply with the requirements for keeping a dangerous dog, the court shall order the animal control officer to seize the dog and shall issue a warrant authorizing the seizure. The animal control officer shall seize the dog and provide for its impoundment in secure and humane conditions. 
(10)  The owner shall pay any cost or fee assessed by the city related to the seizure, acceptance, impoundment, or destruction of the dog. 
(d)  Immediate destruction of the animal if warranted. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the immediate destruction by the animal control officer or a police officer of any vicious animal when less drastic methods, such as tranquilizing, are not effective or available or when the animal control officer, a police officer, nor the animal's owner is able to restrain or control the animal. 
(e)  Reporting requirements. 
(1)  If the owner of a registered dog sells or moves the dog to a new address, the owner, not later than the 14th day after the sale or move, shall notify the animal control officer of the new address. 
(2)  The owner of a registered dangerous dog shall notify the animal control officer of any attacks the dangerous dog makes on people. 
(f)  Consequences of attacks by dangerous dog. 
(1)  A person commits an offense if the person is the owner of a dangerous dog and the dog makes an unprovoked attack on another person outside the dog's enclosure and causes bodily injury to the other person. 
(2)  An offense under this section is a Class C misdemeanor, unless the attack causes serious bodily injury or death, in which event the offense is a Class A misdemeanor. 
(3)  If a person is found guilty of an offense under this section, the court may order the dangerous dog destroyed by a licensed veterinarian. 
(Ord. No. 240, § 2(app. A, art. V, § 2), 7-24-2003; Ord. No. 274, § 2(App. A), 1-27-2005; Ord. No. 393, § 1, 2-12-2009) 
Secs. 14-60-14-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - COMMERCIAL ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 14-81. - Permits. 
(a)  No person, partnership, or corporation shall open or operate a commercial animal establishment without first obtaining a permit in compliance with this chapter and the City of Helotes Zoning Code. 
(b)  The city shall publish these regulations for the issuance of permits and shall include requirements for humane care of all animals and for compliance with the provisions of this chapter and other applicable laws. The city may amend such regulations from time, to time as deemed desirable for public health and welfare and for the protection of animals. 
(c)  Upon a showing by the applicant for a permit that they are willing and able to comply with the regulations published by the city, a permit shall be issued upon payment of the applicable fee. 
(d)  The permit period shall begin on January 1 of each year and shall run for one year. Fees will be prorated for applications received during the year. 
(e)  If there is a change in ownership of a commercial animal establishment, the new owner may have the current permit transferred to his name upon payment of a transfer fee. 
(f)  Annual permit fees will be charged in accordance with the most recent adopted fee schedule passed and approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 240, § 2(app. A, art. V, § 2), 7-24-2003; Ord. No. 274, § 2(App. A), 1-27-2005; Ord. No. 393, § 1, 2-12-2009) 
Sec. 14-82. - Facility standards. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  Structural strength. Housing facilities shall be structurally sound and shall be maintained in good repair to protect and contain animals and restrict the entrance of other animals. 
(2)  Fencing. Fencing shall be solidly anchored to the ground to prevent animals from escaping by digging under the fence and sufficient height to prevent animals from escaping. 
(3)  Water and electricity. Adequate potable water and reliable and adequate electric power shall be available. 
(4)  Storage. Food and bedding supplies shall be stored in facilities which protect them against infestation or contamination by vermin. Refrigeration shall be provided for perishable food items. 
(5)  Waste disposal. Provisions shall be made for the removal and disposal of food and animal wastes, bedding, and debris. Disposal facilities shall be so provided and operated as to minimize vermin infestation, odors, and disease hazards. 
(6)  Washrooms. Facilities, such as washrooms, basins, or sinks, shall be provided to maintain cleanliness among animal caretakers. 
(b)  Indoor facilities. 
(1)  Heating. Indoor housing facilities shall be sufficiently warm enough to protect animals from cold. 
(2)  [ Bedding. ] Sufficient clean bedding material and other means of protection shall be provided when the ambient temperature falls below the temperature to which an animal is acclimated. 
(3)  Ventilation. Indoor housing facilities shall be adequately ventilated to provide for the health and comfort of the animals at all times. Fresh air shall be provided by means of windows, doors, vents, or air conditioning and shall be ventilated so as to minimize drafts, odors, and moisture condensation. Auxiliary ventilation, such as exhaust fans and vents or air conditioning, shall be provided when the ambient temperature is 85 degrees Fahrenheit or higher within the facility. 
(4)  Lighting. Indoor housing facilities shall have ample light by natural or artificial means. Such lighting shall provide uniformly distributed illumination of sufficient light intensity to permit routine inspection and cleaning during the entire working period. 
(5)  Surfaces. The interior building surface shall be constructed and maintained so that they are substantially impervious to moisture and may be readily sanitized. 
(6)  Drainage. A suitable method shall be provided to rapidly eliminate excess liquid from indoor housing facilities. If drains are used, they shall be properly constructed and kept in good repair to avoid foul odors. Closed drainage system, shall be equipped with traps and so installed as to prevent any backup of sewage onto the floor of the room. 
(c)  Outdoor facilities. 
(1)  Shelter from sunlight. When sunlight is likely to cause overheating or discomfort, sufficient shade shall be provided to allow all animals to protect themselves from the direct rays of the sun. 
(2)  Shelter from rain. Adequate shelter shall be provided to allow animals to remain dry. 
(3)  Shelter from cold. Adequate shelter shall be provided for all animals when the temperature falls below 50 degrees Fahrenheit. Sufficient clean bedding material or other means of protection from the weather elements shall be provided when the ambient temperature falls below that temperature to which an animal is acclimated. 
(4)  Drainage. A suitable method shall be provided to rapidly eliminate excess liquid. 
(d)  Space requirements. 
(1)  Primary enclosures must be large enough so that animals may obtain adequate exercise. Separate kennels used as sleeping quarters must provide sufficient space to allow each animal to turn about freely, stand easily, sit, and lie in a comfortable, normal position. 
(2)  A primary enclosure shall never house more than 12 dogs. 
(3)  Dog kennel houses and primary enclosures shall meet the following minimum space requirements: 
Dog's Weight Primary Width Enclosure Sq. Footage House Width House Square Footage Up to 15 lbs 2.0 ft. 6.0 1.5 ft. 3.0 15 to 35 lbs. 2.5 ft. 10.0 2.0 ft. 5.0 35 to 65 lbs. 3.0 ft. 15.0 2.5 ft. 7.5 65 to 95 lbs. 3.0 ft. 18.0 2.5 ft. 9.0 95 to 130 lbs. 3.5 ft. 24.0 3.0 ft. 12.0 Over 130 lbs. 4.0 ft. 32.0 3.5 ft. 14.0  
(4)  If the primary enclosure or kennel contains more than one dog, the minimum number of square feet required is the sum of the square feet requirements for each individual dog. 
(e)  Food and water. 
(1)  Animals shall be provided food which shall be wholesome, palatable, free from contamination, and of sufficient quantity and nutritive value to meet the normal daily requirements for the condition and size of the animal. 
(2)  Food receptacles shall be accessible to all animals and shall be located so as to minimize contamination by excreta. Feeding pans shall be durable and clean. Food receptacles shall be sanitized at least once every two weeks. Self-feeders may be used for dry food, and they shall be sanitized regularly to prevent molding, deterioration or caking of feed. 
(3)  Clean potable water shall be available to the animals at all times, unless restricted for veterinary care. Containers shall be designed to prevent tipping and spilling of water. Containers shall be clean and sanitized at least once every two weeks. 
(f)  Sanitation. 
(1)  Cleaning. Feces shall be removed daily to prevent contamination of the animals and to reduce disease hazards and odors. Rugs, blankets, and other bedding material shall be kept clean and dry. 
(2)  Sanitizing. Prior to the introduction of animals into empty previously occupied enclosures, such enclosures shall be sanitized to prevent an accumulation of debris, feces, or any disease hazard, and shall be repeated at a minimum of once every two weeks. Cages, rooms, and hard surfaced pens and runs shall be sanitized by washing them with hot water (180 degrees Fahrenheit) and soap or detergent; by washing all soiled surfaces with a detergent solution followed by a safe and effective disinfectant; or by cleaning all soiled surfaces with live steam. Pens and runs using gravel, sand, or dirt shall be sanitized by removing the soiled gravel, sand, or dirt and replacing it as necessary. 
(3)  Housekeeping. Premises shall be kept clean and in good repair in order to protect the animal from injury and to facilitate prescribed husbandry practices. Premises shall remain free of accumulations of trash, debris, or feces. 
(4)  Pest control. An effective program for the control of insects, parasites, and vermin shall be established and maintained. 
(5)  Employees. A sufficient number of caretakers shall be utilized to maintain the standards set forth in this section. 
(6)  Classification and separation. Animals housed in the same enclosure shall be maintained in compatible groups with the following restrictions: 
a.  Females in season (estrus) shall not be housed in the same enclosure with males, except for breeding purposes. 
b.  Any animal exhibiting a vicious disposition shall be housed individually. 
c.  Dogs shall not be housed with cats, nor shall dogs or cats be house with other species, except at the request of the owner. 
d.  Puppies and kittens shall not be housed with adult dogs or cats, other than their dames, except at the request of their owner. 
e.  Animals under quarantine or treatment for a communicable disease shall be separated from other animals in such a manner so as to minimize dissemination of the disease. 
f.  Animals with substantial injuries shall be housed separately from other animals. 
(g)  Records. The kennel operator shall keep available for inspection a record that shows the name, address, and telephone number of owners of each animal at the kennel; the description, age, breed, sex, and color of each animal; and a current rabies certificate for each animal. 
(h)  Inspection. The city retains the right to inspect the facilities. As a condition of the issuance of a permit, each operator agrees to allow such inspection. 
(Ord. No. 240, § 2(app. A, art. V, § 2), 7-24-2003; Ord. No. 274, § 2(App. A), 1-27-2005; Ord. No. 393, § 1, 2-12-2009) 
Secs. 14-83-14-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SPECIAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 14-91. - Abatement of conditions not complying with this chapter. 
    Whenever any premises where animals are kept are in an unsanitary condition; or the facilities are not in keeping with the provisions of this chapter, or any other regulation herein; or if any health ordinance or law is not observed, the city health officer, animal control officer, local health inspector, or his/her representative, by written notice to the person responsible for the condition of the premises or the keeping of the animals or the person owning or in control of such premises, may order the abatement of the regulations or conditions which constitute a nuisance. Failure to comply with such order shall, in addition to any criminal or administrative proceedings, be grounds for and entitle the city to obtain relief by injunction. 
(Ord. No. 240, § 2(app. A, art. V, § 2), 7-24-2003; Ord. No. 274, § 2(App. A), 1-27-2005; Ord. No. 393, § 1, 2-12-2009) 
Chapter 18 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Applicability of building regulations in extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(a)  Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.003, as amended, and an interlocal agreement for the regulation of subdivisions in extraterritorial jurisdiction between the city and Bexar County, Texas, as amended, the ordinances of the city providing for the adoption of the building codes, electrical codes, fire codes, and plumbing codes, and the inspection of the same, are hereby extended and made applicable in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city for all residential dwelling units with three or fewer units contained within a single structure. The county shall be responsible for building and fire protection system permitting and inspections in the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction for all commercial development. For purposes of this section, "commercial development" is defined as commercial structures, public buildings, and multifamily developments with four or more residential dwelling units contained within a single structure, excluding industrial facilities with fire brigades following occupational safety and health administration procedures and standards. 
(b)  All persons are prohibited from doing any building or structural work, together with necessary electrical, plumbing, HVAC, and fire safety work, on any residential dwelling unit in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city without first getting the proper building permits from the city, paying the required permit and related fees, and making such construction work in accord with said codes. 
(c)  Violations of this section shall result in the city seeking civil injunctive relief in district court to enjoin such violations. 
(Ord. No. 83, §§ 1-3, 11-5-1992; Ord. No. 402, § 2, 5-14-2009; Ord. No. 503A, 4-25-2013; Ord. No. 541, § 1, 9-25-2014) 
Sec. 18-2. - Building permits. 
(a)  Permit required . Building permits required to be issued, pursuant to section 18-12 International Building Code adopted, by the development services department shall first make application to the development services department and obtain the required permit. All approved building permits shall be posted conspicuously on the building site. 
(b)  Action on application. The development services department shall examine and approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove all applications for building permits within 30 business days. Such applications may be reviewed by other municipal departments to verify compliance with any and all applicable laws and ordinances under that department's jurisdiction. If the building permit application and associated construction documents do not conform to the requirements of this chapter or other applicable laws and ordinances, the development services department shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons for the rejection. If the development services department is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this chapter and other applicable laws and ordinances, the development services department shall issue, upon receipt of the building permit fee prescribed by the City of Helotes Schedule of Fees, as amended, a building permit for the work as soon as practicable. 
(c)  Time limitation of application. An application for a building permit that has been approved, approved with conditions, or disapproved by the development services department shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180 days after the date of building permit disposition and the continued nonpayment of the building permit fee. The development services department may grant a one-time, 180-day extension to an application. 
(d)  Time limitation of permit. Every issued building permit shall become invalid on the 271st day after the date the building permit is issued by the development services department. 
(e)  Permit extension. The development services department is authorized to grant, in writing, a one-time building permit time extension for a period not to exceed 90 days, provided that the extension is requested by the property owner in writing prior to the building permit expiration date and justifiable cause for said extension is demonstrated. 
(f)  Suspension or revocation. The development services department, acting under the direction of the city administrator, is authorized to suspend or revoke a building permit issued under the provisions of this chapter whenever the building permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate, or incomplete information, or in violation of any ordinance, regulation, or any other provision of this chapter. 
(g)  Validity of permit. The issuance or granting of a permit shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or of any other regulations of the city. Permits presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this chapter or other ordinances of the city shall not be valid. The issuance of a permit based on construction documents and other data shall not prevent the development services department, acting under the direction of the city administrator, from requiring the correction of errors in the construction documents and other data. The development services department, acting under the direction of the city administrator, is also authorized to prevent occupancy or use of a structure where such occupancy or use is in violation of this chapter or of any other ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 501, § 1, 03-14-2013) 
Secs. 18-3-18-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TECHNICAL CODES 

Sec. 18-11. - International Residential Code adopted. 
(a)  That certain document, a copy of which is on file in the development services office of the city, being marked and designated as the International Residential Code, including all appendices, standards, supplements, and errata, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the code of the city for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, additions to, use, or maintenance of one- and two-family dwellings in the city and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions, and terms of such International Residential Code, 2015 edition, published by the International Code Council, on file in the office of the city, are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this section. 
(b)  The following Sections of the International Residential Code are hereby revised: 
101.1. Title. These regulations shall be known as the Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings of the City of Helotes, hereinafter referred to as "this Code." 
Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this Code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, or repair mechanical work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the Building Official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Code, shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00. Each day a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work on the system after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable for a fine of not less than $100.00 and not more than $500.00. 
301.2. Climatic and geographic design criteria. Buildings shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of this Code as limited by the provisions of this section. Additional criteria shall be established, as determined by a licensed professional engineer, who is licensed to practice engineering in the State of Texas using good engineering practices. 
(Ord. No. 185, §§ 1, 2, 12-6-2001; Ord. No. 402, § 2, 5-14-2009; Ord. No. 466, § 1, 04-12-2012; Ord. No. 552, § 1, 11-13-2014) 
Sec. 18-12. - International Building Code adopted. 
(a)  That certain document, a copy of which is on file in the development services office of the city, being marked and designated as the International Building Code, including all appendices, standards, supplements, and errata, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the international building code of the city for the control of building and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions, and terms of said International Building Code, 2015 edition, are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions, and changes, if any, prescribed in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  The following sections are hereby revised: 
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the International Building Code of the City of Helotes, hereinafter referred to as the "Code." 
108.2 Schedule of Permit Fees. On buildings, structures, demolitions, or alterations requiring a building permit, a fee for each building permit shall be paid as prescribed in the most recent adopted fee schedule passed and approved by the city council. Approved building permits and the payment of the aforementioned fee(s) include the following Building Official inspections: 
Temporary Meter Loop (TML 
Plumbing Rough-In 
Foundation 
Frame 
Insulation 
Temporary on Permanent Set (TOPS) 
Sewer 
Water 
Driveway and Driveway Approach 
Final 
Reinspection fees, if required, are not included as a component of the building permit or associated fee(s), and, consequently, will be billed separately by the city as prescribed in the most recent adopted fee schedule passed and approved by the city council. 
312.1 General. Buildings and structures of an accessory character and miscellaneous structures not classified in any specific occupancy shall be constructed, equipped, and maintained to conform to the requirements of this Code commensurate with the fire and life hazard incidental to their occupancy. Group U shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
Agricultural buildings 
Aircraft hangars, accessory to a one- or two-family residence (See Section 412.3) 
Barns 
Carports 
Fences, more than 6 feet high 
Grain silos, accessory to a residential occupancy 
Greenhouses 
Livestock shelters 
Private garages 
Retaining walls 
Sheds 
Stables 
Tanks 
Towers 
312.2 Access Control Gate Systems. An electronic or manual access control gate and / or system, with or without connecting fencing and used for vehicular ingress / egress purposes, across the front property line of a parcel of land and abutting a public right-of-way shall be constructed a minimum of twenty feet (20') from the front property line. 
1612.3 Establishment of flood hazard area. To establish flood hazard areas, the governing body shall adopt a flood hazard map and supporting data. The flood hazard map shall include, at a minimum, areas of special flood hazard, as identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in an engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study for the City of Helotes," as amended or revised with the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and Flood Boundary and Floodway May (FBFM) and related supporting data including and all subsequent LOMARs along with any revisions thereto. The adopted flood hazard map and supporting data are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this section. 
3409.2 Applicability. Structures existing prior to January 1, 2002, in which there is work involving additions, alterations, or changes of occupancy, shall be made to conform to the requirements of this section or the provisions of 3402 through 3406. 
Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this Code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair, or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the Building Code Official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this Code, shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 dollars. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work on the system after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable for a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 187, §§ 1, 2, 12-6-2001; Ord. No. 402, § 2, 5-14-2009; Ord. No. 455, § 2, 8-25-2011; Ord. No. 466, § 1, 04-12-2012; Ord. No. 552, § 1, 11-13-2014) 
Sec. 18-13. - International Property Maintenance Code adopted. 
(a)  That certain document, a copy of which is on file in the development services office of the city, being marked and designated as the International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC), as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the code of the city for the control of building and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions, and terms of such International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 edition (including appendices, standards, supplements and errata) are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions, and changes, if any, in subsection (b) of this section. Existing ordinances which are more stringent than the IPMC will remain in effect. 
(b)  The following sections are hereby revised: 
101.1. Title. These regulations shall be known as the International Property Maintenance Code of the City of Helotes, hereinafter referred to as "this Code." 
109.3. Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this Code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair, or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the Building Code or Code Enforcement Official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Code, shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00. Each day a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
303.14. Insect screens. Every door, window, and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas, or any area where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged, or stored shall be supplied with approved, tightly-fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm) and every swinging door shall have a self-closing device in good working condition. 
602.3. Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases, or lets one or more dwelling units, rooming units, or dormitory or guest rooms on terms, either expressed or implied, shall furnish heat to the occupants thereof and maintain a temperature of not less than 65 degrees Fahrenheit (18 degrees Celsius) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and toilet rooms. 
(Ord. No. 190, §§ 1, 2, 12-6-2001; Ord. No. 402, § 2, 5-14-2009; Ord. No. 466, § 1, 04-12-2012; Ord. No. 552, § 1, 11-13-2014) 
Sec. 18-14. - National Electrical Code adopted. 
    There is hereby adopted the National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition, and all subsequent editions thereto and all electrical work and wiring in new construction or remodeling, additions, or repair of existing buildings must comply therewith. 
(Ord. No. 033, § 5, 9-6-1984; Ord. No. 402, § 2, 5-14-2009; Ord. No. 461, § 1, 12-8-2011; Ord. No. 466, § 1, 04-12-2012; Ord. No. 552, § 1, 11-13-2014; Ord. No. 18-02 , § 1, 1-25-2018) 
Sec. 18-15. - International Plumbing Code adopted. 
    There is hereby adopted the International Plumbing Code, 2015 edition, and all subsequent editions thereto and all plumbing in new construction or remodeling, additions, or repair of existing buildings must comply therewith. 
(Ord. No. 552, § 1, 11-13-2014) 
Historical Note- Ord. No. 466, adopted April 12, 2012, amended Sections 18-11 through 18-20.) 
Secs. 18-16-18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADDRESS NUMBERS 

Sec. 18-31. - Addressing authority; assignment of numbers. 
(a)  City Public Service (CPS) Gas and Electric Utility of San Antonio, Texas, is designated as the addressing authority within the CPS service area (Bexar County) of the incorporated city limits. 
(b)  City Public Service shall have assigned all new address numbers by the time the power pole is set for a new construction and revise any existing addresses as the need arises. This authority also includes assigning the address numbers for new streets, and assigning numbers for private roads or private roads that become public streets. 
(Ord. No. 208, 8-8-2002) 
Secs. 18-32-18-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 18-41. - Permit required; issuance; site plan. 
    Any private individual, company or corporation desiring to construct or reconstruct driveways along any city street or road for the purpose of providing access across the city right-of-way for egress or ingress to their private property shall first obtain a permit from the city administrator or his designated representative. Such permit shall be granted hereafter only under the following conditions and specifications: 
(1)  The permit must be obtained before any work is done across the city right-of-way. Application for said permit shall be accompanied by a development/construction plan (two copies) as hereinafter described. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the administrator or his designated representative until the city engineer has approved the site development plan. 
(3)  The site development plan submitted in duplicate, along with the permit request, shall be drawn to scale, and shall indicate: 
a.  Dimensions and locations of the driveway being requested; 
b.  Locations of existing and/or proposed roads or roadway intersections if within 100 feet of the site; 
c.  Locations of existing or proposed buildings, structures, storm drains, fire hydrants, utility poles, fences and service fixtures; 
d.  Radius dimensions; 
e.  Driveway separation; and 
f.  Name and telephone number of the responsible party. 
If the site development plan is a part of a new building construction plan requiring a building permit, the building permit is a prerequisite to the issuance of the driveway access permit. 
(Ord. No. 105, 5-8-1997) 
Sec. 18-42. - Placement of asphalt or gravel driveways. 
    For the placement of asphalt or gravel driveways refer to the summary of driveway regulations attached to this chapter as appendix A. 
(Ord. No. 105, 5-8-1997) 
Sec. 18-43. - Supervision of work by city. 
    Notice shall be given to the city administrator's office before any concrete is laid. In no case shall a driveway be poured without the presence of a representative of the city, unless authorized by the city engineer or his designated representative. 
(Ord. No. 105, 5-8-1997) 
Sec. 18-44. - Right of city to demand removal or relocation. 
    This permit is given subject to the right of the city council, when said council deems it necessary, to demand removal and/or relocation of any installed driveway in, along or across any city right-of-way in the city within 30 days of notice of such demand. 
(Ord. No. 105, 5-8-1997) 
Sec. 18-45. - Construction specifications. 
(a)  Placing of concrete driveways. 
(1)  The asphalt road or street shall be vertically cut with a concrete saw for the full length of the opening, so as to provide a straight vertical face. The new depth of the concrete at this interface shall be at least six inches. A lip shall be provided at the juncture of the driveway ramp with the roadway. This lip shall have the thickness of a two-inch by four-inch piece of lumber secured flush with the sawed edge of the roadway. (Nominal height of 11/2 inches.) 
(2)  The width of driveways and radii at curb returns as well as other criteria and standards are detailed for each condition or situation on the summary of driveway regulations in appendix A. 
(3)  Backfill shall be well tamped prior to placement of concrete driveway(s). 
(4)  Where a driveway ties to an existing sidewalk, reinforcing steel dowels (#4 by two-foot bars spaced at 18 inches on center) shall be used with an expansion joint at the interface. 
(5)  Driveways shall be six inches minimum thickness at the interface with the roadway and for the ramp and may be reduced to a minimum of four inches at the property line. 
(6)  Driveways shall be reinforced with #3 bars or approved equal in both directions tied in a 12-inch grid and placed so as to be in the vertical center of the driveway after concrete is laid. 
(7)  Concrete for the driveway placement shall be minimum 2,500 psi in 28 days. 
(8)  Driveway sections shall have a broomed surface finish with troweled rounded edges and at all joints. Dummy joints will be provided at least every 20 feet for the full length and width of the driveway. 
(b)  Maintenance. Each party placing a concrete access driveway across city right-of-way to that party's property shall be responsible for maintaining the replaced driveway. 
(Ord. No. 105, 5-8-1997) 
Secs. 18-46-18-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - HOURS OF CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 18-51. - Title. 
    This article shall be known as the "Hours of Construction Activities Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 302, § 1, 3-23-2006) 
Sec. 18-52. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases when used is this article, shall have the meaning set forth in this section: 
    Construction means any site preparation (including blasting), assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration, or similar action but excluding demolition, for or of public or private rights-of-way, structures, utilities or similar property. 
    Construction activity shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  It shall also include equipment or vehicles being started or idled, playing of radios, tape players or other devices, loud talking, unloading of equipment, tools, or supplies. 
    Demolition means any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of structures, utilities, public or private rights-of-way surfaces, or similar property. 
    Emergency means any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage that demands immediate action. 
    Emergency work means work required to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity, work required to protect persons or property from imminent exposure to danger, or work by private or public utilities to provide or restore immediately necessary utility service. 
    Heavy construction equipment means earth-moving machines, tractors, bulldozers, backhoes, concrete mixing and pumping trucks, compactors/rollers, cranes, dump trucks, excavators, fork lifts, grades, jackhammers, loaders, pavement breakers, pile drivers, portable crushers, trailer-mounted woodchippers, trenchers, or other pieces of equipment that generate similar levels of noise. 
    Legal holiday means New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. 
    Weekday means any day Monday through Friday, which is not a legal holiday. 
    Weekend means Saturday, Sunday and any legal holiday. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 2, 3-23-2006) 
Sec. 18-53. - Hours of construction activity. 
(a)  It is unlawful to create a nuisance resulting from the construction, demolition, alteration or repair of any structure including excavation, or resulting from the operation of any tools or equipment used in construction, excavation, drilling, demolition, alteration or repair work requiring a building permit at any time. 
(b)  No person shall operate any construction equipment nor conduct any construction activities, except during the following hours: 
Weekdays: 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 
Saturdays: 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
Sundays and legal holidays: 10:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 
(c)  It is also prohibited, prior to the authorized start time and after the required stop time, to cause noise associated with construction activities such as, but not limited to, noise attributed to workmen arriving to work (i.e.: loud talking, laughing or singing); vehicular noise; the playing of radios or other music; assembling, moving or stacking of construction materials; deliveries; or other site related construction noise. 
(d)  The only exception to the hours of operation is for the pouring of concrete when the forecast temperature is greater than 35 degrees Celsius (95 degrees Fahrenheit). At such times concrete may be poured before 7:00 a.m.; however, all shuttering and other site preparations must be completed before the required stop time of the previous day. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 3, 3-23-2006) 
Sec. 18-54. - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to the following construction activity: 
(1)  An emergency situation exists where the construction is necessary to correct an unsafe or dangerous condition resulting in obvious and eminent peril to public health and safety. 
(2)  The operation of equipment relating to essential services to the city and equipment operating during emergency conditions shall be exempted from section 18-53. 
(3)  Emergency work for non-city related essential services shall be exempt from section 18-53. 
(4)  Home improvements or repairs not requiring a city permit. 
(5)  Construction activity is permitted for homeowner permits when the work is being performed by the owner of the property between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. Mondays through Saturdays and 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on Sundays or legal holidays. 
(6)  Routine maintenance or replacement of such items as water heaters, dishwasher units, and garbage disposals. 
(7)  Activities confined within a wholly enclosed building or structure. 
(8)  Activities necessary to prevent injury to persons or property. 
(9)  Activities conducted by or for any government unit or agency. 
(10)  Lawn care maintenance and landscaping. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 4, 3-23-2006) 
Sec. 18-55. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person who criminally negligently, recklessly, willfully, knowingly or, intentionally violates any provisions of this article shall be fined for each offence a sum of not less than $50.00 and not more than $2,000.00. 
(b)  Each day the violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 302, §5, 3-23-2006) 
APPENDIX A. - SUMMARY OF DRIVEWAY REGULATIONS 

[Appendix analysis.] 
a.  Typical driveway. 
b.  Section thru driveway. 
c.  Details for concrete end treatment. 
d.  Typical driveway without culvert section. 
e.  C-C driveway section. 
f.  Typical driveway details. 

a

b

c

d

e

f
Chapter 22 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Interjurisdictional emergency management plan adopted. 
(a)  The Interjurisdictional Emergency Management Plan, Bexar County and Certain Municipalities, known as "the Plan," is hereby adopted for the city, for use within its jurisdiction and elsewhere by its paid and volunteer personnel in support of the Joint Resolution on Emergency Management Programs executed by the mayor of the city and the county judge. 
(b)  The mayor of the city retains responsibility assigned by the Executive Order by the Governor of the State of Texas as the emergency management director of the city, and as such may declare a local state of disaster within the city. The emergency management coordinator of the county shall be designated as the emergency management coordinator by and for the city. The city shall designate a liaison officer to facilitate coordination between the city and the county on emergency management matters, in accordance with V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.105. Copies of the designation documents shall be provided to the emergency management coordinator. 
(c)  Subsection (e) of this section designates the city officials who shall assist the officers of the county responsible for the listed activities under the plan. The city officials shall be listed by position title only, and each official shall become responsible for such assistance on assuming the position for the city. Those city officials are hereby designated by the county as associate managers for their respective activities. This subsection may be revised without affecting this adoption, and revisions will be provided to the emergency management coordinator. 
(d)  This adoption may be terminated by the city or by the county with or without cause, upon 60 days' written notice delivered to the other party, and must be renewed when a new plan is prepared by the county. A revised or new annex or appendix to the plan is not a new plan, and such annex or appendix shall be in effect for the city on its receipt by the city. 
(e)  Responsible officials of the city are as follows: 
Annex Title of Responsible City Official (1) Warning Mayor (2) Communications Police chief (3) Shelter and mass care City administrator (4) Radiological protection Fire chief (5) Evacuation Police chief (6) Fire and rescue Police chief (7) Law enforcement Police chief (8) Health and medical Police chief (9) Emergency public information City secretary (10) Recovery Mayor (11) Public works and engineering City administrator (12) Utilities City administrator (13) Resource management City administrator (14) Direction and control Police chief (15) Human services Police chief (16) Hazard mitigation Fire chief (17) Hazardous materials response Fire chief (18) Transportation Police chief (19) Donations management Police chief (20) Legal City attorney (21) Terrorist incident response Police chief  
(Ord. No. 202, 6-11-2002) 
Secs. 22-2-22-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PROGRAM 

Sec. 22-11. - Organization. 
(a)  There exists the office of emergency management director of the city, which shall be held by the mayor in accordance with state law. 
(b)  An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director. 
(c)  The director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management within the city and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this article. He may delegate authority for execution of these duties to the coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for such execution shall remain with the director. 
(d)  The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the officers and employees of the city so designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well as organized volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 1, 7-27-1989) 
Sec. 22-12. - Powers and duties of emergency management director. 
    The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following: 
(1)  Conduct an on-going survey of actual or potential hazards which threaten life and property within the city and an on-going program of identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur. 
(2)  Supervision of the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the city, and shall recommend for adoption by the city council all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary for the implementation of such plan. 
(3)  Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The declaration may not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven days except by or with the consent of the city council. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the city secretary. 
(4)  Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations or directives which are necessary for carrying out the purposes of this article. Such proclamations, regulations, or directives shall be disseminated promptly by means calculated to bring their contents to the attention of the general public and, unless circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or impede, promptly filed with the city secretary. 
(5)  Direction and control of the operations of the emergency management organization as well as the training of emergency management personnel. 
(6)  Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency management organization of the city. 
(7)  Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional or federal emergency management organizations. 
(8)  Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any department of the city to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan. 
(9)  Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county and with other municipalities within the county, for the county-wide coordination of emergency management efforts. 
(10)  Supervision of and final authorization for the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency management within the city. 
(11)  Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for public shelter and other purposes. 
(12)  Survey of the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies and services which could be used during a disaster, as provided for herein. 
(13)  Other requirements as specified in Texas Disaster Act 1975 (V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 418). 
(Ord. No. 66, § 2, 7-27-1989) 
Sec. 22-13. - Emergency management plan. 
    A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be developed and maintained in a current state. The plan shall set forth the form of the organization, establish and designate divisions and functions, assign responsibilities, tasks, duties, and powers, and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of this article. As provided by state law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the state division of emergency management. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the state division of emergency management. When approved, it shall be the duty of all departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The emergency management plan shall be considered supplementary to this article and have the effect of law during the time of a disaster. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 3, 7-27-1989) 
Sec. 22-14. - Interjurisdictional program authorized. 
    The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the county judge and the mayors of the other cities in said county in the formation of an emergency management council for the county and shall have the authority to cooperate in the preparation of a joint emergency management plan and in the appointment of a joint emergency management coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a county-wide program of emergency management insofar as said program may affect the city. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 4, 7-27-1989) 
Sec. 22-15. - Effect of emergency orders and regulations. 
    At all times when the orders, rules, and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this article shall be in effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules, and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 5, 7-27-1989) 
Sec. 22-16. - Liability. 
    This article is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health, and safety and neither the city, the agents and representatives of the city, nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with, any order, rule, or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this article, shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of said activity. Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the city a license or privilege or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part or parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice enemy attack or natural or man-made disaster shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission or for loss or, or damage to, the property of such person. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 6, 7-27-1989) 
Sec. 22-17. - Commitment of funds. 
    No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this article without prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person have any right to bind the city by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city council unless during a declared disaster. During a declared disaster, the mayor may only expend and/or commit public funds of the city when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of health, life, or property as outlined in the financial annex of the emergency management plan. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 7, 7-27-1989) 
Sec. 22-18. - Offenses; penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article, or to do any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this article. 
(b)  It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or any other means of identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the city, unless authority to do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials. 
(c)  Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a warning signal, or the termination of a warning, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this article and shall be subject to the penalties imposed by this article. 
(d)  Convictions for violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable by fine not less than $25.00 nor more than $2,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 8, 7-27-1989) 
Sec. 22-19. - Conflicts with state, federal or military regulations. 
    This article shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statute or with any military or naval order, rule, or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 10, 7-27-1989) 
Chapter 26 - COURTS 
ARTICLE I. - MUNICIPAL COURT 

Sec. 26-1. - Creation; jurisdiction; rules of practice and procedure. 
(a)  Creation. There is hereby created and established a municipal court of the city. 
(b)  Jurisdiction. 
(1)  The municipal court shall have jurisdiction within the territorial limits of the city in all criminal cases under the ordinances of the city. The court shall have all authority granted to the municipal court pursuant to the statutes of the state, including but not limited to concurrent jurisdiction with any justice of the peace in any precinct situated within the territorial limits of the city in all criminal cases arising under the criminal laws of the state where the legislature has designated the offense a Class C misdemeanor and subject to the jurisdiction of a municipal court, and arising within the city's territorial limits. 
(2)  Penalty by fine shall not exceed the maximum penalty established by the statutes of the state. 
(c)  Jurisdiction over juveniles. The municipal court shall have such jurisdiction over juveniles as is authorized by the statutes of the state. 
(d)  Rules of practice and procedure. The operational procedures of said municipal court shall be governed by the applicable sections of the latest edition of the Texas Criminal and Traffic Law Manual, The Bench Book and Clerk's Certification Guide, as published by the Texas Municipal Courts Education Center, and the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, as may be applicable. 
(Ord. No. 257, § 2, 8-12-2004; Ord. No. 18-09 , § 1, 6-28-2018) 
Sec. 26-2. - Officers. 
(a)  Judge. The municipal court shall be presided over by a judge who shall be known as the judge of the municipal court. He shall be appointed by a majority vote of the city council. The judge first appointed shall hold his term of office corresponding to the unexpired term of the mayor, and every two years thereafter a judge shall be appointed for a term of two years. He shall hold office at the pleasure of the council. 
(b)  Alternate judges. One or more alternate municipal court judges may be appointed by the city council to hold office for terms of office corresponding to the term of the judge of the municipal court, and at the pleasure of the pleasure of the council. The alternate municipal court judges shall serve in the absence or temporary disability of the judge, and must meet the qualifications for such position pursuant to the law of the state. The alternate judges shall have the same powers and duties of the judge while acting as judge. 
(c)  Prior appointments ratified. The prior appointment of the municipal judge and the alternate municipal judges are hereby ratified and affirmed. 
(d)  Clerk and alternate clerk. There shall be a clerk and alternate clerk of said court who shall be appointed and who may be removed by a majority vote of the council. The clerk shall have authority to administer oaths, affidavits, issue all process, and generally perform all the duties of the clerk of a court as prescribed by law for a county clerk in so far as the same may be applicable. The alternate clerk shall serve in the absence of temporary disability of the clerk, and shall have the same power and duties as the clerk. 
(e)  Prosecuting attorneys. The city shall be represented by licensed attorneys in all cases being prosecuted before the municipal court, who shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the City Council. If such attorney is not the city attorney, such attorney(s) shall be a deputy of the city attorney. 
(f)  Warrant officers/bailiff. 
(1)  The city shall provide one or more qualified, licensed peace officer(s) to serve as the municipal court warrant officer and/or court bailiff within the warrant division during all terms of court. The warrant officer/bailiff shall serve for an indefinite term and report to the municipal court clerk, unless otherwise required to report to the chief of police pursuant to federal, state, or local laws, regulations, and/or policies. 
(2)  The warrant officer/bailiff shall be responsible for service of all municipal court process and warrants, special event assignments, and shall perform such other duties, as assigned. Compensation for the position shall be as set in the annual municipal budget. 
(3)  The following positions are authorized within the warrant division, as recommended by the city administrator and approved by the chief of police: 
a.  Warrant officer/bailiff; 
b.  Warrant division corporal; and 
c.  Warrant division sergeant. 
(4)  Warrant division supervisory officers shall be subject to procedures 201, 202, and all other applicable rules, regulations, and policies contained within the police department general manual, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 257, § 2, 8-12-2004; Ord. No. 439, § 1, 10-14-2010; Ord. No. 597, § 1, 9-22-2016; Ord. No. 18-09 , § 1, 6-28-2018) 
Chapter 30 - ELECTIONS 

Sec. 30-1. - Place system for election of council members. 
    The city hereby adopts the place system for the election of the council members. Each office of council member shall be assigned a place number, so that hereafter each such office shall bear its own separate designation, such as council member, place no. 1; council member, place no. 2; council member, place no. 3; council member, place no. 4; and council member, place no. 5. As terms of incumbent council members expire, each candidate for the office of council member shall file his/her application for a specific place on the city council. In such election the ballot shall show each office of council member as a separate office by place number with the name of each candidate printed thereon under the specific office for which he/she is a candidate. 
(Ord. No. 020, § 1, 9-30-1982; Ord. No. 516, § 1, 2-13-2014) 
Sec. 30-2. - Electioneering at polling locations. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide reasonable regulations for electioneering on city-owned or controlled public property when such property is used as an election polling place. The regulations contained herein are to mitigate against any safety concerns, prevent damage to public property, and ensure that the property is sufficiently available for its patrons who use the facilities other than for election purposes. 
(b)  Definitions. The words and phrases as used in this section shall have the meanings as set forth in this section: 
    Electioneering shall mean the posting, use, or distribution of political signs or literature. 
    Prohibited area shall mean the area within which V.T.C.A., Election Code § 85.036(a) prohibits electioneering during the time an early voting or voting place is open for the conduct of early voting or voting. 
    Public property shall mean property owned or controlled by a public entity. 
    Voting period shall mean the period each day beginning the hour the polls are open for voting and ending when the polls close or the last voter has voted, whichever is later on election day and early voting days. The period for a runoff election shall be considered to be a separate voting period. 
(c)  Political signs at polling locations. 
(1)  Size. The size of the on-premises sign shall not exceed 18 inches by 24 inches in size, may be two-dimensional only, and shall have a non-reflective surface. 
(2)  Number. A maximum of six political signs for each candidate, measure, or political party may be placed in the designated area outside of the prohibited area of the public property during the voting period. Additionally, four political signs for each candidate, measure, or political party may be placed in or on each assigned electioneering space, as has been reserved and designated by the city secretary's office. 
(3)  Location. 
a.  Signs must be placed within the designated area or designated electioneering area, as appropriately marked with election distance markers, of the polling place building's premises which is outside the prohibited area and must be self- supporting and placed into the ground by no more than two stakes. 
b.  Any sign determined to be in a location that causes an immediate hazard to public safety may be immediately removed by the city. 
c.  Prohibited locations. No sign shall be posted or otherwise affixed, attached, placed or otherwise affixed or erected in any area designated as a planting or landscaped area or to any tree, shrub, building, pole, or other improvement on public property used as a polling location. 
(4)  Design. Signs shall be maintained in a well-kept manner and shall have a professional appearance. 
(5)  Lighting. None. 
(6)  Duration. Signs may be displayed at polling places from 24 hours prior to the opening of the polls for an election until 24 hours after the closing of the polls for the same election. Thereafter, all such signs shall be promptly removed. 
(7)  Permit fee. No sign permit is required for political signs. 
(d)  Electioneering at the polling location. 
(1)  Each candidate or proposition group may request an electioneering space during the voting period. 
a.  The request must be made in writing to the city secretary on a prescribed form. 
b.  The city secretary shall assign an electioneering space not to exceed ten feet by ten feet to each group making such request on a first come, first serve basis and as space permits. 
c.  Only one space shall be assigned to each candidate or group. 
d.  Electioneering spaces may not be set-up in areas not designated as an electioneering space. 
(2)  Electioneering is prohibited on public property that is used as a polling place other than during the voting period. 
(3)  Electioneering is prohibited on driveways on the premises of a polling location. This restriction shall not apply to the electioneering space designated to the candidate/group by the city secretary's office or to electioneering signs that are attached to vehicles that are lawfully parked at the premises of a polling location. 
(4)  The electioneering spaces shall be regulated by the city secretary's office. 
(e)  Political signs on private property shall be regulated, pursuant to Chapter 66 Signs, section 66-47 political signs. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 2, 8-14-2014) 
Chapter 34 - ENVIRONMENT 
ARTICLE I. - JUNKED VEHICLES 

Sec. 34-1. - Generally. 
    The procedures for the abatement and removal of a junked vehicle or a part of a junked vehicle as a public nuisance from private property, public property, or public rights-of-way shall be as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 260, 8-26-2004) 
Sec. 34-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Junked vehicle means a vehicle that is self-propelled and: 
(1)  Does not have lawfully attached to it: 
a.  An unexpired license plate; or 
b.  A valid motor vehicle inspection certificate; and 
(2)  Is: 
a.  Wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or 
b.  Inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than: 
1.  72 consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or 
2.  30 consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property. 
(Ord. No. 260, § 1, 8-26-2004) 
Sec. 34-3. - Junked vehicles declared public nuisance. 
    A junked vehicle, including a part of a junked vehicle, that is visible at any time of the year from a public place or public right-of-way: 
(1)  Is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the public; 
(2)  Tends to reduce the value of private property; 
(3)  Invites vandalism; 
(4)  Creates a fire hazard; 
(5)  Is an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors; 
(6)  Produces urban blight adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of municipalities; and 
(7)  Is a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 260, § 2, 8-26-2004) 
Sec. 34-4. - Violations; penalty. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person maintains a public nuisance described by section 34-2. 
(b)  An offense under this section is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine upon conviction of not less than $25.00 or more than $200.00. 
(c)  The court shall order abatement and removal of the nuisance upon conviction. 
(Ord. No. 260, § 3, 8-26-2004) 
Sec. 34-5. - Abatement procedure. 
    If the city does not bring a complaint in municipal court it may abate the nuisance as follows: 
(1)  The abatement and removal from private or public property or a public right-of-way of a junked vehicle or part of a junked vehicle as a public nuisance shall be as follows: 
a.  Once declared a junked vehicle, the owner or possessor of the junked vehicle is prohibited from reconstructing or making the vehicle operable after removal. 
b.  A public hearing is required before the city council before the removal of the public nuisance. 
c.  Notice identifying the vehicle or part of the vehicle will be given to the state motor vehicle department not later than the fifth day after the date of removal. 
(2)  The municipal court for the city may issue necessary orders to enforce the decision of the city council. 
(3)  The code enforcement officer of the city shall administer the provisions of this section. 
(4)  The code enforcement officer may enter private property to examine a public nuisance, to obtain information to identify the nuisance, and to remove or direct the removal of the nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 260, § 4, 8-26-2004) 
Sec. 34-6. - Notice to abate. 
(a)  The code enforcement officer of the city shall provide not less than ten days' notice of the nature of the nuisance. The notice must be personally delivered or sent by certified mail with a five-day return requested to: 
(1)  The last known registered owner of the nuisance; 
(2)  Each lienholder of record of the nuisance; and 
(3)  The owner or occupant of: 
a.  The property on which the nuisance is located; or 
b.  If the nuisance is located on a public right-of-way, the property adjacent to the right-of-way. 
(b)  The notice must state that: 
(1)  The nuisance must be abated and removed not later than the tenth day after the date on which the notice was personally delivered or mailed; and 
(2)  Any request for a hearing must be made before that ten-day period expires. 
(c)  If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the nuisance is unknown, notice may be placed on the nuisance or, if the owner is located, personally delivered. 
(d)  If notice is returned undelivered, action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not earlier than the 11th day after the date of the return. 
(Ord. No. 260, § 5, 8-26-2004) 
Sec. 34-7. - Abatement hearing. 
(a)  The city council shall conduct the hearings under the administrative procedures adopted under this article. 
(b)  If a hearing is requested by a person for whom notice is required under section 34-6(a)(3), the hearing shall be held not earlier than the 11th day after the date of the service of notice. 
(c)  At the hearing, the junked motor vehicle is presumed, unless demonstrated otherwise by the owner, to be inoperable. 
(d)  If the information is available at the location of the nuisance, a resolution or order requiring removal of the nuisance must include the vehicle's: 
(1)  Description; 
(2)  Vehicle identification number; and 
(3)  License plate number. 
(e)  The person requesting the hearing has the right to representation of counsel and may cross examine city witnesses but shall be questioned by the council members, regarding the alleged nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 260, § 6, 8-26-2004) 
Sec. 34-8. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Procedures adopted under section 34-5 may not apply to a vehicle or vehicle part: 
(1)  That is completely enclosed in a building in a lawful manner and is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or 
(2)  That is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard, or that is an antique or special interest vehicle stored by a motor vehicle collector on the collector's property, if the vehicle or part and the outdoor storage area, if any, are: 
a.  Maintained in an orderly manner; 
b.  Not a health hazard; and 
c.  Screened from ordinary public view by appropriate means, including a fence, rapidly growing trees, or shrubbery. 
(b)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Antique vehicle means a passenger car or truck that is at least 25 years old. 
    Motor vehicle collector means a person who: 
(1)  Owns one or more antique or special interest vehicles; and 
(2)  Acquires, collects, or disposes of an antique or special interest vehicle or part of an antique or special interest vehicle for personal use to restore and preserve an antique or special interest vehicle for historic interest. 
    Special interest vehicle means a motor vehicle of any age that has not been changed from original manufacturer's specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by a hobbyist. 
(Ord. No. 260, § 7, 8-26-2004) 
Sec. 34-9. - Disposal. 
(a)  A junked vehicle, including a part of a junked vehicle, may be removed to a scrapyard, a motor vehicle demolisher, or a suitable site operated by the city, another municipality or the county. 
(b)  The city, another municipality or the county may operate a disposal site if its governing body determines that commercial disposition of junked vehicles is not available or is inadequate. The city, through agreement with another municipality or the county, may: 
(1)  Finally dispose of a junked vehicle or vehicle part; or 
(2)  Transfer it to another disposal site if the disposal is scrap or salvage only. 
(Ord. No. 260, § 8, 8-26-2004) 
Secs. 34-10-34-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WEED AND RUBBISH CONTROL 
DIVISION 1. - COMMERCIAL, BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 34-21. - Applicability; exceptions. 
(a)  Applicability. All owners of property zoned B-1, B-2, B-3, B-3 OD, B-4, I-1, QD, and SGD should keep an area of not less than 15 feet adjacent to the paved surface of any roadway, or adjacent property line of residentially zoned property, free and clear of weeds, rubbish, brush and junk. As used herein a weed(s) is defined as uncultivated vegetation growth that has grown to a height of 36 inches. 
(b)  Exceptions. 
(1)  A tree with a diameter of three inches or more at a height of four feet above ground may remain within the 15 feet of clear area required herein. 
(2)  The 15 feet of clear area adjacent to residentially zoned property shall not be required unless there is a residential unit within 200 feet of any portion of the property line of property zoned B-1, B-2, B-3, B-3 OD, B-4, I-1, QD or SGD. 
(3)  Brush and similar material may be kept within the 15-foot clear area for a period of not more than five days if placed temporarily within the clear area for waste pick-up. 
(Ord. No. 267, § 1(app. A, § 1), 10-14-2004) 
Sec. 34-22. - Notice of noncompliance. 
(a)  The city shall issue a written notice to a landowner whose property is in violation of the provisions of this division requiring the owner to bring his property into compliance. 
(b)  The written notice shall be given by any one of the following methods: 
(1)  By hand delivery to the owner; 
(2)  By certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner at the owner's address as recorded in the Bexar County appraisal records; and 
(3)  By publication once in a newspaper of local circulation. 
(c)  If the notice mailed in accordance with subsection (b) is returned by the U.S. Postal Service marked "refused" or "unclaimed," the validity of the notice is not affected thereby and notice is perfected pursuant to the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 267, § 1(app. A, § 2), 10-14-2004) 
Sec. 34-23. - Time limit for compliance. 
    The notice of violation provided for in section 34-22 shall notify the property owner of the violation and provide the property owner with ten days to bring his property into compliance without penalty. One extension of not more than 15 days may be granted by the city administrator. 
(Ord. No. 267, § 1(app. A, § 3), 10-14-2004) 
Sec. 34-24. - Filing of complaint in municipal court. 
    In the event the property owner fails or refuses to bring his property into compliance with the provisions of this division, then, in such event, the city shall file a complaint for violation of this division in the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 267, § 1(app. A, § 4), 10-14-2004) 
Sec. 34-25. - Emergency abatement. 
    In the event that the presence of weeds not less than 48 inches high, rubbish, brush, and junk in the 15 feet clear area creates a situation that presents an immediate danger to the health, life or safety of any person in the opinion of the city's health officer, then, in accordance with this division and V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 217.002, the city may take such actions as are necessary to abate such nuisance. In such event the city shall: 
(1)  Cause the work to be done that is necessary to abate the danger; 
(2)  Bill the property owner for all necessary expense incurred for performing the work needed plus an administrative fee of $75.00; 
(3)  File a lien against the property on which the work is done, unless payment therefor is made in full to the city within 30 days of such billing to the owner; and 
(4)  Provide in the lien for interest at not more than ten percent per annum on any unpaid expenses which the city incurred in abating the nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 267, § 1(app. A, § 5), 10-14-2004) 
Sec. 34-26. - Appeals. 
(a)  In any event where the city abates a nuisance without prior notice to the property owner, then, in such event, the city shall, within ten days after the city abates the nuisance, give notice to the property owner in the manner required by section 34-22. Included in such notice shall be a description of the violation that created the immediate health danger, a statement of the work that the city did or authorized and an explanation of the property owner's right to request a hearing before the board of adjustment contesting the city's actions within 30 days of the date of the notice. An appeal to the board of adjustment shall stay the payment of all city fees for clearing the property until the board of adjustment considers the appeal. 
(b)  The board of adjustment upon payment of the filing fees shall hear the appeal at its next regularly scheduled meeting subsequent to the filing of a notice of appeal to contest the administrative decision of the city official. If the board of adjustment overturns the city's action, the property owner shall not be responsible for any costs. 
(Ord. No. 267, § 1(app. A, § 6), 10-14-2004) 
Secs. 34-27-34-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OUTDOOR LIGHTING 

Sec. 34-41. - Definitions. 
    Candela means a unit of luminous intensity in any given direction. A candela is commonly called one candlepower. 
    Changeable electronic variable message sign (CEVMS) shall mean a sign which permits light to be turned on or off intermittently or which is operated in a way whereby light is turned on or off intermittently, including any illuminated sign on which such illumination is not kept stationary or constant in intensity and color at all times when such sign is in use, including an LED (light emitting diode) or digital sign, and which varies in intensity or color. A CEVMS sign does not include a sign located within the right-of-way that functions as a traffic control device and that is described and identified in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) approved by the Federal Highway Administrator as the National Standard. 
    Direct light means light emitted directly from the lamp, off of the reflector diffuser, or through the refractor or diffuser lens, of a luminary. 
    Full cutoff (FCO) means a luminaire light distribution where zero candela intensity occurs at an angle of 90 degrees above nadir, and at all greater angles from nadir. Additionally, the candela per 1,000 lamp lumens does not numerically exceed 100 (ten percent) at a vertical angle of 80 degrees above nadir. This applies to all lateral angles around the luminaire. A full cutoff luminaire is also fully shielded. (See exhibit 1.) 
    Footcandle means a unit of light measurement equal to one lumen per square foot. 
    Glare means direct light emitted from a luminaire that causes reduced vision or temporary blindness. 
    Illuminance means the quantity of light arriving at a surface measured in lux or footcandles. 
    Intermittent lighting means luminaries that do not remain on for an extended period of time. 
    Lumen means a unit of luminous flux. 
    Luminary means a complete lighting unit, consisting of a lamp or lamps and parts designed to distribute light, position and protect lamps, and connect lamps to a power supply. 
    Nadir means the direction pointing vertically down from the lowest light emitting part of a luminary. 
    Outdoor lighting means night-time illumination of an outside area or object by any manmade device. 
    Sign code application area shall mean the corporate limits of the city and the area of its extraterritorial jurisdiction as defined by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 42.021. 
    Temporary outdoor lighting means lighting for a specific event of an outside area or object by any manmade device that produces light for a period less than seven days and with at least 30 days passing before reuse. 
    Trespass lighting means light emitted by a luminary that falls outside the boundaries of the property on which the luminary is installed. 
(Ord. No. 396, § 1, 2-26-2009) 
Sec. 34-42. - Lighting requirements. 
(a)  All commercial outdoor lighting installed within the corporate city limits of the City of Helotes shall be in conformance with the requirements established by this article. 
(b)  Control of glare. 
(1)  Any luminary that is aimed, directed, or focused in such a manner to create glare perceptible to persons operating motor vehicles on public rights of way or to adjacent residential property owners is prohibited. 
(2)  A luminary used for public roadway illumination shall not exceed 25 feet in height, and the location of the luminary may be positioned up to the property edge so long as no glare is perceptible to adjacent residential property owners. 
(c)  Commercial lighting. 
(1)  Exterior commercial lighting shall comply with the planning and zoning commission's aesthetic design standards. 
(2)  All exterior lighting on commercially zoned real property or property intended to be used as a multifamily residential development shall be full cutoff. 
(3)  Service stations and other fueling facilities. Gas station canopies must utilize canopy lights that are fully recessed into the canopy. 
(4)  Parking Lot Lighting. All parking lot lighting shall be full cutoff. 
(5)  Outdoor advertising signs. 
a.  Lighting fixtures used to illuminate outdoor advertising signs shall conform to the requirements specified in the city's most current sign regulations and shall be full cutoff. 
b.  Outdoor advertising signage of the type constructed of translucent materials and internally illuminated does not require shielding and shall be allowed. Dark backgrounds with light lettering or symbols are preferred. 
(6)  Municipal activities. All municipal activities shall be exempt from the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 396, § 1, 2-26-2009) 
Sec. 34-43. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Laser source lighting. The use of laser source lighting or any similar high intensity lighting, such as used for outdoor advertising or entertainment, when projected above the horizontal plane is prohibited unless authorized by city council. 
(b)  Searchlights. The operation of searchlights for advertising purposes is prohibited, unless authorized by City Council. 
(c)  Changeable electronic variable message signs. From and after the effective date, no CEVMS shall be allowed within the sign code application area. 
(d)  New off-premises Signs. From and after the effective date, no new construction permit shall be issued or written permission granted for the erection of an off-premises CEVMS or the conversion of an existing non-CEVMS off-premises sign to a CEVMS, within the sign code application area. 
(Ord. No. 396, § 1, 2-26-2009) 
Sec. 34-44. - Exemptions. 
    The following are exempt from the provisions of this article: 
(1)  Traffic control signals and devices. 
(2)  Temporary emergency lighting (i.e. fire, police, repair workers). 
(3)  Moving vehicle lights. 
(4)  Navigation lights (i.e. airports, heliports, radio/television towers). 
(5)  Seasonal decorations in place no longer than 60 days. 
(6)  Sports field outdoor lighting. 
(7)  Special situations approved by the city council for temporary or periodic events. 
(8)  Security lights of any wattage that are controlled by a motion-sensor switch and which do not remain on longer than five minutes after activation. 
(Ord. No. 396, § 1, 2-26-2009) 
Sec. 34-45. - Effective date and grandfathering of nonconforming luminaries. 
(a)  This article shall take effect immediately upon approval by the city council and publication, as required by law. This article shall supersede and replace all previous ordinances pertaining to outdoor lighting. 
(b)  All luminaries in place prior to the effective date of the article shall be grandfathered. 
(Ord. No. 396, § 1, 2-26-2009) 
Sec. 34-46. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  Enforcement. This article shall be enforced by the code enforcement department, under the direction of the city council. 
(b)  Penalties. Anyone charged with negligently, recklessly, knowingly, or intentionally violating any provisions of this article shall be fined by a penalty of not less than $25.00 nor more than $2,000.00. Each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 396, § 1, 2-26-2009; Ord. No. 18-13 , § 1, 7-12-2018) 
Sec. 34-47. - Variances. 
    Variances to the terms of this article may be granted by the city council where a literal enforcement of the provisions of this article will result in unnecessary hardship. A variance request must be submitted to the city administrator setting out the basis for the request along with any associated fees listed in the city fee schedule. No variance can be granted unless: 
(1)  Such variance will not be contrary to the public interest; 
(2)  Such variance will be in harmony with the spirit and purposes of this article; 
(3)  The plight of the owner of the property for which the variance is sought is due to unique circumstances existing on the property, and the unique circumstances were not created by the owner of the property and are not merely financial; and 
(4)  The variance will not substantially weaken the general purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 396, § 1, 2-26-2009) 
Exhibit 1. 

Full cutoff (FCO) luminaire in section 34-41. The FCO luminaire on any commercial property (beginning at 80 degrees up from nadir to less than 90 degrees) may emit up to 100 candela per 1000 lamp lumens (ten percent) at all vertical angles. This applies to all horizontal angles around the luminaire. This information can be provided on the packaging of the outdoor light or from the manufacture. 
(Ord. No. 396, § 1, 2-26-2009) 
Secs. 34-48-34-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STORMWATER DETENTION AND DRAINAGE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Historical Note- Ord. No. 396, § 1, adopted February 26, 2009 repealed the former Art. IV. Ord. No. 306, § 2(Exh. A), adopted July 25, 2006, repealed the former Art. IV. The former Art. IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 283, Ex. A(1.1, 2.1-2.8, 3.1, 4.1, 5.1), adopted Sept. 22, 2005. 

Sec. 34-51. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide adequate measures for the detention and distribution of stormwater in a manner that minimizes the possibility of stormwater flooding or the adverse impact to water quality during and after development. 
(Ord. No. 196A, § 1, 2-14-2002) 
Sec. 34-52. - Scope. 
(a)  Applicability. This article shall apply to any application for the approval of a subdivision plat, a subdivision replat, a master development plan, a building permit, a change in zoning, a zoning variance, or the redevelopment of property within the city's corporate limits or extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(b)  Exceptions. Lots individually platted and developed for single family use shall be exempt from the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 196A, § 2, 2-14-2002) 
Sec. 34-53. - Drainage facilities. 
(a)  New development. Peak stormwater runoff rates for all new development shall be less than or equal to the peak runoff rates from the site's pre-development conditions for the five-, 25-, and 100-year design storm events. 
(b)  Redevelopment. Peak stormwater runoff rates from an area of redevelopment shall be less than or equal to the peak runoff rates produced by existing development conditions for the five-, 25-, and 100-year design storm events. 
(c)  Stormwater detention. Stormwater detention shall be required for all new developments or redevelopment of individual parcels of property to mitigate peak flow rates to pre-development or existing development conditions as stated in subsections (a) and (b) above. The maximum allowable out-flow rate from the detention facility must be restricted to the flow rate for the undeveloped or existing development tract for the five-, 25-, and 100-year frequency. 
(Ord. No. 196A, § 3, 2-14-2002) 
Sec. 34-54. - Design standards. 
    Stormwater runoff may be determined by using the Austin standard method, the rational method, or similar method acceptable to the city engineer. Calculations and plans of the drainage area in pre-development, existing development or ultimate development shall be submitted, for review and approval by the city engineer, as required in section 34-53. The difference in runoff quantities and the flow rates shall be managed by an onsite storm detention system. The detention system shall be designed to release stormwater at a rate not to exceed that of the pre-development or existing development rate. The design of the detention "reservoir" shall preclude any pooling of water or result in additional identifiable adverse flooding within the subdivision or to other properties. The detention system design must be reviewed for acceptability by the city engineer, who then shall make a recommendation to the city council, and it shall be approved by the city council before any improvements may be made within the proposed subdivision. The detention system must be maintained in a safe and sanitary manner in accordance with its approved design. 
(Ord. No. 196A, § 4, 2-14-2002) 
Sec. 34-55. - Fee in lieu of detention. 
(a)  The city may, at its sole discretion, accept a fee in lieu of detention. All fees collected will be used for regional detention basins or drainage improvements within the city. The fee for said permit shall be as prescribed in the most recent adopted fee schedule passed and approved by the city council. The fee shall be nonrefundable. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) above, owners of properties located within the Old Town Helotes Special District and qualifying for a fee in lieu of detention, as recommended by the city engineer, shall pay the fee for said permit, as prescribed in the most recent adopted fee schedule passed and approved by the city council, for the area of actual impervious cover proposed to be constructed at the time of permit issuance. 
(Ord. No. 196A, § 5, 2-14-2002; Ord. No. 394, § 1, 2-12-2009; Ord. No. 431, § 1, 5-13-2010) 
Sec. 34-56. - Penalty. 
    Any person or firm convicted of violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be fined an amount not less than $25.00 nor more than $2,000.00. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. Prosecution or conviction under this section shall never be a limitation to other remedies or relief of violation of this article. In addition to any other remedy provided by law, the city and its agents shall have the right to enjoin any violation of this article by injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction or other alternatives as authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 196A, § 6, 2-14-2002) 
Secs. 34-57-34-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - GENERAL MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) PROTECTIONS. 

Sec. 34-61. - Definitions. 
    The following terms shall have the following meanings for the purpose of this article: 
(a)  City of Helotes Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4). The system of conveyances, including, but not limited to, roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, creeks, streams, tributaries, manmade channels, and/or storm drains, which: 
(1)  Provide for the collection and conveyance of stormwater, rain water, flood water, or other surface water; and 
(2)  Are located on public property; and 
(3)  Are not designed and intended to be part of the collection system of a sanitary sewer system utilized by a publicly-owned treatment works (POTW), as defined in 40 C.F.R. 122.2; and 
(4)  Are located within the corporate limits of the City of Helotes, Texas. 
(b)  Brush cuttings, clippings. All herbaceous materials, including lawn trimmings and leaves. 
(c)  Household hazardous waste. Waste from materials utilized for residential or commercial purposes containing regulated substances which either singularly, by its interaction with other wastes, or by its accumulation in the MS4 becomes injurious or potentially injurious to human, plant, or animal life or property. For purposes of this article, household hazardous wastes include, but are not limited to, paint, paint thinners, paint solvents, bleaches, and drain cleaners. 
(d)  Pesticide. Any substance or mixture of substances intended for preventing, destroying, repelling, or mitigating any pest and/or any substance or mixture of substances intended for use as a plant regulator, defoliant, or desiccant. 
(e)  Rubbish. Inorganic solid waste, including, but not limited to, paper, rags, cartons, wood, excelsior, furniture, rubber, plastics, glass, crockery, tin, aluminum cans, metal furniture, and other like materials. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 1, 9-13-2012) 
Sec. 34-62. - Prohibited discharges into the MS4. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this article for any entity to deposit, throw, drain, discharge; cause or allow to be deposited, thrown, drained, or discharged; or otherwise cause to be injected into the MS4 or any other storm sewer manhole, catch basin, private drain, ditch, street gutter, creek, stream, tributary, or any other drainage device which connects with or drains into the MS4, any of the following materials or substances within the corporate limits of the City of Helotes: 
(1)  Any acid waste materials; 
(2)  Any alkaline waste materials; 
(3)  Any water- or waste-containing free-floating or insoluble oil; 
(4)  Any gasoline, naphtha, fuel oil, mineral oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas; 
(5)  Any noxious, malodorous, poisonous, or reactive substance which, either singularly or by interaction with other substances or by its accumulation in the MS4, becomes injurious or potentially injurious to human, plant, or animal life or property; and/or 
(6)  Any domestic or industrial wastewater. 
(b)  It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section that such entity was authorized to commit any act under a valid permit from the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), which would otherwise constitute a violation at the time of commission. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 1, 9-13-2012) 
Sec. 34-63. - Placing brush cuttings, clippings, and/or rubbish into the MS4. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this article for any entity to deposit, discard, dump, or cause or allow to be deposited, discarded, or dumped any brush cuttings, clippings, and/or rubbish within the MS4. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this article for any entity to place, cause, or allow to be placed brush cuttings, clippings, and/or rubbish within any street in the corporate limits of the city in such a manner that the same may be washed by the flow of water into the MS4. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 1, 9-13-2012) 
Sec. 34-64. - Placing household hazardous wastes into the MS4. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this article for any entity to place, cause, or allow to be placed household hazardous waste within the MS4. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this article for any entity to place, cause, or allow to be placed household hazardous waste within any street in the corporate limits of the city in such a manner that the same may be washed by the flow of water into the MS4. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 1, 9-13-2012) 
Sec. 34-65. - Prohibiting the improper use of pesticides in order to keep them from entering into the MS4. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this article for any entity to cause or allow a pesticide to enter into the MS4. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this article for any entity to utilize a pesticide in a manner inconsistent with the proper usage set out in the labeling for such pesticide, all in accordance with the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA). 
(c)  It shall be a violation of this article for any entity to utilize a pesticide which is not properly labeled in accordance with FIFRA. 
(d)  It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section that the entity accused of such violation utilized a pesticide in accordance with the requirements of FIFRA and in a manner consistent with its labeling. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 1, 9-13-2012) 
Sec. 34-66. - Criminal penalty. 
(a)  A conviction for violation of this article shall constitute a Class C misdemeanor. A person convicted of a violation of this article shall be fined a minimum amount of not less than $200.00 per violation and a maximum amount of not more than $2,000.00 per violation. Each violation of a particular section of this article shall constitute a separate offense, and each day an offense continues shall be considered a new violation for purposes of enforcing this article. A culpable mental state is not required to prove an offense under this article. 
(b)  The City of Helotes hereby authorizes the city administrator to designate qualified personnel to serve notices of violations of this article and to take all necessary actions to file a complaint with the municipal court of the city. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 1, 9-13-2012) 
Sec. 34-67. - Civil penalty. 
    A civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $5,000.00 per violation of this article may be imposed. Each violation of a particular section of this article shall constitute a separate offense, and each day such an offense continues shall be considered a new violation for purposes of enforcing this article. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 1, 9-13-2012) 
Sec. 34-68. - Additional enforcement remedies. 
(a)  In addition to any other remedies provided by this article, the City of Helotes may, at any time, seek legal and/or equitable remedies or may file charges against any person, corporation, or other entity believed to be in violation of this article. In furtherance thereof, the city attorney is hereby authorized and instructed to commence any action, in law or in equity, including the filing of charges for the purpose of enforcing this article. 
(b)  The use of negotiated civil settlements or other methods of alternative dispute resolution to reach a civil settlement is hereby authorized; provided, however, that the civil penalty imposed by any such agreement or settlement is of a sufficient amount in relation to the violations to which they provide a sanction. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 1, 9-13-2012) 
Sec. 34-69. - Conflict. 
    No provision of this article is intended to, nor shall any part or portion hereof be construed, so as to conflict with the Texas Water Code. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 1, 9-13-2012) 
Sec. 34-70-34-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - STORMWATER COMPLIANCE FOR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY 

Sec. 34-76. - Statement of purpose. 
(a)  The intent of this article is to satisfy conditions imposed by the State on the city within the city's Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (TPDES) permit. 
(b)  All construction addressed by this article is intended to conform to best management practices. Applicable best management practices (BMPs) are presently outlined in the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) Technical Guidance On Best Management Practices, June 1999, Document No. RG-348. These sources constitute recommended guides only. Choice of any technique or BMP is at the option of the responsible party. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 1, 9-13-2012) 
Sec. 34-77. - Definitions. 
    When used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
(a)  Best management practices (BMP). A series of structural and non-structural techniques and practices which, when used in an erosion control plan or considered as part of a construction site's housekeeping efforts, are proven to be effective in controlling construction-related runoff, erosion, sedimentation, and associated pollutants. 
(b)  Construction activity. Clearing or grading of land; dozing or mechanical removal of trees which dozing or mechanical removal disturbs the soil; excavation for installation of utility lines, streets, and drainage facilities; site preparation for housing and commercial development; and on-going construction activities which produce waste products. 
(c)  EPA. The United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
(d)  Erosion. The wearing away of the ground surface as a result of the movement of wind, water, and/or ice. 
(e)  Final inspection. Occurs after a responsible party meets the definition of final stabilization and files a notice of termination, if required by state or federal law. At such time, the City of Helotes will conduct a final inspection to verify compliance with final stabilization and the removal of temporary BMPs. 
(f)  Final stabilization. Reference TPDES General Permit for Stormwater Discharges for Construction Activities standards located within Region 6 of the EPA. All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed and a uniform perennial vegetative cover with a density of 70 percent of the native background vegetative cover for the area has been established on all unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures or equivalent permanent stabilization measures have been employed. 
(g)  Grade. The vertical location of the ground surface. 
(h)  Grading. Any land disturbance or land fill, or any combination thereof. 
(i)  Improved. Altered by manmade conditions. 
(j)  Land disturbance/land-disturbing activities. Any moving or removing, by manual or mechanical means, of the soil mantle or top six inches of soil, whichever is shallower, including, but not limited to, excavations. 
(k)  Land fill. Any human activity involving the disposition of soil, earth, or other earthen or aggregate materials. 
(l)  Measurable Volume. A volume of material that is capable of being truly and correctly depicted in a photograph, motion picture, or video recording of the sediment, soil, soil material, or pollutant in question. 
(m)  Municipal (City of Helotes) separate storm sewer system (MS4). The system of conveyances, including, but not limited to, roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, creeks, streams, tributaries, manmade channels, and/or storm drains, which: 
(1)  Provide for the collection and conveyance of stormwater, rain water, flood water, or other surface water; and 
(2)  Are located on public property; and 
(3)  Are not designed and intended to be part of the collection system of a sanitary sewer system utilized by a publicly-owned treatment works (POTW), as defined in Title 40 C.F.R. 122.2; and 
(4)  Are located within the corporate limits of the City of Helotes, Texas. 
(n)  Notice of intent (NOI). Notice of Intent filed by a responsible party with the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ). An NOI is required under State regulation for certain construction activity. The NOI is part of the federal general permit process for construction activity concerning projects or runoff deemed to potentially impact waters of the United States of America. 
(o)  Notice of termination (NOT). The notice required by TCEQ for sizeable projects within the jurisdiction of any agency that verifies "final stabilization" of the site has been achieved, as described above. 
(p)  National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES). A permit program that controls water pollution by regulating point sources that discharge pollutants into waters of the United States. 
(q)  Entity. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or other legal entity, or the legal representatives, agents, or assigns thereof. 
(r)  Pollutant. Any substance introduced into the environment that adversely affects a resource. Pollutants include, but are not limited to, soils, soil materials, sediments, human wastes, other wastes, and debris generated at construction sites. 
(s)  Responsible party. Any person or legal entity, individual or corporate, including the owner, operator, contractor, or subcontractor, any or all of whom may be engaged in, consent to, or actually perform a construction project or construction activity. 
(t)  Sediment. Earth material deposited by water, wind, or ice. 
(u)  Site. The location of construction activity within the corporate limits of the city. 
(v)  Soil and/or soil material. Naturally occurring superficial deposits of earth mantle overlaying bedrock or clay; any naturally occurring surface deposit of sand, gravel, silt, clay; or any mixture thereof. 
(w)  Stormwater. Stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage, as per TPDES Permit No. TXR040000. 
(x)  Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP). The state or federally required plan for identifying and implementing appropriate measures to reduce pollutants in stormwater that discharges into the city's municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4), including eroded sediments. Protective measures include, but are not limited to, natural and manmade collection components, good housekeeping for site maintenance, and other commonsensical actions, all frequently referred to as best management practices (BMP). 
(y)  Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ). An agency of the State of Texas. 
(z)  Unimproved. Natural conditions that are unaltered. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 1, 9-13-2012) 
Sec. 34-78. - Applicability; declaration of nuisance for violation; no culpable mental state required. 
(a)  Within the corporate limits of the city, no entity shall perform construction activities that violate provisions of this article. Construction activities violating this article are hereby declared unlawful. 
(b)  Violations committed within the corporate limits of the city shall constitute a public nuisance, as further provided below. Violations of any provision of this article within the city's corporate limits shall be deemed a criminal Class C misdemeanor. Violations of any provision of this article within the city's corporate limits shall be further subject to a civil enforcement option, more particularly described below. 
(c)  No culpable mental state is required of any responsible party in order to constitute a violation of this article. Some of the requirements of this article may be generally characterized as good housekeeping protocols and those expected to be employed by a reasonably prudent contractor, operator, owner, or other person having responsibilities for various activities on a construction site. Where State and federal permits require the site operator, owner, or other responsible party to make a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP), such Plans must be readily available for city inspection. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 1, 9-13-2012) 
Sec. 34-79. - General prohibition against construction pollution within the municipal separate storm sewer system; measurable volumes for violation. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any entity to engage in construction activity which results in a measurable volume of sediment, soils, soil material, or pollutants entering the city's MS4. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall diminish or change the general prohibitions against MS4 pollution found in this chapter. 
(c)  The responsible party shall use best management practices (BMP) to prevent sediment, soils, soil materials, and pollutants from entering the city's MS4. 
(d)  It is unlawful for any person to engage in construction activity without employing BMP necessary to protect the city's MS4 from runoff or other media capable of transporting sediment, soil, soil material, and pollutants into the city's MS4. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 1, 9-13-2012) 
Sec. 34-80. - Additional federal and state requirements generally applicable to responsible parties associated with five-acre tract or larger projects; proper custody of federal or state stormwater pollution prevention plans (SWPPP); applicable to parties required to provide notice of intent (NOI) to EPA or TCEQ; requirement to post NOI at site; requirement to make SWPPP available to city inspector; copy of notice of termination required by EPA or TCEQ. 
(a)  Concerning projects for which the EPA or TCEQ have permitting authority, the responsible party shall post at the site, as required by federal and State regulations, a true and correct copy of the NOI. A copy of the NOI shall also be sent to the City of Helotes. 
(b)  The responsible party shall have available on site for City inspection the stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) imposed by EPA or TCEQ when the site in question is subject to such plans imposed by federal or State law. 
(c)  The responsible party shall make the SWPPP available to the city inspector on reasonable request made during normal working hours. 
(d)  Failure, refusal, or inability to provide such plan for inspection, when the plan is required under state or federal law, constitutes a violation of this article. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in construction activity in violation of the elements of an applicable SWPPP. 
(f)  The responsible party shall provide the City of Helotes a true and correct copy of any notice of termination (NOT) necessary to close out a project regulated by the EPA or TCEQ. The NOT shall be sent to the City of Helotes at the time it is sent to the EPA or TCEQ. 
(g)  Where permanent improvements have been constructed, the final inspection shall verify whether or not the "final stabilization" criteria have been met. 
(h)  Where no permanent improvements are planned, temporary BMPs shall continue to be maintained until the site has reached final stabilization. 
(i)  A site shall continue to be regulated until final stabilization is achieved, and, where applicable to state and federally-regulated sites, until a "notice of termination" (NOT) has been filed. 
(j)  Where the site has met final stabilization requirements but the controls or measures implemented thereafter fail, each discharge of construction-related contamination by the responsible party shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(k)  Removal of temporary BMPs shall be required after the site achieves final stabilization. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 1, 9-13-2012) 
Sec. 34-81. - Enforcement procedures. 
(a)  Upon observation of an alleged violation or condition an inspector believes constitutes a violation of this article, the inspector shall issue a field correction notice to a responsible party. The field correction notice shall be personally delivered to a responsible party if such person is available on site, or, in the absence of such person, shall be posted at the construction site. Field correction notices shall afford two 24-hour periods to correct the violation alleged. The first 24-hour period should be used to remediate and remove the offending material, if any, from the city's MS4. A second 24-hour grace period shall follow immediately to allow the responsible party to appropriately install or repair corrective BMP which was lacking or failed to protect the city's MS4. 
(b)  If the violation is cured within 48 hours, as described above, no further City action is required. 
(c)  If correction is not made timely, the inspector may issue a stop work order. 
(d)  If a stop work order is not honored at the site and/or corrective action is not timely accomplished to protect the city's MS4, citations may be issued or civil injunctive remedies with appropriate penalties may be pursued. 
(e)  Additional or cumulative enforcement action may be taken as the seriousness of the alleged pollutant encroachment into the city's MS4 escalates. 
(f)  Additional compliance time may be afforded if, within the judgment and discretion of the inspector, municipal obligations to environmental health and safety and municipal stormwater compliance obligations to enforcement agencies are not comprised. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 1, 9-13-2012) 
Sec. 34-82. - Criminal and civil enforcement. 
(a)  A penalty is hereby established whereby any entity that shall violate any provision of this article shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be fined a minimum of not less than $200.00 per violation and a maximum amount of not more than $2,000.00 per violation. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense for purposes of the enforcement of this article. A culpable mental state is not required to prove an offense under this article. 
(b)  The city attorney is hereby authorized to pursue all legal, equitable, and criminal remedies appropriate to enforce all provisions of this article, including, but not limited to, the authority granted under the V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 54, providing for injunctive relief and court imposed civil penalties up to $5,000 a day for violation of ordinances relating to the discharge of a pollutant into a storm sewer system controlled by a municipality. 
(c)  Upon the written direction of the city administrator advising of an alleged violation of any section of this article, the city attorney is authorized to petition any court of competent jurisdiction for an injunction to enjoin the continuance of such violation and to secure any all civil penalties within the jurisdiction of the appropriate court. This remedy shall be cumulative of and in addition to all other enforcement remedies available to the city. 
(d)  The authority set out above shall in no way diminish the authority and responsibility of the city attorney to diligently prosecute violations of this article through municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 1, 9-13-2012) 
Chapter 38 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Enforcement. 
    The regulations of this chapter shall be enforced by the fire chief, the fire marshal and the city fire department unless otherwise herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 252, § 2, 3-25-2004) 
Sec. 38-2. - Violations; penalty. 
    Any reckless, knowing or intentional act or omission contrary to the requirements or directives of this chapter or any breach of any duty imposed by this chapter shall constitute a violation hereof. Any person who commits a violation of this chapter shall be subject to a penalty of not less than $25.00 nor more than $2,000.00 per violation per day upon conviction. Each day on which a violation is found to exist shall constitute a separate and sanctionable offense. In addition to the criminal penalties prescribed by this section, the city council may direct the city attorney to institute civil action or proceedings to prevent violations or threatened violations of these regulations or to obtain civil damages or penalties against violators of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 252, § 3, 3-25-2004) 
Sec. 38-3. - Reward for reporting arson. 
(a)  The city hereby offers a reward of $250.00 to anyone who furnishes information leading to the arrest and conviction of any person or persons found guilty of arson committed within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  This reward is a standing offer and shall be paid out of the general fund of the city. 
(Ord. No. 71, §§ 1-2, 7-26-1990) 
Secs. 38-4-38-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 38-11. - Establishment. 
    It is hereby determined by the city council that there shall be maintained a fire department to provide a means for protection against conflagrations and other emergencies and the city shall provide for the maintenance, support and regulation of the fire department. Therefore the city fire department is hereby established. It may be composed of various member groups, including, but not limited to, paid, volunteer, part-time, and auxiliary firefighters and/or support staff, as well as civilian personnel. 
(Ord. No. 252, § 1(art. I, § 1), 3-25-2004) 
Sec. 38-12. - Personnel. 
(a)  Fire chief. 
(1)  The office of the fire chief is created. The fire chief is to have control of the fire department. The fire chief shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to the approval of the city council. 
(2)  All members of the city fire department, whether paid, volunteer, part-time auxiliary, support staff or civilian, shall be under the command of the fire chief and subject to all the provisions of the constitution and laws of the state, and the ordinances of the city. 
(3)  The fire chief, or his designee, shall develop, maintain and implement standard operating guidelines, rules, regulations and/or written department operating policies for the department, a copy of which shall be located at the fire station and at city hall in the office of the city secretary. 
(4)  The fire chief, or his designee, shall determine the chain of command, and cause such to be recorded in the written department operating policies. 
(5)  In case of fire or other emergencies, the fire chief, or his designee, shall assume control and be in command of the incident. In the absence of the fire chief, or his designee, the chain of command as established by the written department operating policies shall determine what officer is to assume authority and responsibility. 
(b)  Fire marshal. 
(1)  Office created; duties. The office of fire marshal is hereby created. The fire marshal for the city shall investigate or cause to be investigated, the cause, origin, and circumstances of every fire occurring within this city by which property has been destroyed or damaged, and shall especially make investigations as to whether such fire was the result of carelessness or design. The fire marshal shall maintain a record of all fires, together with all the facts, statistics and circumstances, including the origin of the fires and the amount of the loss, which may be determined by the investigation required by this chapter. The fire marshal's office, a division of the city fire department, shall be the arson investigation unit of the city. Each member of the arson investigation unit commissioned by the city shall be a peace officer as that term is used in Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 2.12(7). The fire marshal and all arson investigators shall obtain and maintain certification and license as a peace officer from the Texas Commission on Law Enforcement Officers Standards and Education, as set out in V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 1701. The fire chief will appoint a fire marshal from within his department, or assume the duties himself. 
(2)  Investigations. The fire marshal, when in his opinion further investigation is necessary, shall take or cause to be taken the testimony, or oath, of all persons supposed to be cognizant of any of the facts or to have means of knowledge in relation to the matter under investigation and shall cause the same to be reduced to writing; and if he shall be of the opinion that there is evidence sufficient to charge any person with the crime of arson, or with the attempt to commit the crime of arson, or of the conspiracy to defraud, or criminal conduct in the connection with such fire, he shall cause such person to be lawfully arrested and charged with such offense, or either of them, and shall furnish to the proper prosecuting attorney all such evidence, together with the names of witnesses and all of the information obtained by him, including a copy of all pertinent and material testimony taken in the case. 
(3)  Powers as investigator. The fire marshal shall have the power to summon witnesses before him to testify in relation to any matter which is by the provisions of this chapter a subject of inquiry and investigation, and may require the production of any book, paper or document deemed pertinent thereto. The said fire marshal is hereby authorized and empowered to administer oaths and affirmations to any persons appearing as witnesses before him. 
(4)  Refusal of witness to testify. Any witness who refuses to be sworn, or who refuses to appear or testify, or who disobeys any lawful order of said fire marshal, or who fails or refuses to produce any book, paper or document touching any matter under examination, or who is guilty of any contemptuous conduct during any of the proceedings of the fire marshal on the matter of said investigation or inquiry, after being summoned to give testimony in relation to any matter under investigation as aforesaid, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and it shall be the duty of the fire marshal to cause all such offenders to be prosecuted. 
(5)  Investigations to be private. All investigations held by or under the direction of the fire marshal may, in his discretion, be private, and persons other than those required to be present may be excluded from the place where such investigation is held, and witnesses may be kept separate and apart from each other and not allowed to communicate with each other until they have been examined. 
(6)  Entry on premises. The fire marshal shall have the authority at all times of day or night, when necessary, in the performance of the duties imposed upon him by the provisions of this chapter, to enter upon and examine any building or premises where any fire has occurred, and other buildings and premises adjoining or near the same, which authority shall be exercised only with reason and good discretion. 
(7)  Inspection of premises. The fire marshal, upon complaint of any person having an interest in any building or property adjacent, or without any complaint, shall have a right at all reasonable hours, for the purpose of examination, to enter into and upon buildings and premises within the city, and it shall be his duty to enter upon and make, or cause to be entered and made, a thorough examination of all mercantile, manufacturing and public buildings, together with the premises belonging thereto. Whenever he shall find any building or other structure which, for want of repair or by reason of age or dilapidated condition or for any cause, is especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger other buildings or property, or so occupied that fire would endanger persons or property therein, and whenever he shall find an improper or dangerous arrangement of stoves, ranges, furnaces or other heating appliances of any kind whatsoever, including chimneys, flues, and pipes with which the same may be connected, or a dangerous arrangement of lighting devices or systems, or a dangerous or unlawful storage of explosives, compounds, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, dangerous chemicals, vegetable products, ashes, combustible, inflammable and refuse materials or other conditions which may be dangerous in character or liable to cause or promote fire or create conditions dangerous to the firefighters or occupants, he shall order the same to be removed or remedied, and such order shall be forthwith complied with by the owner or occupant of said building or premises. Provided, however, that if said owner or occupant deems himself aggrieved by such order, he may, within five days of receipt of such order, appeal to the mayor in writing by delivery to the city secretary, who shall promptly investigate the cause of the complaint, and unless by his authority the order is revoked, such order shall remain in force and be forthwith complied with by said owner or occupant. The fire marshal shall report to the state fire marshal any information in regard to fire investigations or inspections as may be required or requested. 
(c)  Volunteer firefighter membership. 
(1)  The fire department may include volunteer firefighters who shall report to the fire chief. 
(2)  The volunteer firefighters shall be governed by this chapter (as applicable) and by the rules and regulations promulgated by the fire chief. 
(3)  The city fire department volunteer membership is authorized to accept donations or contributions on its behalf for its volunteer services. The volunteer membership has the authority to hold fund-raising events as approved by a majority of the volunteer membership, and as confirmed by the fire chief, and the city council, provided that the city council has final and ultimate authority to approve each fund-raising event, donations, and/or contributions. 
(4)  Each volunteer firefighter, hereafter joining, shall at the time of joining be in good health and physical condition, be of good moral character and above 18 years of age. Each member shall be in good standing with all federal, state and local laws, ordinances and codes. 
(5)  The fire chief may reinstate any previous volunteer and/or paid member to active volunteer status, provided the previous member meets the following criteria: 
a.  The member previously left the department in good standing, and severance from the department has not been more than three years; 
b.  The member of the paid force who has resigned his position in good standing requests to be a member of the volunteers. 
(6)  In case of the failure of any volunteer firefighter to faithfully perform the duties assigned to him, criminal conviction above a Class C misdemeanor, or who displays conduct unbecoming of a firefighter, the fire chief may, with just cause, take appropriate disciplinary action, i.e., counseling, verbal and/or written reprimand, restrictive duty and, subject to city council approval, suspension and/or termination. 
(7)  Any member expelled from the volunteers shall not be eligible to membership in the department for 36 months thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 252, § 1(art. I, § 2), 3-25-2004) 
Sec. 38-13. - Authority at fires and other emergencies. 
(a)  The fire chief or officer in charge at the scene of a fire or other emergency involving the protection of life or property or any part thereof shall have the authority to direct such operation as necessary to extinguish or control any fire, perform any rescue operation, investigate the existence of any suspected or reported fires, gas leaks or other hazardous conditions or situations or of taking any other action necessary in the reasonable performance of duty. 
(b)  In the exercise of such power, the fire chief, or his designee, is authorized to prohibit any person, vehicle, vessel or thing from approaching the scene and is authorized to remove or cause to be removed or kept away from the scene any vehicle, vessel, or thing which could impede or interfere with the operations of the fire department and, in the judgment of the fire chief or his designee, any person not actually and usefully employed in the emergency operation or in the preservation of property in the vicinity thereof. 
(c)  The fire chief, or his designee, at the scene of an emergency, is authorized to place ropes, guards, barricades, or other obstructions across any street, alley, place or private property in the vicinity of such operations so as to prevent accidents or interference with the lawful efforts of the fire department to manage and control the situation and handle fire apparatus. 
(Ord. No. 252, § 1(art. I, § 3), 3-25-2004) 
Secs. 38-14-38-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE CODE 

Sec. 38-21. - International fire code adopted. 
(a)  That certain document, a copy of which is on file in the office of the fire chief or fire marshal for the city, being marked and designated as the International Fire Code, including all appendices, standards, supplements, and errata, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the code of the city for regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of building and premises in the city and providing for the issuance of permits for hazardous uses or operations; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such International Fire Code, 2015 edition, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this section. 
(b)  The following sections are hereby revised: 
101.1. Title. These regulations shall be known as the International Fire Code of the City of Helotes, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
109.3. Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor, punishable by fine of not more than $2,000.00. Each day a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
111.4. Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work on the system after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable for a fine of not less than $100.00 and more than $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 252, § 1(art. II, §§ 1-2), 3-25-2004; Ord. No. 402, § 2, 5-14-2009; Ord. No. 552, § 2, 11-13-2014) 
Sec. 38-22. - Additional regulations. 
    The following regulations shall be applicable in addition to the regulations set forth in the International Fire Code: 
(1)  Unsafe buildings, structures, heating, etc. 
a.  Unsafe buildings or structures. No owner or occupant of a building or other structure or premises shall keep or maintain the same when, for want of repair, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or for any cause, it is especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger buildings or property of others, or is especially liable to fire, and which is so occupied that fire would endanger other persons or their property. 
b.  Unsafe heating, lighting, storage, etc. No owner or occupant of a building or other structure or premises shall keep or maintain the same with an improper arrangement of a stove, range, furnace, or other heating appliance of any kind whatever, including chimneys, flues, and pipes with which the same may be connected, so as to be dangerous in the matter of fire, or health, or safety of persons or property of others, or shall keep or maintain any building, other structure or premises with any improper arrangement of a lighting device or system, or with a storage of explosives, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, chemicals, vegetable products, ashes, combustibles, inflammable materials, or refuse, or with any other condition which shall be dangerous in character to the persons, health or property of others; or which shall be dangerous in the matter of promoting, augmenting of causing fires; or which shall create conditions dangerous to firefighters, or occupants of such buildings, structure or premises. 
c.  Notice required. No prosecution shall be brought under subsection (1) of this section until the order provided in section 38-12(b)(7) be given, and the party notified shall fail or refuse to comply with the same. 
(2)  Removal of debris. 
a.  The owner or person having under his control or in his possession upon any premises in the city any substances which have been rendered useless or unmerchantable by reason of any fire on such premises, or any debris resulting from such fire, must remove such substances and debris from such premises within five days after notice to do so has been served in writing by the fire marshal. 
b.  Whenever any building or other structure in the city is partially burned, the owner thereof, or the person in charge or control thereof, shall, within ten days after written notice from the fire marshal to do so, remove all refuse, debris, charred and partially burned lumber and material from the ground; and if such building or other structure shall be burned to such an extent that it is rendered incapable of being repaired, the owner of the property upon which such structure is located, or person in charge or control thereof, shall, within ten days after written notice from the fire marshal to do so, remove all of the remaining portion of the building or structure from the ground. 
c.  The fire marshal may extend the ten-day period of removal of such burned or partially burned buildings, when the insurance adjustment, if any, is still pending, but he shall establish a date for removal that recognizes the health and safety needs of the citizens and so notify the owner of the premises in writing. 
(3)  Fire lanes. 
a.  Definition. A fire lane shall be defined as any area adjacent to the entrance or exit of any building or buildings deemed necessary by the fire chief. This area, now called "fire lane," is to remain free and unobstructed of parked vehicles or other obstacles at all times, day or night. This designated area may also include sidewalks, driveways, portions of parking lots or any other area directly adjacent to or near building entrances or exits, to include any fire hydrant. 
b.  Designation. The fire chief is hereby duly authorized to designate a fire lane on any premises that, in his opinion, might hinder or cause slow response of fire apparatus or other emergency vehicles. A fire lane designated by the fire chief shall not make the city responsible for the upkeep of such area, but the owner of such property will continue to be responsible as upon initial designation of such fire lane by the fire chief. An official record of all locations of designated fire lanes shall be kept in the office of the fire chief. Owners of private property or their representative may request additional fire lanes be designated by the fire chief at his discretion. 
c.  Notices; posting of signs; and/or other approved markings. 
1.  Upon designation of a fire lane by the fire chief, notice shall be given to the owner(s) of said property that signs and/or other approved markings are to be posted in that particular area. These signs and/or other approved markings shall be posted at designated locations and shall conform to the standard size, coloring, lettering ("FIRE LANE-NO PARKING AT ANY TIME"), mounting, and/or markings as set forth by the fire chief. The cost and maintenance of signs and/or markings shall not be incurred by the City but by the owner(s) of said property. If so directed by the fire chief, painted red curbing or red pavement striping with white stenciled letters stating "FIRE LANE-NO PARKING" will suffice as approved markings. The owner(s) of such premises may paint the curbing or pavement striping to conform to specifications described above if not required to do so by the fire chief, but the fire chief must approve such action. 
2.  It is unlawful to park any vehicle, other than fire apparatus or other emergency vehicles, in any designated fire lane. It shall also be unlawful for any individual(s) to place any obstruction, for whatever purpose, in a designated fire lane. 
3.  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or attempt to remove or alter in any way any sign designating a fire lane. 
d.  Removal of vehicles. 
1.  The owner or the owner's agent may have any vehicle removed other than fire apparatus or any emergency vehicle, that is parked in any required fire lane. The cost of having the vehicle(s) removed and stored shall be incurred by the owner or operator of such vehicle(s). The owner or his agent who has a vehicle removed and stored shall not be held liable for any damage incurred by the vehicle owner or operator, provided that the movement and storage of such vehicle be accomplished by a vehicle wrecker service that is insured against such damages during tow procedures and a storage company that is insured against liability for property damage for vehicles being stored. 
2.  Any vehicle(s) parked in a designated fire lane may be removed at the owner's expense by the fire marshal or the fire chief: 
i.  When a vehicle is repeatedly parked in a designated fire lane created pursuant to this section. 
ii.  When a vehicle is blocking the entrance to or exit from any business, apartment complex or place of assembly such that fire apparatus could not safely enter or exit. 
iii.  When the presence of a vehicle threatens the life and safety of the general public or by hindering the ability of fire apparatus or any emergency vehicle to respond to any emergency. 
3.  The fire marshal or fire chief, when having a vehicle removed from a premise and stored, shall use the towing service and storage facility presently under contract with the city. 
4.  No owner or agent of a premise shall close fire lanes or remove signs pertinent thereto unless written permission has been obtained from the fire chief. 
(Ord. No. 252, § 1(art. II, § 3), 3-25-2004; Ord. No. 17-06, § 1, 6-8-2017) 
Sec. 38-23. - Enforcement. 
    The Fire Code shall be enforced by the Fire Marshall, the Fire Chief, and the Fire and Police Departments of the City. 
(Ord. No. 252, § 1(art. II, § 4), 3-25-2004; Ord. No. 428, § 1, 3-25-2010) 
Sec. 38-24. - Modification. 
    The fire marshal shall have power to modify the effect of any of the provisions of the fire codes upon particular property, upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are unique obstacles in carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done, and the particulars of any such modification when granted or allowed, and the decision of the fire marshal thereon, shall be entered upon the records of the city and a signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 252, § 1(art. II, § 5), 3-25-2004) 
Sec. 38-25. - Appeals. 
    Whenever the fire marshal shall disapprove any application, or refuse to grant a license or permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code do not apply or that the same has been wrongly interpreted by the fire marshal, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the fire marshal to the council within 30 days from the date of the decision of the fire marshal. Such an appeal must be filed in writing with the city secretary, who shall place the appeal on the next available city council agenda, provided that a filing fee of $25.00 is paid to partially offset the costs of administration. 
(Ord. No. 252, § 1(art. II, § 6), 3-25-2004) 
Secs. 38-26-38-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OPEN BURNING 

Sec. 38-41. - Adoption of state law. 
    The city hereby adopts the outdoor burning rules as outlined in 30 Tex. Admin. Code §§ 111.201-111.221. If a conflict occurs between 30 Tex. Admin. Code §§ 111.201-111.221 and this article, the state statute shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 252, § 1(art. III, § 1), 3-25-2004) 
Sec. 38-42. - General prohibition. 
    No person may cause, allow, or permit any outdoor burning within the city limits, except as provided by this chapter. The burning of household trash, garbage of any form, or municipal solid waste, including grass, leaves, and branch trimmings, is prohibited within the city limits. It shall also be unlawful for any person to light or have lighted any fire in any street, alley, thoroughfare or public property. Outdoor disposal or disposition of any material capable of igniting spontaneously, with the exception of the storage of fossil fuels, shall not be allowed. No furniture, electrical insulation, treated and untreated lumber, plastics, non-wood construction/demolition materials, heavy oils, asphaltic materials, potentially explosive materials, chemical wastes, and items containing natural or synthetic rubber shall be burned. 
(Ord. No. 252, § 1(art. III, § 2), 3-25-2004) 
Sec. 38-43. - Exceptions. 
    Only fires under the conditions described below will be permitted: 
(1)  Fire training. Outdoor burning shall be authorized for training of firefighting personnel when requested in writing and authorized by the city fire marshal's or the county fire marshal's office. The burning shall be authorized if notice of denial is not received within ten working days after the date of postmark or date of personal delivery of the request. 
(2)  Domestic outdoor fires. Fires are allowed out-of-doors for cooking or warmth provided such a fire is built in a fireproof container, such as a bar-b-que pit or chimenea, made of brick, stone, metal, or other fireproof material, in such a manner to prevent said fire from escaping. Domestic outdoor fires do not require a burn permit or a permit fee. This subsection does not include the burning of domestic waste. 
(Ord. No. 252, § 1(art. III, § 3), 3-25-2004; Ord. No. 402, § 2, 5-14-2009) 
Secs. 38-44-38-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FIREWORKS 

Sec. 38-51. - Sale, possession, transport or discharge. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, barter, exchange, or give away fireworks of any kind, in any quantity, within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to have, keep, transport, discharge, or otherwise use fireworks of any kind, in any quantity, within the corporate limits of the city, except as provided in section 38-53, and subsection (c) hereof. 
(c)  A person may temporarily possess and transport fireworks for personal use during a period not to exceed 72 hours immediately preceding and including Christmas Day, New Year's Day, and the Fourth of July provided that: 
(1)  The fireworks are possessed in a motor vehicle while being transported for discharge outside the municipal city limits of Helotes; and 
(2)  The fireworks not exceeding in quantity two vendor's bags or two sealed display packages are kept in such bag or sealed display package with a receipt displaying the date of purchase securely attached to one of the vendor bags or sealed display packages; and 
(3)  The fireworks must be inaccessible to children under the age of 18 years, unopened and in their original sealed manufacturer's packaging and stored in: 
a.  The trunk of a vehicle; or 
b.  The area behind the last upright seat of the vehicle, if the vehicle does not have a trunk. 
(Ord. No. 016B, § 1, 7-26-1984; Ord. No. 16C, 4-8-1987; Ord. No. 364, § 1, 08-28-2008) 
Sec. 38-52. - Manufacture or storage. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture or store fireworks or components of fireworks of any kind, in any quantity, within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 016B, § 2, 7-26-1984; Ord. No. 16C, 4-8-1987) 
Sec. 38-53. - Permit. 
(a)  Eligibility; application; fee. Any citizen of the city may give a fireworks display provided such person secures a permit from the city council. Application therefore shall be addressed to the city council, shall state the name and residence of the applicant, the time and place of the proposed exhibition, and a description of the kind, character, and quantity of the fireworks intended to be displayed, and shall be accompanied by a fee as prescribed in the most recent adopted fee schedule passed and approved by the city council. The fee shall be nonrefundable. 
(b)  Action by city council. The city council shall act on the application and approve or reject it within its sole discretion and such decision shall be final. A copy of the city council's approval shall constitute the applicant's permit. 
(c)  Limitations. No such permit shall be granted to any applicant, or immediate member of his family, more than twice during any calendar year. Any such fireworks display shall conclude not later than 10:30 p.m. on the date specified in the permit, subject to the penalty provided herein. 
(d)  Indemnification of city. If such permit is granted, the applicant shall fully indemnify and hold the city, its officers, employees, and agents completely free and harmless from any and all occurrences arising out of the applicant's use of the permit or the use of the permit in question by the applicant's family members, employees or agents, whether it results in bodily injury, death, disease, property damage, or property loss to any person. Each such permit shall so state, but this provision shall apply whether it does or not. 
(Ord. No. 016B, § 3, 7-26-1984; Ord. No. 394, § 3, 2-12-2009) 
Sec. 38-54. - Definition. 
    The term "fireworks," as used in this article, shall include but not be limited to firecrackers, Roman candles, sparklers, torpedoes, bombs, skyrockets, buzz bombs, atomic wings, cherry bombs, aerial flash salutes, and trail blazers. 
(Ord. No. 016B, § 4, 7-26-1984) 
Sec. 38-55. - Penalty. 
    Each violation of this article shall be punished by a penalty of a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $2000.00. 
(Ord. No. 016B, § 5, 7-26-1984; Ord. No. 364, § 1, 08-28-2008) 
Chapter 42 - FLOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Historical Note- Ord. No. 298, § 1, adopted Jan. 26, 2006, deleted Art. II, former §§ 42-31-42-36 in its entirety and enacted similar provisions to read as set out herein. Former §§ 42-31-42-36 derived from Ord. No. 55, adopted Sept. 8, 1988; and Ord. No. 55A, adopted Oct. 22, 1998. 

ARTICLE I. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
DIVISION 1. - DESIGN CRITERIA 

Sec. 42-1. - Title, duties of officials. 
    The provisions of this article shall be known as and may be cited as the city's floodplain ordinance, and all officials of the city having duties under these regulations are ordered and directed to perform such duties as required of them under these regulations. (Ord. No. 298, Ex. A(42-31), 1-26-2006) 
Sec. 42-2. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The areas of special flood hazard in Helotes are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 298, Ex. A(42-32), 1-26-2006) 
Sec. 42-3. - Statement of purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to promote land use controls necessary to qualify the city for flood insurance under requirements of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 with provisions designed: 
(1)  To protect human life and property exposed to the hazards of flooding; 
(2)  To avoid increasing flood levels or flood hazards or creating new flood hazards areas; 
(3)  To minimize public and private property losses due to flooding; 
(4)  To preserve the natural floodplains where at all possible; 
(5)  To ensure that potential property owners are notified if property is in a special flood hazard area; 
(6)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(7)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(8)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located in special flood hazard [areas]; 
(9)  To minimize expenditure of future public money for costly flood control projects; areas; and 
(10)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas. 
(Ord. No. 298, Ex. A(42-33), 1-26-2006) 
Sec. 42-4. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
    In order to accomplish its purposes, this article uses the following methods: 
(1)  Restricts or prohibits uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Requires that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Controls the alteration of natural floodplains, their protective barriers and stream channels; 
(4)  Prevents the construction of barriers that will divert floodwaters and subject other lands to greater flood hazards; 
(5)  Controls development that would cause greater erosion or potential flood damage such as grading, dredging, excavation, and filling; 
(6)  Imposes a regulatory 100-year floodplain that requires using the ultimate development of the watershed to determine the 100-year water surface elevations. New developments must be constructed above this elevation. 
(Ord. No. 298, Ex. A 42-34), 1-26-2006) 
Sec. 42-5. - Special floodplain definition. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. The following definitions apply only to this article: 
    100-year floodplain is the land in the floodplain with a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year and the area is designated as a Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) zone A, AE, AH, AO, on the flood insurance rate maps. 
    Area of flood inundation refers to sites that are subject to flooding as a result of water ponding in the controlled storage areas of dams, detention and retention ponds. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent chance or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This area is also known as the 100-year floodplain. The area is designated as a Federal Emergency Management Agency zone A, AE, AH, AO on the flood insurance rate maps. 
    Baseflood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    CLOMR means a conditional letter of map revision. A CLOMR will be submitted for FEMA approval for all proposed physical changes to the floodplain that will result in a change to the floodplain boundary. 
    Development means any manmade change in improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or, drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Elevated building means a non-basement building (i) built, in the case of a building in zones AE, A, A99, AO, AH, X, and D, to have the top of the elevated floor, elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the floor of the water and (ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of zones AE, A, A99, AO, AH, X, D, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood waters. 
    Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before the date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as existing structures. 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study (FIS) means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, water surface elevation or the base flood, as well as the flood boundary map. 
    Flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "flooding"). 
    Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent or the areas within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent or the depths or associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, darns, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
    Floodplain means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding). The 100-year floodplain is also known as the area of special flood hazard. 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain management regulations mean zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, bonding codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications or police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose or flood damage prevention and reduction. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway means the channel or a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood. The floodway is the 100-year floodplain in the City of Helotes. 
    Habitable structure means a structure that has facilities to accommodate people for an overnight stay. These include, but are not limited to, residential homes, apartments, condominiums, hotels, motels, and manufactured homes. Recreational vehicles are not included in this definition. 
    Historic structure means any structure that meets any of the designations below: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the department of interior) or preliminarily determined by the secretary or the interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary of interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior; or 
b.  Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved programs. 
    Ineffective flow areas. Ineffective flow areas are used to describe portions of a cross section in which water will pond, but the velocity of that water, in the downstream direction, is close to or equal to zero. This water is included in the floodplain storage calculations and other wetted cross section parameters, but it is not included as part of the active flow area. 
    Levee means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
    LOMR means a letter of map revision. A LOMR will be submitted for FEMA approval for all changes to the floodplain boundary that are delineated on the current flood insurance rate maps. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
    Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
    Natural state means the topography that exists at the time information is gathered for flood insurance rate maps or any subsequent approved revisions to those maps. 
    New construction means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Regulatory 100-year floodplain means the land within the community subject to flooding during a 100-year frequency storm event assuming ultimate development has occurred throughout the watershed. The regulatory 100-year floodplain is limited to the reach of the stream which is designated as an area of special flood hazard on the flood insurance rate maps. 
    Repetitive loss means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Start of construction means, for all new construction and substantial improvements, the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation for a foundation; or the placement of manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction includes land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; includes the installation of streets and/or walkways; excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. The start of construction period is valid for 180 days. Delay beyond this period would require resubmission of added data and the permit application. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, which is principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured home. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. Substantial damage also means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. This includes "substantial damage," regardless of the structures which have incurred "repetitive loss" or actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." Project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structures continued designation as a "historical structure." 
    Unflooded access means that vehicular traffic has safe access to a property from a public street in times of flood (regulatory 100-year flood). A property will be considered to have unflooded access to an existing street if flow depths for access on the street adjacent to the property do not exceed one foot and fall within the safe range on figure 42-35.1 "dangerous conditions on crossing during floods." 
    Variance is a grant of relief to a person from the requirement of this article when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. (For full requirements see section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.) 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or ravine areas. 
(Ord. No. 298, Ex. A(42-35), 1-26-2006) 
Sec. 42-6. - Lands to which provisions apply. 
    This article shall only apply to areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city and where applicable in its area of extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 298, Ex. A(42-36), 1-26-2006) 
Sec. 42-7. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazards. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study, Bexar County, Texas and Incorporated Areas," updated periodically by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, together with the accompanying flood insurance rate maps and flood hazard boundary floodway maps and any revisions thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of these regulations. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency on its flood insurance rate maps (FIRM), currently published for the City of Helotes, Bexar County and surrounding counties shall be used as the controlling study for the base flood within the City Limits of Helotes and its ETJ unless a more current study is required by the floodplain administrator. Typically, new studies will be required for development where existing studies were performed prior to the City of Helotes's adoption of Ordinance No. 55A, passed and approved on October 22, 1998, and/or where city records indicate the ultimate development of the watershed has not been considered. Similar studies done by FEMA shall also be used for control in the City of Helotes's area of extraterritorial jurisdiction, along with the floodplain information reports prepared by the United States Corps of Engineers, and the United States Geological Survey, Water Resources Division District Office, Austin, Texas, 1:24,000 U.S.G.S. quadrangle maps as prepared for the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the latest revisions thereof. These reports and maps are available for inspection by the public in the office of the city drainage engineer. Information and studies sanctioned and adopted by the floodplain administrator or by city council subsequent to publication of the flood insurance study and associated FIRM that update the base flood elevations, floodplain boundaries or flows shall also be used for control. 
(Ord. No. 298, Ex. A(42-37), 1-26-2006) 
Sec. 42-8. - Compliance. 
(a)  No structure or land in an area of special flood hazard shall hereafter be located, altered, have its use changed, or otherwise be developed unless a floodplain development permit has been issued, pursuant to the terms of this subdivision. Proposed work must be started within 12 months of the date of approval of a floodplain development permit, otherwise the permit will become null and void. The floodplain development permit will be in effect for six months following the start of construction unless otherwise approved on the permit by the floodplain administrator. 
(b)  No building permits, floodplain permits or plat approvals will be issued on properties with past floodplain violations unless the permits will remedy the violation. 
(c)  Work permitted with a floodplain development permit shall be undertaken in a manner designed to minimize surface runoff, erosion and sedimentation, and to safeguard life, limb, property and the public welfare. 
(Ord. No. 298, Ex. A(42-38), 1-26-2006) 
Sec. 42-9. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 298, Ex. A(42-39), 1-26-2006) 
Sec. 42-10. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 298, Ex. A(42-40), 1-26-2006) 
Sec. 42-11. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this division is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. In rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. These regulations do not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. These regulations shall not create liability on the part of the City of Helotes or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on these regulations or any administrative decision lawfully made there under. 
(Ord. No. 298, Ex. A(42-41), 1-26-2006) 
Secs. 42-12-42-20. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 42-21. - Designation of a city floodplain administrator. 
    The city engineer is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this division. The floodplain administrator, or his designee, must be certified as a floodplain manager by the Texas Floodplain Management Association. 
(Ord. No. 298, Ex. A(42-50), 1-26-2006) 
Sec. 42-22. - Duties and responsibilities of floodplain administrator. 
    Duties and responsibilities of the city floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of these regulations; 
(2)  Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by division 3 of this article; 
(3)  Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from these federal, state or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required; 
(4)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation; 
(5)  Notify adjacent communities prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency; 
(6)  Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of a watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished, where appropriate easements are provided; 
(7)  When base flood elevation data for various flood-prone areas has not been provided in accordance with section 42-8 of this article, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of this article. 
(8)  No new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including cut and/or fill) shall be permitted within zones A and AE on the community's flood insurance rate maps unless it is first demonstrated by engineering data submitted by the applicant's engineer in accordance with the various requirements and procedures as set forth in this article that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the regulatory 100-year floodplain at any point within the community. 
(Ord. No. 298, Ex. A(42-51), 1-26-2006) 
Sec. 42-23. - Enforcement. 
    If any person violates any provisions of these regulations, the floodplain administrator shall notify the city attorney and direct him to take whatever action is necessary to remedy the violation, including but not limited to, filing suit to enjoin the violation and submitting a request to FEMA for denial of flood insurance. 
(a)  Notice of violation. 
(1)  Generally. Whenever the floodplain administrator receives information of the existence of a floodplain violation, the floodplain administrator shall serve the owner of the property with a written notice informing the owner of such condition, directing that action be initiated to bring the property into compliance and advising the owner that he or she must respond in person to the floodplain administrator or authorized representative within 15 days of receipt of the notice. 
(2)  Service-Generally. Such notice may be served by personal delivery to the owner if he can be located within the city limits, but if he cannot be so located or served after reasonable effort, notice may be served by certified letter addressed to such owner at his post office address, but if such address cannot be ascertained after reasonable effort, notice may be served by publication two times within ten consecutive days in a newspaper of general circulation published in the city. In the case of community property, service upon either the husband or the wife shall be deemed sufficient notice hereunder. 
(3)  Service-Corporation. If the owner is a corporation, service may be made by delivery of same to any office or place of business of such corporation or any officer of the corporation if such office, place of business or officer can be located within the city limits; but if such office, place of business, or officer cannot be so located after reasonable effort, service may be made by certified letter addressed to its corporate headquarters post office address; but if such address cannot be ascertained after reasonable effort, the notice may be served by publication two times within ten consecutive days in a newspaper of general circulation published in the city. 
(4)  Service by publication. Whether delivered personally, by mail, or by publication, the notice provided for above shall be addressed to the owner, but if the owner is not known, service may be had by publication addressed "To the owner of (legal description of the property involved)." The notice shall give the legal description of the property, state the condition which constitutes a violation hereof, and shall state that upon failure of the owner to take approved steps toward compliance within 15 days from date the notice is delivered or within 15 days from date of the second publication, if notice is to be served by publication, a criminal complaint may be filed in the municipal court of the city for violation of this article, stating the penalties for violation hereof as given below. 
(b)  Remediation. 
(1)  Generally. The city may also cause the work necessary to bring any property into compliance herewith to be done, if the owner has failed to respond as set forth in subsection (a) above within 15 days from the date notice has been received or published, and to charge the owner for the costs incurred by the city. A statement of the costs incurred by the city to abate such condition shall be mailed to the owner of such premises if the owner and mailing address are known and, if not known, may be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The statement shall demand payment within 30 days from the date of receipt or publication. 
(2)  Failure to pay. If such statement has not been paid within such period, and if such work was further accomplished because the city's health inspector, or person designated by the Mayor, certified that such work was required to abate an unwholesome or unsanitary condition described in Chapter 342 of the Health and Safety Code, V.A.T.S., then the floodplain administrator may cause a statement of the expenses incurred to abate and correct such condition on the premises to be filed with the county clerk of the county in the deed records, and such statement shall be and the city shall have a privileged lien upon the lot, parcel, or tract of land upon which such expenses were incurred, second only to tax liens and liens for street improvement, together with ten percent interest per annum on the delinquent amount from the date such payment was due. For any such expenditures and interest as aforesaid, suit may be instituted and foreclosure had in the name of the city; and the statement so made as aforesaid, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended in any such work. 
(3)  Large trees. Although large trees are not covered hereby, and are not felt to be a nuisance or a hazard, it may be necessary at times to remove trees or parts thereof in order for the city crews or city contractors to affect entry of mowing or clearing equipment to property or portions of property not meeting standards established in this article. In such case, the removal of such trees or parts thereof as is found necessary shall be done and is hereby authorized and the cost of this work shall be included in the cost charged to the owner. 
(c)  Options. 
(1)  Options available. With the approval of the floodplain administrator the following options are available to an owner of property in violation of the requirements of this section. 
a.  The owner may cause all work, improvements, and grading performed in violation of this section to be restored to the natural state. Proof of compliance must be provided in the form of a certification signed by a registered professional engineer or surveyor to the effect that the property in question has been restored as nearly as possible to its natural state. 
b.  The owner may cease all or a portion of the work, improvements, and grading performed in violation of this article and seek approval of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator. Data presented with the permit application must demonstrate the compliance of all improvements with this article. 
(2)  Time for compliance. Each of the above options shall require a series of steps to be completed by the property owner at time intervals approved by the floodplain administrator. During the initial meeting set forth in subsection (b)(1) above, these options shall be discussed. Thereafter the owner shall have 15 days to decide which option to pursue and provide a schedule of steps with completion dates necessary to rectify the violation. Upon failure of the owner to comply with these requirements or to complete the steps according to the schedule approved by the floodplain administrator, the city may choose to pursue the remedies set forth in subsection (b) or (c). 
(3)  Time periods. Each violation shall be considered on an individual basis. The time period for each step shall be approved by the floodplain administrator on the basis of hardship to the owner and danger to residents and citizens. The maximum time period allowed under any circumstances to perform all work necessary to bring a violation into compliance with the requirements of this article is six months. 
(d)  Reporting violations, other remedies. 
(1)  Violations. Violations of this article shall be reported by the city floodplain administrator as set out herein. 
(2)  Penalties. Any person whose actions or omissions criminally negligently, recklessly, knowing, or intentionally violates any provision of this article shall be charged with a misdemeanor offense and upon conviction shall be punished by a penalty of not less than $25.00 and not more than $2,000.00. Each day of continuation of each such violation shall be a separate offense and punishable as such. 
(3)  Other remedies. In addition to the other remedies provided by law, the city council may institute appropriate action to abate violations of these regulations as a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 298, Ex. A(42-52), 1-26-2006) 
Secs. 42-24-42-30. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMITS 

Sec. 42-31. - Allowable development within the regulatory floodplain. 
(a)  No increase in the regulatory 100-year floodplain elevation will be permitted within the watershed as a result of development. 
(b)  An increase in water surface elevation is permitted solely on the developer's property if the regulatory 100-year floodplain is contained in a dedicated drainage easement or right-of-way. 
(c)  Account for increase in discharge due to loss of storage and increase in impervious cover in all reclamation analysis. 
(d)  Demonstrate that the development will not increase the regulatory 100-year floodplain velocities above six feet per second. No increase in velocity will be permitted if predevelopment velocities in the floodplain exceed six feet per second. 
(e)  The following development may be allowed in the regulatory 100-year floodplain and will require a floodplain development permit: 
(1)  All weather (passes the ultimate development 100-year flood) street crossings; 
(2)  Utility construction; 
(3)  Parks; 
(4)  Greenways; 
(5)  Recreational facilities and golf courses; 
(6)  Hike and bike trails; 
(7)  Drainage improvements that mitigate existing or anticipated flood hazards; 
(8)  Capital improvement projects that are deemed advantages to public health and safety; 
(9)  Maintenance activities necessary to maintain the stormwater conveyance of the floodplain; 
(10)  Drainage infrastructure repair; 
(11)  Floodplain restoration; 
(12)  Wetland reestablishment or mitigation; 
(13)  Habitat re-establishment; 
(14)  Installation of flood monitoring controls: rain gages, early flood warning systems, high water detection systems, etc.; 
(15)  Installations of emergency devices necessary to warn, alarm and protect citizens at flood hazards; 
(16)  Improvements to a structure that does not fall under the definition of substantial improvement; 
(17)  Elevating and/or floodproofing structures in the floodplain; 
(18)  100-year floodplain reclamation where the watershed drainage area is less than 320 acres; 
(19)  Parking lot construction where water depths do not exceed six inches; 
(20)  100-year floodplain reclamation in areas of ineffective flow; 
(21)  100-year floodplain reclamation in overbank areas subject to extensive shallow (zero to three feet) flooding where flood velocities in the overbank area are less than three feet per second; 
(22)  Historic structure reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration with appropriate variance; 
(23)  Reclamation between the 100-year floodplain and the regulatory 100-year floodplain. Elevate development one foot above the water surface elevations established for the regulatory 100-year floodplain; 
(24)  Projects that are in the best interest of the public; 
(25)  Nonresidential construction. Some or all of the following restrictions will be placed on nonresidential construction in the floodplain: 
a.  Demonstrate that no alternate site is available for development within the property that is out of the floodplain; 
b.  Meet all the requirements of section 42-42(b), nonresidential construction; 
c.  Ensure the lowest finished floor elevation and/or the height to which the building must be flood-proofed is no lower than the higher elevation of the energy grade line or the water surface elevation plus one foot of the regulatory 100-year floodplain; 
d.  No increase in water surface elevations over existing conditions is permitted anywhere within the watershed as a result of the construction. An increase in water surface elevation is permitted on the developer's property if the floodplain is contained in a dedicated drainage easement or right-of-way; 
e.  Unflooded vehicular access must be available to the development from a public street; 
f.  Demonstrate that the development will not increase the 100-year floodplain predevelopment velocities above six feet per second. No increase in velocity will be permitted if predevelopment velocities exceed six feet per second; 
g.  Demonstrate that the development will not be subject to damage from hydrostatic or hydrodynamic forces, debris impact, soaking, sediments and contaminants; 
h.  Provide, operate, and maintain an early flood warning system for the development. Warning systems will be subject to periodic inspection by the City of Helotes to ensure they are maintained and operated as intended; 
i.  Complete the letter of map revision process for the development; 
j.  The owner shall indemnify the City of Helotes against damages resulting from flooding on the owner's site; 
k.  Other site-specific restrictions and/or requirements deemed appropriate by the floodplain administrator; 
(26)  Construction in areas of flood inundation must meet the requirements of section 42-41 General standards. Structures associated with park and recreation development (fences, open construction type bleachers, concession stands, etc.) may be permitted in areas of flood inundation. Keep this construction out of the flood conveyance section of the floodplain. Compensate for loss of storage. Secure structures to minimize damage from hydrostatic or hydrodynamic forces (including buoyancy) and debris impact. 
(Ord. No. 298, Ex. A(42-61), 1-26-2006) 
Sec. 42-32. - Prohibited development within the regulatory floodplain. 
    The following development will not be allowed in the regulatory floodplain: 
(1)  Development without first obtaining a floodplain development permit; 
(2)  Habitable structures; 
(3)  Street or access construction that does not provide all weather access; 
(4)  100-year floodplain reclamation where the watershed drainage area exceeds 100 acres except as provided in this section 42-31 of this division 3. 
(Ord. No. 298, Ex. A(42-62), 1-26-2006; Ord. No. 402, § 2, 5-14-2009) 
Sec. 42-33. - Requirement. 
    No development or other encroachment is allowed in a floodplain that will result in any increase in the base flood elevations within the floodplain during discharge of water of a base flood unless the floodplain is contained within an easement. Where construction of structures in a floodplain is allowed by the floodplain administrator, a floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this article. In addition, all land development in any area of special flood hazard shall be required to have a floodplain development permit. 
(Ord. No. 298, Ex. A(42-63), 1-26-2006) 
Sec. 42-34. - Application. 
(a)  Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator, on a form furnished by him, prior to any development. Application for a floodplain development permit for a proposed subdivision may be presented prior to or in conjunction with other data required for the platting process. For platting purposes, a floodplain development permit shall serve only as an approval of the floodplain ordinance requirements. No cut and/or fill, building, or other site alterations shall proceed until the permit is approved. The permit application shall be accompanied by requested supporting data prepared by a licensed professional civil engineer in the State of Texas. Data required by the city, as requested by the city engineer, must accompany all floodplain development permit applications, except building renovation, reconstruction and restoration. 
(b)  In addition to the above, the following information is required: 
(1)  An elevation certificate for buildings on property located in or abutting the floodplain; 
(2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed; 
(3)  Certification from a registered professional civil engineer or registered architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of section 42-42; 
(4)  An existing structure may be improved (remodeled) without conforming to requirements of this division when the improvement does not constitute a substantial improvement. In the event that the work is considered a substantial improvement then the structure must be brought into compliance with this division; 
(5)  Certification of the fair market value of an existing structure prepared by a certified real estate appraiser and a cost estimate of proposed improvements to the structure prepared by a registered architect or registered professional engineer shall be submitted to verify whether or not the proposed improvements exceed 50 percent of the fair market value of the existing structure. In the case of a structure that has suffered damage, the date will verify the fair market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
(Ord. No. 298, Ex. A(42-64), 1-26-2006) 
Sec. 42-35. - Permit evaluation. 
(a)  Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this article and the following relevant factors: The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; velocities in excess of six feet per second shall be considered erosive and the product of the velocity times the depth of flow in excess of that shown as within the "safe range" by figure 42-35.1 shall be considered dangerous to life. 
(1)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(2)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(3)  The impact the development may have on the overall function of the stormwater facilities and the impact on properties in its own and connecting watersheds. This may include but not be limited to changes in discharges as a result of changes in impervious cover, velocity, storage, creek roughness, etc.; 
(4)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; flow depths for access shall not be greater than one foot for proposed subdivisions or buildings; 
(5)  The cost of providing governmental services during and after flooding conditions; 
(6)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the sites shall be analyzed; 
(7)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
(8)  The relationship for the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area, with respect to the dedication of additional drainage easement for future bond projects, in accordance with these division regulations. 
(b)  If a floodplain development permit application is disapproved, the floodplain administrator shall notify the applicant in writing of the section and specific requirement of this article with which the proposed development does not comply and the nature of such noncompliance. 
(c)  When there is a change in the alignment, width, or elevation of a floodplain identified on a flood insurance rate map, then a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR), or letter of map revision (LOMR) if no improvements are proposed in the floodplain, must be submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency prior to approval of the plat. If improvements are proposed in the floodplain the (CLOMR) must be approved by FEMA and the LOMR submitted to FEMA prior to acceptance of the construction by the city. A hold will be placed on all building permits for lots in a floodplain until FEMA has approved the LOMR or a performance bond is issued per section 42-36(b). 
Figure 42.35.1

(Ord. No. 298, Ex. A(42-65), 1-26-2006) 
Sec. 42-36. - Performance bond. 
(a)  All proposed drainage improvements to be made within the limits of the area of special flood hazard as set forth in section 42-8, shall require a performance bond which shall be filed with the city clerk, after the approval of the floodplain development permit. An exception to this requirement is made for improvements being made in conjunction with the platting of a subdivision under the requirements of this article. 
(b)  A performance bond may be issued for the letter of map revision submittal in order to release the hold on the lot building permits. This bond shall be in the amount of the current fees required by FEMA for LOMR review plus $1,000.00. 
(c)  A performance bond will be executed by a surety company, licensed to do business in the State of Texas, in an amount equal to the cost estimate, such cost estimate to include an inflation factor based upon a locally recognized construction cost index, as approved by the floodplain administrator, of all uncompleted and unaccepted improvements required by these regulations, with the condition that the developer shall complete such improvements and have them approved by the floodplain administrator, within three years from the date of approval of the floodplain development permit. 
(d)  The performance bond shall be substantially in the same form as the bond instrument set out in appendix C of Chapter 78, Subdivision. The floodplain administrator is authorized to sign the bond instrument on behalf of the City of Helotes, and the city attorney shall approve the same as to form. 
(Ord. No. 298, Ex. A(42-66), 1-26-2006) 
Sec. 42-37. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The city council shall consider requests for variances from the requirements of these regulations. Variance requests shall be processed as follows: 
(1)  For cut and/or fill, building, building permits, or establishment of a mobile home site, the applicant shall present the disapproved permit to the city administrator together with information as to why the variance should be granted. The city council will then hear the request as soon as practical. 
(2)  For subdivision plats, the applicant may submit the disapproved permit and the request for variance prior to plat submission or in conjunction with other data required for the platting process. This request shall be handled similar to [subsection] (a)(1) above. If the applicant chooses to submit the disapproved permit as part of the plat submission process, then the variance request shall be handled similar to other variance requests except that criteria for the floodplain variance shall be governed by this section. 
(3)  The city administrator shall notify the floodplain administrator of the applicant's request for variance and shall furnish him with copy of the request together with the applicant's statement of facts that he feels warrant the granting of the variance. The floodplain administrator shall reply in writing as to his evaluation of the applicant's request and make a recommendation as to approval or denial of the variance request. 
(4)  The city administrator shall notify the floodplain administrator of the decision of the city council. If the city council approves the request, the permit will be issued with the variance and with any special conditions that are attached to the variance. 
(b)  Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the city council may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(c)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(d)  Variances, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section, may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Sites and Places or the Texas State Historic Survey List or the City of Helotes Landmark List. 
(e)  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this article, the city council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives stated in section 42-4. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued within any floodplain if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result, unless the increase in flood levels are contained within a dedicated drainage easement on the requestor's property. 
(g)  Variances may be granted by the city council only upon a finding that: 
(1)  The variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; 
(2)  There is good and sufficient cause; 
(3)  Failure to grant the variance will result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
(4)  The variance will not result in increased flood heights, cause an additional threat to public safety, result in extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(h)  Any applicant to whom a variance or variances are granted shall be given written notice of the specific parts of this article for which variances were granted and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the granting of the variance. 
(Ord. No. 298, Ex. A(42-67), 1-26-2006) 
Sec. 42-38. - Continuing obligations. 
    Drawings and other material or criteria submitted to the floodplain administrator in applying for such permit shall, upon approval and issuance of such a permit, be a part of a condition and term of such permit. In addition, all standards and requirements of this article and all factors listed in this article as relevant in approving or denying such permit shall be a part of such a permit and a condition and term of such a permit. In addition to named materials required to be submitted in applying for such a permit, the floodplain administrator may require additional submission in order to verify whether such a permit should be issued. The conditions and terms shall constitute a continuing obligation upon all future occupants or users of the land to the extent same are applicable after development has been completed. 
(Ord. No. 298, Ex. A(42-68), 1-26-2006) 
Secs. 42-39-42-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD 

Sec. 42-41. - General standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required: 
(1)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads including the effects of buoyancy (see U.S. Corps of Engineers Flood Proofing Regulations, Chapter 6, Section 610). 
(2)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage (see the United States Corps of Engineers Flood Proofing Regulations, Chapter 5 and Chapter 6). 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage (see the United States Corps of Engineers Flood Proofing Regulations, Chapter 12 and Chapter 13). 
(4)  All new and replacement toilet, sinks, showers, water heaters, pressure tanks, furnaces, and other permanent plumbing installations shall be installed at or above the base flood elevation or floodproofed. 
(5)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to San Antonio Water System standards to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharges from the systems into flood water. 
(6)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to city sanitary sewer standards to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges from the systems into floodwater. 
(7)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. Waste disposal systems shall be located above the base floodwater surface elevation. 
(8)  Filling or the disposal of any materials which will diminish the water flow capacity of any waterway or floodplain defined by this article must be compensated for with remedial action by additional excavation or otherwise so as not to diminish water capacity. 
(9)  Floodplain engineering procedures and requirements within FEMA or United States Corps of Engineers official flood-prone areas shall conform to the engineering criteria of this section. 
(Ord. No. 298, Ex. A(42-71), 1-26-2006) 
Sec. 42-42. - Specific standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided in accordance with these regulations, the following provisions are required: 
(a)  Residential construction. Construction of habitable structures within the regulatory floodplain (base flood) is not allowed unless the floodplain is revised with a floodplain permit. Residential construction must be elevated one foot above the regulatory floodplain. 
(b)  Nonresidential construction. 
(1)  New construction or substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall have either (a) the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to one foot above the level of base flood elevation, or (b) have the lowest floor, including basement, with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be floodproofed so that below the base flood level plus one foot and above the lowest floor, the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (including basement) that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other covering or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(3)  Electrical heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(4)  A registered professional engineer or registered architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. The certification shall include a statement to the effect that the engineer has developed and/or reviewed structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction and finds them to be in accordance with this subsection. The floodplain administrator shall utilize the flood proofing regulations manual prepared by the United States Army Corps of Engineers as a guide in determining construction requirements. 
(c)  Manufactured homes. 
(1)  All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to the following (refer to FEMA Manual #85, Manufactured Home Installation in Flood Hazard Areas): 
a.  Over the top ties at each of the four corners of the manufactured home with two additional ties per side at intermediate locations. Manufactured homes more than 50 feet long require one additional tie per side; 
b.  Frame ties at each corner of the home with five additional ties per side at intermediate points. Manufactured homes more than 50 feet long require four additional ties per side; 
c.  All components of the anchoring system shall be capable of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds; 
d.  Any additions to the manufactured home shall be similarly anchored. 
(2)  All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within zones Al-30, AH, and AE shall conform to the following criteria: 
a.  Stands or lots are elevated on compacted fill or on pilings so that the lowest floor of the mobile home will be one foot above the base flood level. A registered professional civil engineer, registered architect, or registered public surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this paragraph complies with subsection (a); 
b.  Adequate surface drainage and access for a hauler are provided; 
c.  In the instance of elevation of pilings: (i) lots are large enough to permit steps, (ii) piling foundations are placed in stable soil no more than ten feet apart, and (iii) reinforcement is provided for pilings more than six feet above the ground level. 
(d)  Floodways. Located within the areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters that carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other developments, unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)  If subsection (d)(1) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this article. 
(3)  The placement of any manufactured home is prohibited except in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 298, Ex. A(42-72), 1-26-2006) 
Sec. 42-43. - Areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
    Located within the areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as areas of shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate. Therefore, in these areas the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor elevated one foot above the highest adjacent grade or one foot above the depth number specified on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified), whichever is higher controls. 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall: 
a.  Have the lowest floor elevated above the highest adjacent grade as high as the depth number specified on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified). 
b.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be completely floodproofed to or above that level so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. 
(3)  A registered professional civil engineer, registered public surveyor, or registered architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this section are satisfied. 
(4)  Require within zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Ord. No. 298, Ex. A(42-73), 1-26-2006) 
Sec. 42-44. - Subdivision proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with sections 42-3, 42-4, and 42-5 of this article. 
(b)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions shall meet the development permit requirements of this article. No floodproofing of an existing or proposed building in a new subdivision will be allowed as a substitute for providing the proper finished ground elevation, at the slab, above the ultimate development 100-year or 25-year plus freeboard flood elevation, whichever is higher. Buildings in a proposed subdivision shall be on land that is above the controlling flood elevation. 
(c)  Flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed development, if not otherwise provided, and shall conform to the design requirements of City of Helotes Code of Ordinances, Chapter 34, Article IV, including any amendments or revisions thereto. 
(d)  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards, and in accordance with this article. 
(e)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed so that they will not affect the existing water surface elevations of the base flood, the ultimate development 100-year or 25-year ultimate development flood (whichever is greater) in the area of special flood hazard. 
(f)  All proposed subdivisions must be contiguous to high ground that is not subject to flooding (the base flood, ultimate development 100-year or the 25-year ultimate development flood, whichever is higher) that is in excess of one foot flow depth, i.e., no "island" will be considered for platting; unless adequate connecting structures capable of passing the base flood, ultimate development 100-year or 25-year ultimate development flood (whichever is higher) are provided to high ground (not subject to the controlling flood of the same flood plain), and an additional one foot of freeboard is provided to all minimum floor slab elevations. 
(g)  All proposed subdivisions traversed by an area of special flood hazard where the "buildable" portion of the subdivision is severed by the floodplain shall be provided with adequate access. Adequate access shall be a structure that will pass the control flood (ultimate development 100-year) without overtopping the structure. Upstream property must not be affected by backwater, and velocities in the vicinity of the structure must be controlled to prevent scour, erosion or structural damage. Proposed subdivisions that involve the platting of streets shall have at least one access to an unflooded portion of existing dedicated street or roadway. 
(h)  Proposed subdivisions that do not involve the platting of streets shall have access to an existing dedicated street that is not subject to flood depths of over one foot. 
(i)  Existing channels shall not be increased or decreased from their natural state until engineering data meeting the requirements of Chapter 34, Article IV, of the City of Helotes Code of Ordinances, including any amendments or revisions thereto, has been approved by the city engineer. Floodplain engineering and procedures requirements for subdivision within FEMA or United States Corps of Engineers official flood-prone areas shall conform to the engineering criteria as set out in Chapter 34, Article IV, of the City of Helotes Code of Ordinances, including any amendments or revisions thereto. 
(Ord. No. 298, Ex. A(42-74), 1-26-2006) 
Chapter 46 - HEALTH AND SANITATION 
ARTICLE I. - HEALTH OFFICER 

Sec. 46-1. - Position created; appointment. 
(a)  There is hereby created the position of city health officer for the city. 
(b)  The mayor, subject to council approval, shall appoint a qualified person to serve as city health officer. 
(Ord. No. 90, §§ 1, 2, 6-23-1994) 
Sec. 46-2. - Term. 
    The term of city health officer shall be for a period of two years and coincide with the term of the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 90, § 3, 6-23-1994) 
Sec. 46-3. - Compensation. 
    The city health officer shall receive compensation based on duties performed at a reasonable professional rate and shall receive no salary or retainer. Necessary expenses, if any, shall be reimbursed after the same are incurred. 
(Ord. No. 90, § 4, 6-23-1994) 
Sec. 46-4. - Duties. 
    The city health officer shall perform those duties described by statute and custom and upon the direction of the mayor or council. 
(Ord. No. 90, § 5, 6-23-1994) 
Secs. 46-5-46-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 46-11. - Adoption of state rules. 
    The city hereby adopts by reference the provisions of the current rules or rules as amended by the Texas Board of Health found in 25 Tex. Admin. Code, §§ 229.161-229.171 and 229.173-229.175, regarding the regulation of food establishments in this jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 259, § 2 (A), 8-26-2004) 
Sec. 46-12. - Definitions. 
    The following shall have the meaning as indicated for the purpose of this article: 
    Authorized agent or employee means the employees of the regulatory authority. 
    Food establishment means a food service establishment, a retail food store, a temporary food establishment, a mobile food unit, and/or a roadside food vendor. 
    Mobile food unit means any vehicle from which food is prepared or sold other than foods prepared and prepackaged in a state licensed and inspected facility. 
    Municipality means the City of Helotes. 
    Regulatory authority means the governing body (city council) of the City of Helotes. 
    State rules means state rules found at 25 Tex. Admin. Code, §§ 229.161-229.171 and 229.173-229.175. These rules are also known as the Texas Food Establishment Rules. 
(Ord. No. 259, § 2 (B), 8-26-2004) 
Sec. 46-13. - Permits generally; food manager; mobile food units. 
(a)  A person may not operate a food establishment without a permit issued by the regulatory authority. Permits are not transferable from one person to another or from one location to another location, except as otherwise permitted by this article. A valid permit must be posted in or on every food establishment regulated by this article. 
(b)  Each food establishment must have at least one qualified food manager on duty during all hours in which food is being prepared or served. 
(c)  The city shall issue either a food manager's or food handler's permit annually to all persons engaged or employed in, around or about food establishments who have been duly qualified by written exam. 
(d)  A person may not operate a mobile food unit within the city. 
(Ord. No. 259, § 3, 8-26-2004) 
Sec. 46-14. - Application for permit; inspection; permit fees. 
(a)  Any person desiring to operate a food establishment must make a written application for a permit on forms provided by the regulatory authority. The application must contain the name and address of each applicant, the location and type of the proposed food establishment and the applicable fee. An incomplete application will not be accepted. Failure to provide all required information, or falsifying information required, may result in denial or revocation of the permit. Renewals of permits are required on an annual basis and the same information is required for a renewal permit as for an initial permit. 
(b)  Prior to the approval of an initial permit or the renewal of an existing permit, the regulatory authority shall inspect the proposed food establishment to determine compliance with state laws and rules and regulations of this article. A food establishment that does not comply with state laws and rules will be denied a permit or the renewal of a permit. 
(c)  A fee schedule will be established and reviewed periodically to ensure that the fee being charged sufficiently reimburses the regulatory authority for the cost to enforce this article. 
(Ord. No. 259, § 4, 8-26-2004) 
Sec. 46-15. - Review and approval of plans. 
(a)  Whenever a food establishment is constructed or extensively remodeled, and whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a food establishment, properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling or conversion shall be submitted to the city for review before the work is begun. Extensive remodeling means 20 percent or greater of the area of the food establishment is to be remodeled. The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, equipment arrangement, mechanical plans and construction of materials of work areas, and the type and model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities. The plans and specifications will be approved by the city if they meet the requirements of the rules adopted by this article. The approved plans and specifications must be followed in construction, remodeling or conversion. 
(b)  Failure to follow the approved plans and specifications will result in a permit denial, suspension, or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 259, § 5, 8-26-2004) 
Sec. 46-16. - Suspension of permit. 
(a)  The city may, without warning, notice, or hearing, suspend any permit to operate a food establishment if the operation of the food establishment constitutes an imminent hazard to public health. Suspension is effective upon service of the notice required by subsection (b) of this section. When a permit is suspended, food operations shall immediately cease. Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing within 20 days of receipt of a request for a hearing. 
(b)  Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit or the person in charge shall be notified in writing that the permit is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended and that an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the city by the holder of the permit within ten days. If no written request for hearing is filed within ten days, the suspension is sustained. The city may end the suspension at any time if the reasons for suspension no longer exist. 
(Ord. No. 259, § 6, 8-26-2004) 
Sec. 46-17. - Revocation of permit. 
(a)  The city may, after providing opportunity for a hearing, revoke a permit for serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of these rules or for interference with the city in the performance of its duties. Prior to revocation, the city shall notify the holder of the permit or the person in charge, in writing, of the reason for which the permit is subject to revocation and that the permit shall be revoked at the end of the ten days following service of such notice unless a written request for a hearing is filed with the city by the holder of the permit within such ten-day period. 
(b)  If no request for hearing is filed within the ten-day period, the revocation of the permit becomes final. 
(Ord. No. 259, § 7, 8-26-2004) 
Sec. 46-18. - Notices; hearings. 
(a)  A notice as required in these rules is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit or the person in charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the holder of the permit. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the regulatory authority (the city). 
(b)  The hearings provided for in these rules shall be conducted by the regulatory authority at a time and place designated by it. Based upon the recorded evidence of such hearing, the city shall make final findings, and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report of the hearing shall be furnished to the holder of the permit by the regulatory authority. 
(Ord. No. 259, § 8, 8-26-2004) 
Sec. 46-19. - Penalty; additional remedies. 
(a)  Any person who violates a provision of these rules and any person who is the permit holder of or otherwise operates a food service establishment that does not comply with the requirements of these rules and any responsible officer of that permit holder or those persons shall be fined not more than $2,000.00. 
(b)  The city may seek to enjoin violations of these rules. 
(Ord. No. 259, § 9, 8-26-2004) 
Secs. 46-20-46-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SMOKING 

Sec. 46-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Administrator means a member of the city staff appointed by the mayor, designated to administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
    Employee means any person who is employed by any employer for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, or is in a position that would lead one to believe that such person is so employed. 
    Employer means any person, partnership, corporation, association or other entity that employs one or more persons. 
    Enclosed means closed in by a roof and walls with appropriate openings for ingress and egress, but may not include areas commonly described as public lobbies. 
    Food establishment means any operation engaged in the preparation or sale of prepared ready-to-eat food, if such operation accounts for more than 50 percent of annual gross sales receipts. 
    Smoke or smoking means and includes the carrying or holding of a lighted pipe, cigar or cigarette of any kind, or any other lighted smoking equipment or device, and the lighting, emitting or exhaling of the smoke of a pipe, cigar or cigarette of any kind. 
(Ord. No. 163, § 1, 7-12-2001) 
Sec. 46-32. - Smoking prohibited in government buildings; signage. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he smokes or possesses a burning tobacco, weed or other plant product, or any lighted or burning pipe, cigar, cigarette of any kind, or smoking equipment or device, in any of the following: indoor or enclosed areas of any enclosed building or portion thereof owned, operated, and under the control of the city or any governmental entity. 
(b)  The administrator shall direct that a sign shall be posted conspicuous to ordinary public view, at or near each public entrance to each city building. The sign shall contain the words "No smoking except in designated areas, City of Helotes ordinance," the universal symbol for no smoking, or other language that clearly prohibits smoking. 
(Ord. No. 163, § 2, 7-12-2001) 
Sec. 46-33. - Smoking in food establishments. 
(a)  A food establishment which has indoor or enclosed dining areas shall provide separate indoor or enclosed dining areas for smoking and nonsmoking patrons. 
(b)  A nonsmoking area in a food establishment must: 
(1)  Be separated from the smoking area by a minimum of four feet of contiguous floor space, a partition, or a wall; 
(2)  Be situated so that air from the smoking area is not drawn into or across the nonsmoking area, or the smoking area shall be separately ventilated; 
(3)  Be clearly designated by appropriate signs visible to patrons within the dining area indicating that the area is designated nonsmoking; and 
(4)  Have ashtrays or other suitable containers for extinguishing smoking materials at the perimeter of the nonsmoking area. 
(c)  Each food establishment which has an indoor or enclosed dining area shall: 
(1)  Have and implement a written policy on smoking which conforms to this article; 
(2)  Make the policy available for inspection by employees; and 
(3)  Have signs, conspicuous to ordinary view, at each public entrance to the establishment indicating that nonsmoking seating is available. 
(d)  Non-dining areas of any food establishments affected by this section to which patrons have access, including, but not limited to, food order areas, food service areas and restrooms, shall be designated as nonsmoking areas. 
(e)  It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the food establishment is: 
(1)  An establishment which has indoor seating arrangements for less than ten patrons. 
(2)  An establishment which has more than 50 percent of its annual gross sales in alcoholic beverages. 
(3)  A physically separated bar area of a food products establishment otherwise regulated. 
The establishments covered above in subsections (e)(1) through (e)(3) of this section shall post a sign conspicuous to ordinary public view, at each public entrance to the establishment, which shall contain the words "this establishment does not provide for a nonsmoking section." 
(f)  A person commits an offense if he smokes or possesses a burning tobacco, weed, or other plant product, or any lighted or burning pipe, cigar or cigarette of any kind, or smoking device, in an area of a food establishment designated as nonsmoking. 
(Ord. No. 163, § 3, 7-12-2001) 
Sec. 46-34. - Reporting of violations not required. 
    This article does not require the owner, operator, employer, manager or any employee of an establishment to report a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 163, § 4, 7-12-2001) 
Sec. 46-35. - Penalty. 
    Any person, firm, corporation, agent or employee thereof who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be fined an amount not less than $25.00 nor more than $2,000.00. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 163, § 5, 7-12-2001) 
Chapter 50 - LAW ENFORCEMENT 
ARTICLE I. - POLICE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 50-1. - Office of marshal abolished. 
    The office of marshal in the city is hereby abolished and dispensed with. 
(Ord. No. 019B, § 1, 4-5-1984) 
Sec. 50-2. - Positions of chief of police, police officers and supplementary police officers created; appointment and term of office. 
    There is hereby created the position of chief of police, police officers and supplementary police officers. The chief of police and police officers shall be appointed by the city council. Supplementary police officers shall be appointed and/or relieved by the chief of police subject to city council approval. Such positions shall have no term of office, but shall serve at the will and pleasure of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 019B, § 2, 4-5-1984) 
Sec. 50-3. - Compensation of supplementary police officers; number; training. 
    Supplementary police officers shall serve at a wage set by the city council. This wage may be paid annually, in advance, at the discretion of the chief of police. The total number of supplementary police officers shall be set by a formal vote of the city council with a simple majority prevailing. Supplementary police officers must comply with the minimum training standards established by the Texas Commission on Law Enforcement Officers Standards and Education for Peace Officers. Prior to completion of this training they may function as a police officer only with a certified city peace officer present. 
(Ord. No. 019B, § 3, 4-5-1984) 
Sec. 50-4. - Employment status of police officers; holding other city office; powers and duties as peace officers. 
    All police officers shall hold no office in the city, as defined in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 22, but shall be an employee of the city; provided, however, that such police officers shall be peace officers as defined in Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 2.12, with all of the powers and duties conferred upon peace officers under the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 019B, § 4, 4-5-1984) 
Sec. 50-5. - Qualifications and residency of police officers. 
    All police officers shall hold a certificate as qualified law enforcement officers from the Texas Commission on Law Enforcement Officer Standards and Education as provided in V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 1701, unless serving under a temporary or probationary appointment as provided in said act. They may reside within or without the corporate limits of said city, as the city council may authorize and direct. 
(Ord. No. 019B, § 5, 4-5-1984) 
Chapter 54 - NATURAL RESOURCES 
ARTICLE I. - SAND, ROCK AND MINERAL EXTRACTION 

Sec. 54-1. - Applicability of uniform fire code. 
    For the purposes of this article, the 1997 Uniform Fire Code (hereinafter the "UFC") article 77 (entitled "Explosive Materials") and article 1, section 105 (entitled "Permits") is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference for all purposes. A copy of the UFC shall be maintained at city hall for public inspection during regular business hours. 
(Ord. No. 164, § 1, 7-26-2001) 
Sec. 54-2. - Purpose. 
    In order to promote the health, safety, and welfare of those who work or reside near extraction operations, and to protect air quality and the water resources of the city, the following regulations are applicable to extraction operations. 
(Ord. No. 164, § 2(120.01), 7-26-2001) 
Sec. 54-3. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the definitions ascribed to them by this section: 
    Administrator means a member of the city staff designated by the mayor to administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
    Blasting means the practice or occupation of extracting heavy masses of rock, or other materials imbedded in the ground, by means of explosives. 
    Extraction operation means the use of a lot or tract of land primarily for extraction of materials (including limestone, rock, sand, gravel, or soil, but not oil or natural gas) for any purpose other than excavation or grading necessary for the development of the lot or tract. 
    Extraction site means the location of materials or rock removal or extraction operations as delineated by a plat site plan or a certificate of occupancy. 
    Legal holiday means a holiday that is officially observed by the city by the closure of city offices. 
    UFC means the 1997 Uniform Fire Code. 
(Ord. No. 164, § 2(120.02), 7-26-2001) 
Sec. 54-4. - Scope. 
    This article shall apply, within the corporate limits of the city, to any activity that is related to the extraction or removing of rock or materials from the ground or any related activity. 
(Ord. No. 164, § 2(120.03), 7-26-2001) 
Sec. 54-5. - Blasting. 
    All blasting activity that falls within the scope of this article shall comply with the following provisions: 
(1)  Permit. 
a.  Required. Prior to any blasting activity or preparation for blasting activity at an extraction site, an appropriate blasting or explosives permit must be acquired from the administrator. 
b.  Rights granted; renewal. Each such blasting or explosives permit will authorize blasting for extraction of materials (i.e., rock, stone, etc.) only at the extraction site designated on the permit, and shall expire if not reviewed annually by the administrator. In order to renew a permit the permit holder shall submit a request in writing, and appropriate fee, to the administrator no later than 30 days prior to the expiration date of the permit 
c.  Fees. The fee for a blasting or explosive permit and for annual review of an issued permit shall be as prescribed in the most recent adopted fee schedule passed and approved by the City Council. The fee shall be non-refundable. 
d.  Application; approval or denial; appeals. The extraction site operator, or designated representative, may apply for an appropriate blasting or explosives permit in accordance with the following procedures: 
1.  The applicant shall submit a completed permit application form and fee as required by the regulations contained in the UFC, as adopted by the city council; 
2.  The administrator shall have 30 days in which to approve or deny the permit application; 
3.  Any party aggrieved by the denial of a permit or inaction by the administrator may appeal such decision or inaction to the city council, provided that such appeal is made in writing within 45 days of the date the initial permit application was submitted to the administrator; and 
4.  Upon receipt of the appeal notification, the mayor have the matter placed on the first available meeting of the city council and the council shall take the action on the matter at that meeting. 
(2)  Hours of operation. The hours during which excavation may take place by blasting or use of explosives shall be any time during the hours between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Blasting shall not occur on Saturdays, Sundays or legal holidays, unless required by applicable safety regulations. 
(3)  Regulatory compliance. All blasting operations located within an extraction site shall comply with all applicable local, state and federal regulations concerning industrial noise and dust levels as well as applicable drainage, water and air standards. 
(4)  Environmental protection. For extraction sites and other land uses located over the Edwards Recharge Zone all required approvals of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), or its successor agencies, must be obtained prior to initiating blasting or the removal of materials from the ground by means of explosives within the site. 
(5)  Storage and handling of explosives. 
a.  The storage area for explosives shall be clearly marked and identified on the premises and a security fence must be established at a distance of at least 25 feet from the containers in which explosive materials are to be stored. The security fence shall be at least eight feet in height and shall be made of chain link or other appropriate material. A lockable eight-foot gate shall be provided for access in and out of the security fence surrounding the storage area. The access gate for the explosives storage area must be kept locked at all times with an appropriate locking device or padlock. No keys to the locking device or padlock preventing access to the explosives storage area may be distributed by the quarry operator to any person other than those employees or subcontractors who have been trained and/or certified in the proper handling, storage, and use of explosive materials. As an alternative to the fencing requirement provided in this section, the quarry operator may use a solid steel storage container that has a lockable access point and that is capable of containing an accidental discharge or explosion of the explosive agents stored within the container. 
b.  The storage facility in which explosive materials are stored must be located at least 500 feet from any adjoining property line. 
(6)  Monitoring of blasting. Quarry operators shall be required to perform independent monitoring of blasting events to accumulate data with respect to the seismographic and shockwave effects of the blasting activity as required by federal and state law. The information generated in the form of reports or other data from this monitoring must be made available to the administrator within 72 hours from receipt by the owner/operator of a written request to review such information. The administrator shall honor and maintain the confidentiality of data submitted by quarry operators and identified as confidential data to the extent allowed by law. 
(7)  Safety standards. The quarry operator is responsible and required to comply with all applicable provisions of any federal or state law or applicable regulations promulgated by OSHA, MSHA, ATF, or any other executive agency of the federal or state government relating to the use, handling, storage, or detonation of explosives. 
(8)  Inspections. 
a.  The holder of a quarry blasting permit shall make the quarry site available to the administrator for inspection at all times during regular business hours. 
b.  All records relating to blasting activities will be made available to the administrator during normal business hours within 72 hours after such request is made. 
(Ord. No. 164, § 2(120.11), 7-26-2001; Ord. No. 394, § 4, 2-12-2009) 
Sec. 54-6. - Control of adverse effects. 
(a)  General requirements . Extraction activities and blasting shall be conducted according to this section in addition to the requirements of section 54-5(3). 
(b)  Noise limits. For the purpose of this article, the noise generated by the use of explosives in excavation activities shall be measured by the airblast created thereby. 
(1)  Airblast shall not exceed the maximum limits listed below at the location of any dwelling, public building, school, church, or community or institutional building outside the permit area, except as provided in subsection (f) of this section. 
Lower Frequency Limit of Measuring System, in Hz 
(plus-minus 3 dB) Maximum Level (dB) 0.1 Hz or lower-flat response* 134 peak 2 Hz or lower-flat response 133 peak 6 Hz or lower-flat response 129 peak C-weighted-slow response* 105 peak dB(C) *Only when approved by the administrator.  
(2)  The administrator shall be responsible for maintaining and reviewing the measuring of airblast levels in subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
(c)  Monitoring requirement. 
(1)  The operator shall conduct periodic monitoring to ensure compliance with the airblast standards. Airblast measurement of blasts must be performed to the extent required by section 54-5(6). 
(2)  The measuring systems shall have an upper-end flat-frequency response of at least 200 Hz. 
(d)  Flyrock. Flyrock traveling in the air or along the ground shall not be cast from the blasting site beyond the area under the control of the operator. 
(e)  Ground vibration. 
(1)  Generally. In all blasting operations, except as otherwise authorized in subsection (f) of this section, the maximum ground vibration shall not exceed the values illustrated in Figure 1 (Bureau of Mines chart), which has been omitted from this Code. The maximum ground vibration for protected structures listed in subsection (e)(2)a of this section shall be established in accordance with the maximum peak particle velocity limits as shown below. 
(2)  Maximum peak particle velocity. 
a.  The maximum ground vibration shall not exceed the following limits at the location of any dwelling, public building, school, church, or community or institutional building outside the area under the control of the operator. 
b.  A seismographic record including both particle velocity and vibration-frequency levels shall be maintained for each blast to the extent required by section 54-5(6). 
(f)  The maximum airblast and ground-vibration standards of this section shall not apply at the following locations: 
(1)  At structures owned by the permittee and not leased to another person. 
(2)  At structures owned by the permittee and leased to another person, if a written waiver by the lessee has been obtained. 
(Ord. No. 164, § 2(120.12), 7-26-2001) 
Sec. 54-7. - Burning of hazardous waste prohibited. 
    No biomedical waste or other hazardous waste or materials may be burned or otherwise used as a fuel in conjunction with any quarry activity. 
(Ord. No. 164, § 2(120.21), 7-26-2001) 
Sec. 54-8. - Beneficial reuse concept plan (BRCP). 
(a)  Extraction activities and facilities shall be required to submit a beneficial reuse concept plan (BRCP) prior to initiating extraction of raw materials, which shall provide the following: 
(1)  Address drainage from the pit area, taking into consideration opportunities for positive drainage and/or retention, recharge potential, and flood control; 
(2)  Address the extraction site's relationship to rights-of-way for arterial streets so that street grades may be anticipated; 
(3)  Demonstrate planning to address remediation of existing soil or water contamination; 
(4)  Provide a tentative schedule for commencement of beneficial reuse construction or remedial actions upon ceasing active extraction operations; 
(5)  Project, to the extent possible, the anticipated life of the extraction operation; and 
(6)  Provide a preliminary plan indicating potential future land use of the extraction site. 
(b)  The BRCP shall be updated on an annual basis. 
(Ord. No. 164, § 2(120.31), 7-26-2001) 
Sec. 54-9. - Protection of public health, safety and welfare. 
    Extraction operations which fall within the scope of this article and which include all related uses shall abide by the public health, safety, and welfare safeguards of this article. Owners and/or operators of such activities shall: 
(1)  Comply with applicable federal and state water quality standards; 
(2)  Upon request of the administrator, provide, to the city's satisfaction, documentation evidencing the characterization, handling, and disposal of any industrial waste generated by the activity. Documentation which will satisfy the characterization inquiry includes process knowledge literature and/or waste analysis records; 
(3)  Upon request of the administrator, independent of the Federal Community Right to Know and Emergency Planning Act, provide copies of material safety data sheets (MSDS) for material maintained, stored, or used on the site. The materials subject to this section are those materials whose properties for volatility, flammability, explosive potential, corrosiveness, radioactivity, or other toxic or hazardous property allow them to be listed in the North American Emergency Response Guidebook, current edition, as amended; and 
(4)  Upon request of the City of San Antonio Fire Department and/or SAWS, provide a site plan, when the City of San Antonio Fire Department and/or SAWS determines a site plan is necessary to an independent environmental assessment or other inquiry pertinent to the public health, safety, or welfare. 
(Ord. No. 164, § 2(120.41), 7-26-2001) 
Sec. 54-10. - Enforcement; inspection. 
(a)  The administrator or other designated city employee may enforce this article. 
(b)  Extraction operations shall be available for inspection by the city during regular operating hours. 
(Ord. No. 164, § 2(120.42), 7-26-2001) 
Sec. 54-11. - Penalties. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  Violation of any provision of this article is a Class C misdemeanor and upon conviction may be punished by a fine not to exceed $2,000.00 per occurrence. 
(2)  Except for blasting violations which are covered by subsection (b) below, the mayor may direct the city attorney to immediately seek additional remedies at law or in equity to prevent a violation of this section. 
(b)  Blasting. In addition to the criminal penalties noted above: 
(1)  The mayor may direct the city attorney to immediately seek additional remedies at law or in equity to prevent blasting by any party who does not have a blasting permit. 
(2)  The mayor may direct the city attorney to seek to revoke a blasting permit pursuant to the provisions of the UFC where the permit holder has demonstrated a pattern of violations of this article. A pattern of violations is established upon three convictions in municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 164, § 2(120.43), 7-26-2001) 
Chapter 58 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - WEAPONS 

Sec. 58-1. - Discharge of firearms. 
(a)  Title. This section shall be known as "The Firearms Discharge Ordinance of the City of Helotes." 
(b)  Definitions. As used in this section: 
    Firearm means any instrument used in the propulsion of pellet, shot, slug, or bullet by the action of gunpowder exploded or released within it. 
(c)  Unlawful discharge. It shall be unlawful to discharge a firearm within or into the corporate limits of the city. 
(d)  Exceptions. The following discharges are exempted from subsection (c) of this section: 
(1)  Discharge by law enforcement officers in the lawful performance of their duties; and 
(2)  Discharge for lawful defense/protection of one's self, family, or property provided that the individual who discharges a firearm under such circumstance contacts the city police department and files a report with said department within four hours of discharging said firearm. 
(e)  Penalty. Violation of this section by any person shall constitute a Class C misdemeanor and upon conviction a violator shall be subject to a fine of not less than $1.00 and not more than $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 246, §§ 1-5, 10-23-2003) 
Secs. 58-2-58-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ALARMS AND ALARM SYSTEMS 
DIVISION 1. - FALSE ALARMS 

Sec. 58-11. - Purpose. 
    The city finds that false alarms have adversely affected the city. Public safety is jeopardized by taking police patrol units out of general service, public peace is disturbed by audible alarms, and public funds are wasted. Therefore, the city establishes this division to make it unlawful for a person to sound a false alarm. 
(Ord. No. 76, § 1, 11-14-1991) 
Sec. 58-12. - Violations. 
    The city deems it a violation of this division if three false alarms have been sounded in the previous 12 month period, the person responsible for the alarm system does not meet the responsibilities listed in section 58-13, or a person knowingly causes a false alarm to be activated. Violations are subject to penalties identified within section 58-14. 
(Ord. No. 76, § 2, 11-14-1991; Ord. No. 19-05, § 1, 3-14-2019 ) 
Sec. 58-13. - Responsibilities of occupant. 
    The occupant of the property on which the alarm is located is the responsible person and shall: 
(1)  Keep the alarm system in repair and adjustment. Maintain the premises equipped in a manner that will minimize false alarm notifications and ensure proper operation of the alarm system. 
(2)  Supervise family members, employees, and guests to preclude inadvertent or deliberate false alarms. 
(3)  Ensure, when the alarm system is audible beyond the occupant's property, that the system automatically discontinues sounding an audible alarm after a total of 30 minutes, to include automatic resets. After 30 minutes of audible alarm, the audible alarm must shut down until manually reset. The following is explanatory comment: 
a.  The alarm system may sound for five minutes and then automatically reset to sound an alarm an additional five times for five minutes each in the unattended mode. After a sixth alarm sounding, the system must shut itself down until reset manually. 
b.  The alarm system may sound for ten minutes and then automatically reset to sound an alarm an additional three times for ten minutes each in the unattended mode. After a third alarm sounding, the system must shut itself down until reset manually. 
(4)  Respond or cause a representative to respond within one hour when notified by the city to repair or inactive a malfunctioning alarm system, to provide access to the premises, or to provide security for the premises. 
(5)  Not manually activate an alarm system for any reason other than occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report. 
(6)  Utilize relaying intermediaries for residential alarm systems of all classification types. 
(7)  Utilize relaying intermediaries for commercial alarm systems of all classification types, except holdup alarms. 
(8)  Not operate, cause to be operated or allow the operation of an alarm system: 
a.  Without being in compliance with the procedures and provision of this division; 
b.  That automatically dials the 911 emergency communications system; or 
c.  Without due regard in maintaining such a system in a manner that minimizes false alarm notifications. 
(Ord. No. 76, § 3, 11-14-1991; Ord. No. 19-05, § 1, 3-14-2019 ) 
Sec. 58-14. - Penalty. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, leases, or is in control of a property or structure equipped with an alarm system to permit or fail to prevent the occurrence of more than three false alarm notifications within any preceding 12-month period. 
(1)  Each violation of this division, as determined by the chief of police, shall be punished by a fine prescribed within the municipal fee schedule and shall be in accordance with False Alarm Penalties, V.T.C.A., § 214.207, LGC as indicated below: 
a.  If the property or structure has had three or more false alarm notifications in the preceding 12-month period, the fee is $50.00 per false alarm occurrence. 
b.  If the property or structure has had five or more false alarm notifications in the preceding 12-month period, the fee is $75.00 per false alarm occurrence. 
c.  If the property or structure has had eight or more false alarm notifications in the preceding 12-month period, the fee is $100.00 per false alarm occurrence. 
(2)  Penalty enforcement will commence once the receipt of eight or more false alarms have been reported in the proceeding 12-month period. 
a.  Issuance of a citation. A member of the police or code enforcement departments in response to a false alarm notification may issue a citation to a person he or she reasonably believes to be in violation of this division. The citation shall name the alarm subscriber or to any general addressee at the alarm site address if the member of the police or code enforcement departments is unable to verify the identity of the alarm subscriber. 
b.  Content of citation. The citation issued shall contain the following information: 
i.  The date of the false alarm or alarm notification(s); 
ii.  The address of the alarm site, and, if the alarm site is a multi-unit facility, the identification of the individual facility the false alarm occurred; and 
iii.  The date and time the alleged violator is required to appear in the Municipal Court. The alleged violator shall be served a copy of the citation. 
c.  Service of citation. Service of the citation shall be complete upon either of the following occurrences: 
i.  Personal delivery of the citation to the alarm subscriber or to any general addressee (with a person of suitable age and discretion) at the alarm site address if the police or code enforcement department is unable to contact the alarm subscriber. 
ii.  Mailing a copy of the citation addressed to the alarm subscriber sent certified mail, return receipt requested and a copy by regular mail. 
(3)  Any person found guilty of violating this division shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 76, § 4, 11-14-1991; Ord. No. 503, § 1, 4-11-2013; Ord. No. 19-05, § 1, 3-14-2019 ) 
Sec. 58-15. - Documentation and notification. 
    The chief of police shall ensure that the occurrence of a false alarm is documented and notification sent to any person who shall violate any provisions contained in this division. 
(1)  Alarm dispatch records. 
a.  Emergency personnel responding to a dispatch resulting from an alarm system notification shall, whenever possible, record such information as necessary to permit the chief to maintain records, including, but not limited to, the following information: 
i.  Identification of the owner(s) or occupant(s). 
ii.  Location of the alarm site. 
iii.  Time dispatched, arrived, and cleared. 
iv.  Time of day and date. 
v.  Name of representative on the premises if any. 
b.  Responding personnel shall indicate on the dispatch record whether the notification was caused by a false alarm. 
(Ord. No. 76, § 5, 11-14-1991; Ord. No. 19-05, § 1, 3-14-2019 ) 
Sec. 58-16. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm or alarm system means a device or system that transmits a signal intended to summon the police of the city to respond. The term includes an alarm that emits an audible signal on the exterior of a structure. It does not include an alarm designed to alert only the inhabitants within a premises. The term does not include an alarm installed on a vehicle. 
    False alarm. A false alarm has occurred when the city police, within 30 minutes of the alarm notification, have determined from an inspection of the interior or exterior of the premises that the alarm was false. 
(Ord. No. 76, § 6, 11-14-1991) 
Secs. 58-17-58-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MINORS 
DIVISION 1. - CURFEW 

Sec. 58-31. - Definitions. 
    Emergency shall include, but not be limited to, fire, natural disaster, an automobile accident, or obtaining immediate medical care for another person. 
    Guardian shall mean any person to whom custody of a minor has been given by a court order. 
    Minor shall mean any person under 17 years of age and over nine years of age. 
    Parent shall mean a person who is the natural or adoptive parent of a person. As used herein, "parent" shall also include a court-appointed guardian or other person 18 years of age or older, authorized by the parent, by a court order, or by the court-appointed guardian to have the care and custody of a person. 
    Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and shops. 
(Ord. No. 17-04, § 1, 4-27-2017) 
Sec 58-32. - Offenses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a minor to purposefully remain, walk, run, stand, drive, or ride about in or upon any public place in the City of Helotes between the hours of 12:00 a.m. (midnight) and 6:00 a.m. on a Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, or Saturday. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a minor to purposefully remain, walk, run, stand, drive, or ride about in or upon any public place in the City of Helotes during school days between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. on a Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, or Friday. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for the parent having legal custody of a minor to knowingly allow or permit the minor to be in violation of the curfew imposed in subsections (a) and (b) hereof. 
(Ord. No. 17-04, § 1, 4-27-2017) 
Sec. 58-33. - Defenses. 
    It is a defense to prosecution under section 58-32 of this division that: 
(a)  The minor was accompanied by his or her parent; 
(b)  The minor was accompanied by another adult approved by the parents; 
(c)  The minor was on an emergency errand; 
(d)  The minor was attending a school, government-sponsored, or religious activity or is going to or coming from a school, religious, or government-sponsored activity without detour or stop; 
(e)  The minor was engaged in lawful employment or volunteer work at a recognized charity institution or other organization or is going to or coming directly from such activity without detour or stop; 
(f)  The minor was on the sidewalk of the place where such minor resides or on the sidewalk of a place where the minor has permission from his/her parent or guardian to be or on the sidewalk of a next-door neighbor not communicating an objection to the police officer; 
(g)  The minor was completing an errand directed by his or her parent; 
(h)  The minor was in a motor vehicle involved in intrastate or interstate transportation or transportation for which passage through the curfew area is the most direct route; 
(i)  The minor was married or had been married or had the disabilities of minority removed in accordance with V.T.C.A., Family Code ch. 31; and 
(j)  With respect to subsection 58-32(b) of this division, that the offense occurred during the scheduled vacation of or on a holiday observed by the school in which the minor is enrolled; or that the minor has graduated from high school or received a high school equivalency certificate; or that the minor has permission to be absent from school or be in a public place from an authorized school official. In the case of a minor being educated in a home school, a parent shall be deemed a school official. 
(Ord. No. 17-04, § 1, 4-27-2017) 
Sec. 58-34. - Enforcement procedure. 
(a)  Any police officer, upon finding a minor in violation of section 58-32 of this division, shall determine the name and address of the minor and the name and address of his or her parent(s) or guardian(s). The minor's parent(s) or guardian(s) shall be notified and required to pick up the minor, and a warning notice shall be issued to the minor and the parent(s) or guardian(s) of the minor advising them of the fact that the minor was found in violation of this division and soliciting cooperation in the future. 
(b)  Any police officer, upon finding a minor in violation of section 58-32 of this division, who has previously been found in violation and issued a warning, as provided for in subsection (a) herein, shall transfer the case to proper authorities charged with handling such cases under the provisions of V.T.C.A., Family Code tit. 3. In addition, a complaint will be filed against the parent(s) or guardian(s) in the municipal court for violation of section 58-32. The police department shall file all necessary legal papers, supply all necessary documentation, and provide necessary testimony, as required, for pursuing violations of this division by either the minor or by any parent or guardian. 
(Ord. No. 17-04, § 1, 4-27-2017) 
Sec. 58-35. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any minor violating the provisions of this Division shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor, as defined in the Texas Penal Code, and shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Family Code tit. 3. 
(b)  A parent or guardian of a minor violating the provisions of this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, which shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00. 
(c)  In assessing punishment for a parent, guardian, or minor, the municipal court judges are encouraged to consider the community service program. 
(Ord. No. 17-04, § 1, 4-27-2017) 
Sec. 58-36. - Triennial review. 
(a)  Within three years of the adoption, modification, or renewal of this division, the chief of police shall review the division, prepare a written report, and make recommendations to the city council concerning its effectiveness and continuing need. The report shall review the division or order's effects on the community and on problems the division or order was intended to remedy. 
(b)  After presentation of the chief's report to the city council, as required by subsection (a) of this section, the city shall: 
(1)  Make a determination on the need to continue the division or order; and 
(2)  Abolish, continue, or modify the division. 
(Ord. No. 102A, § 1, 2-22-2001; Ord. No. 279, § 1, 6-9-2005; Ord. No. 354, § 1, 04-24-08; Ord. No. 447, § 1, 4-28-2011; Ord. No. 521, § 1, 5-8-2014; Ord. No. 17-04, § 1, 4-27-2017) 
Secs. 58-37-58-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SYNTHETIC SUBSTANCES AND DEVICES 

Sec. 58-50. - Prohibition. 
    The use, possession, sale, ingestion, or smoking of illegal smoking products and ingestion devices, as hereinafter defined, are prohibited within the city limits of the City of Helotes. The violation of any section provided for herein shall be a strict liability offense which does not require the showing of a culpable mental state. 
(Ord. No. 446, § 1, 03-24-2011) 
Sec. 58-51. - Definitions. 
    Illegal smoking product shall mean any substance, whether described as tobacco, herbs, incense, spice, or any blend thereof, regardless of whether the substance is marketed for the purpose of being smoked, which includes any one or more of the following chemicals: 
(a)  Salvia divinorum or salvinorin A; all parts of the plant presently classified botanically as Salvia divinorum , whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, any extract from any part of such plant, and every compound, manufacture, salts derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds or extracts; 
(b)  2-[(1R, 3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl}-5-(2-methylocatan-2-yl)phenol (also known as CP47,497) and homologues; 
(c)  (6aS,10aS)-9-(Hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a,7,10,10a-tetrahydrobenzo[c]chromen-1-ol (also known as HU-211 or Dexanabinol); 
(d)  1-Pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-018); or 
(e)  Butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-073). 
    Ingestion device shall mean equipment, a product, or material that is used or intended for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing an illegal smoking product into the human body, including, but not limited to: 
(a)  A metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipe with or without a screen, permanent screen, hashish head, or punctured metal bowl; 
(b)  A water pipe; 
(c)  A carburetion tube or device; 
(d)  A smoking or carburetion mask; 
(e)  A chamber pipe; 
(f)  A carburetor pipe; 
(g)  An electric pipe; 
(h)  An air-driven pipe; 
(i)  A chillum; 
(j)  A bong; or 
(k)  An ice pipe or chiller. 
    Person shall mean an individual, corporation, partnership, wholesaler, retailer, or any licensed or unlicensed business. 
(Ord. No. 446, § 1, 03-24-2011) 
Sec. 58-52. - Sale, offer, gift, display, or possession. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use, possess, purchase, barter, give, publicly display, sell, or offer for sale any illegal smoking product. 
(Ord. No. 446, § 1, 03-24-2011) 
Sec. 58-53. - Use or possession of ingestion devices. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use, or possess with intent to use, an ingestion device to inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body an illegal smoking product. 
(b)  It shall not be an offense under subsection (a) of this section for any person to use or possess an ingestion device without the presence (including, but not limited to, trace amounts and/or residue) of an illegal smoking product. 
(c)  It shall not be an offense under subsection (a) of this section for any person to offer for sale or sell an ingestion device in a retail establishment, provided such ingestion device does not contain the presence (including, but not limited to, trace amounts and/or residue) of an illegal smoking product. 
(Ord. No. 446, § 1, 03-24-2011) 
Sec. 58-54. - Penalty. 
    That any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions or terms of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $2,000.00 for each offense, with each and every day of violation deemed to constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 446, § 1, 03-24-2011) 
Secs. 58-55-58-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RESELLING OF TICKETS 

Sec. 58-60. - Definitions. 
(a)  In this section, the following words or terms shall have the following meaning: 
    Event shall mean an event of public entertainment or amusement. 
    Event sponsor shall mean a person (including, but not limited to, an owner, lessee, operator, promoter, or manager of an event or an event site; an organizer of an athletic contest; a team participating in a sporting event; a performer of a concert; a presenter of a program, presentation, lecture, service, or video presentation; a circus or rodeo; an organizer of a religious event; and/or a person or entity holding or owning, whether directly or indirectly, the legal possessory right or interest to use or occupy a main facility) who owns or holds, whether directly or contractually through a delegated license or sublicense from the owner or holder of such right, as distinguished from a ticket purchaser, the right to issue tickets or other admission licenses to the event. 
    Person shall include any natural being and any association, partnership, entity, or corporation of any type recognized by state or federal law. 
    Resell shall mean to sell or offer to sell a ticket or other admission license to an event after such ticket or other admission license has been issued by the event sponsor. 
    Ticket scalping shall mean the unauthorized reselling of a ticket or other admission license in violation of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 453, § 1, 8-11-2011) 
Sec. 58-61. - Prohibition. 
(a)  A person may not resell a ticket or other admission license at a price exceeding its face value to an event on public property or a public street within the city. A person may resell a ticket or other admission license if the person is within a structure for which a certificate of occupancy has been issued or within a private home. 
(b)  It is an exception to the application of subsection (a) above that the person is the event sponsor or is authorized to resell the ticket or other admission license by the event sponsor. Nothing herein shall restrict an event sponsor or person authorized by the event sponsor from selling, reselling, or offering to sell or resell a ticket or other admission license to an event at any price. 
(Ord. No. 453, § 1, 8-11-2011) 
Sec. 58-62. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of misdemeanor and punished by the imposition of a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00. Each day that a violation is allowed to continue shall be a separate offense and punished by the imposition of a separate fine. The violation of this article shall be considered a strict liability offense which does not require proof of a culpable mental state. 
(Ord. No. 453, § 1, 8-11-2011) 
Chapter 62 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS 

Sec. 62-1. - License required; hours of operation; fair notice and going on posted property. 
(a)  It shall hereafter be unlawful for any solicitors or canvassers of orders for services or merchandise, or for peddlers, itinerant merchants and transient vendors of merchandise, or for distributors of advertising handbills, leaflets, or papers, to go in or upon the premises of any private residence in the city without a valid license issued by the city, or go thereon with a license prior to 10:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m., or at any time on Sundays, unless previously requested to do so by the owner or occupants of said private residence, for the purpose of soliciting orders for the furnishing of any service or for the sale of goods, services, wares and merchandise, or for the purpose of disposing of, contracting for, or peddling the same, or to distribute any printed or written advertising handbills, leaflets, or papers. 
(b)  Fair notice by any resident may be given by any means reasonably designed to advise a person that commercial solicitation is not welcome. The city may prepare a current list of addresses where the residents have indicated to the city that commercial solicitation is not welcome (this list is referred to as the "do not disturb list"). The do not disturb list should be kept current to reflect the addition or relocation of any residents. The city administrator, or other designee shall be responsible for adopting and implementing procedures for the maintenance of the do not disturb list. A solicitor is presumed to have received fair notice that solicitation is not welcome at a residence: 
(1)  If the address of that residence appears on the do-not-disturb list received by that person at the time the permit is issued; or 
(2)  Where the resident has a sign on their property that says "No Solicitors", "No Soliciting", "No Trespassing", or similar language and such sign is plainly legible at the principal entrance to the residence and it is affixed near the doorbell, door knob, latch of the outer door (or gate), or in the yard of the principal entrance. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 1, 12-11-1997; Ord. No. 18-08 , § 1, 6-14-2018) 
Sec. 62-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Canvasser or solicitor means any individual, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck, or other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for sale of personal property of any nature whatsoever to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or advertising matter as to such service or whether he is collecting advance payments on such sales or not; providing that such definition shall include any person who, for himself, or for another person, firm or corporation, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, vehicle or other place within the city for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and/or advertising matter and taking orders for such services or sales for future performance or delivery. 
    Interstate commerce means soliciting, selling or taking orders for or offering to take orders for any goods, wares, merchandise, photographs, newspapers or magazines, or subscriptions of newspapers or magazines, which, at the time the order is taken, are in any foreign country, any federal territory or district, or any state other than Texas, or will be produced in any foreign country, any federal territory or district, or any state other than Texas, and shipped or introduced into this city in the fulfillment of such orders. 
    Peddler includes any person, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle, or any type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting any goods, wares and merchandise whatever, offering and exposing the same for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or who, without traveling from place to place, shall sell or offer the same for sale from any vehicle or conveyance, and further provided that one who solicits orders and as a separate transaction makes deliveries to purchasers as part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a peddler, subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
    Person includes the singular and plural and shall also mean and include any person, firm, corporation, association, club, co-partnership or society, or any other organization. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 2, 12-11-1997) 
Sec. 62-3. - Application for license. 
    Applicants for licenses under this chapter shall make written application to the city secretary for a license. Such application shall show name and address of the applicant, the name and address of the person, firm or corporation, if any, and the description of the activity sought to be licensed. Two recent photographs of the applicants shall be provided, one to be attached to the license issued by the chief of police and one to remain in the files of the police department. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 3, 12-11-1997) 
Sec. 62-4. - Investigation of applicant for license. 
    Upon receipt of such application, the original shall be referred to the chief of police, who shall cause such investigation of the applicant's business moral character to be made as he deems necessary, if any, for the protection of the public good. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 4, 12-11-1997) 
Sec. 62-5. - License fee. 
    The fee for licenses to cover the cost of investigation shall be as prescribed in the most recent adopted fee schedule passed and approved by the city council. The fee shall be nonrefundable. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 5, 12-11-1997; Ord. No. 394. § 5, 2-12-2009) 
Sec. 62-6. - License card. 
    The chief of police shall issue to each licensee, at the time of delivery of his license, a card which shall contain the words "City of Helotes, PEDDLER, CANVASSER OR SOLICITOR'S LICENSE" and the period for which the license is issued and the number of the license, in letters and figures easily discernible. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 6, 12-11-1997) 
Sec. 62-7. - Exhibition of license. 
    Such license shall, during the time such licensee is engaged in soliciting, canvassing or peddling, be worn constantly by the licensee in front of his outer garment in such a way as to be conspicuous. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 7, 12-11-1997) 
Sec. 62-8. - Enforcement. 
    It shall be the duty of any police officer of the city to require any person seen soliciting or canvassing, and who is not known by such officer to be duly licensed, or who is not wearing the required license, to produce his peddler's, canvasser's or solicitor's license and to enforce the provisions of this chapter against any person found to be violating the same. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 8, 12-11-1997) 
Sec. 62-9. - Records. 
    The chief of police shall report to the city administrator all convictions of violations of this chapter. The chief of police shall maintain a record of each license issued and record the reports of violation therein. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 9, 12-11-1997) 
Sec. 62-10. - Revocation of license. 
    Licenses issued under provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the chief of police after notice, for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the application for license; 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in the course of carrying on his business as solicitor or as canvasser, or peddler, or itinerant merchant, or transient vendor of merchandise; 
(3)  Any violation of this chapter; 
(4)  Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; 
(5)  Refusal to comply with fair notice provision; or 
(6)  Conducting the business of soliciting, canvassing, or peddling in an unlawful manner, or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace, or to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public, including but not limited to the refusal to cease solicitation and leave the property after being told by resident that the resident is not interested in the solicitor's product or service. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 10, 12-11-1997; Ord. No. 18-08 , § 1, 6-14-2018) 
Sec. 62-11. - Exemptions; requirements for charitable and nonprofit organizations. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to sales made to dealers by commercial travelers or sales agents in the usual course of business nor sales under authority and by order of law. Further, the license fee shall not apply to charitable or nonprofit organizations which would otherwise be regulated by this chapter if, at the time an application is made for such license, the said charitable or nonprofit organization submits satisfactory evidence to city staff of its charitable or nonprofit status. Solicitors of funds or services or property for charitable or nonprofit purposes may be required to file a current organization financial statement with the application. Where such charitable or nonprofit organizations are required to obtain a peddler's, canvasser's or solicitor's license, its application for a license shall be processed in the same manner as a license which is processed under sections 62-3 and 62-4. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 11, 12-11-1997) 
Sec. 62-12. - Registration of persons engaged in interstate commerce. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter pertaining to license fees shall not apply to persons engaged in interstate commerce as that term is herein defined; provided, however, that it shall be unlawful for persons engaged in interstate commerce to go from house to house or place to place in the city without having first registered with the city giving the following information: 
(1)  Name, home address and local address, if any, of the registrant. 
(2)  Name, and address of the person, firm or corporation, if any, that he represents or for whom or through whom orders are to be solicited or cleared. 
(3)  Nature of the articles or things which are to be sold or for which orders are to be solicited. 
(4)  Whether the registrant, upon any sale or order, shall demand or receive or accept payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery. 
(5)  Period of time which the registrant wishes to solicit or sell in the city. 
(b)  The registrant, at the time of the registration, as herein provided for, shall submit, for inspection of the police department, written proof of his identity, which may be in the form of an automobile operator's license, identification letter or card issued to the registrant by the person, firm or corporation for whom or through whom orders are to be solicited or cleared, and pay registration fee of $10.00. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 12, 12-11-1997) 
Sec. 62-13. - Expiration of license. 
    All licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire at 6:00 p.m. on the 120th day following the date of issuance. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 13, 12-11-1997) 
Sec. 62-14. - Penalty. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this chapter or failing to observe any provisions hereof shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00, and each and every day or fraction of a day during which this chapter, or any part thereof, shall be violated, shall be deemed a separate offense and punishable as such. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 14, 12-11-1997) 
Chapter 66 - SIGNS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 66-1. - Short title. 
    This chapter along with its amendments shall be known as the "sign regulations" of the city. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 1(150.101), 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 391, § 1, 1-22-2009) 
Sec. 66-2. - Purpose; intent; jurisdiction. 
    The provisions of this chapter are made to establish reasonable and objective regulation of signs within the city, and in the public interest for the reasons that follow: 
(1)  To protect property values within the city's jurisdiction; 
(2)  To preserve the beauty and unique character of the city; 
(3)  To promote a positive city image reflecting order, harmony, and pride; 
(4)  To encourage signs that are compatible with the architectural style, characteristics and scale of the building and to encourage signs that are compatible with adjacent buildings and businesses; 
(5)  To promote a healthy relationship among the business, residential and cultural communities and strengthen the economic stability within the city; 
(6)  To protect the general public from property damage and injury which may be caused by faulty or uncontrolled construction and erection of signs within the city's jurisdiction; and 
(7)  To protect the public safety, welfare, convenience and enjoyment of travel, and the free flow of traffic within the city. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 1(150.102), 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 391, § 1, 1-22-2009) 
Sec. 66-3. - Scope. 
    This chapter shall apply to all signs which are visible to the public within the city's corporate and extraterritorial jurisdiction, pursuant to the authority provided in V.T.C.A, Local Government Code ch. 216. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 1(150.103), 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 391, § 1, 1-22-2009) 
Sec. 66-4. - Applicability. 
(a)  Generally. Except as specifically provided otherwise herein, beginning the date of effect of this chapter, no sign shall be displayed, located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted, replaced, or altered except in conformance with the provisions of this chapter and after issuance of a sign permit by the city. 
(b)  Existing signs. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply retroactively to any sign legally installed prior to the date of effect of this chapter except as provided for in the maintenance provisions of section 66-78. 
(c)  Severability. Should any article, section, part, paragraph, sentence, phrase, clause, or word of this chapter, or any appendix thereof, for any reason be held illegal, inoperative, or invalid or if any exception to or limitation upon any general provisions herein continues to be held unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective, the remainder shall, nevertheless, stand effective and valid as if it had been enacted and ordained without the portion held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 1(150.104), 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 391, § 1, 1-22-2009) 
Sec. 66-5. - Liability. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed as relieving or limiting in any way the responsibility or liability of any person erecting or owning any sign from personal injury or property damage resulting from the placing of the sign, or resulting from the negligence or willful acts of such person, or such person's agents, employees or workers, in the design, construction, maintenance, repair or removal of any sign erected in accordance with a permit issued under the provisions of this chapter. Nor shall it be construed as imposing upon the city or its officers or employees, or the planning and zoning commission (P&Z), any responsibility or liability by reason of the approval of any signs, materials, and devices under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 1(150.106), 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 391, § 1, 1-22-2009) 
Secs. 66-6-66-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS 

Sec. 66-11. - Design review guidelines. 
(a)  Harmony with city scale. Sign location, configuration, design, materials and colors should be harmonious with the hill country setting and the rural scale of the city. 
(b)  Materials. Sign materials shall be predominantly natural, such as native stone, rustic woods, or decorative metal. Other materials may be substituted when in the opinion of the P&Z the materials meet the design criteria of the city. 
(c)  Architectural harmony. The sign and its supporting structure shall be in architectural harmony with the surrounding structures. 
(d)  Colors. Natural colors are encouraged. 
(e)  Landscaping. Landscaping is required and shall be designed to harmonize with the building and surrounding natural landforms and native plants, as reflected in specific requirements contained herein. 
(f)  Reflective surfaces. Glare-producing surfaces on signs are not allowed. 
(g)  Lighting . Unless otherwise noted herein, all lighting of signs shall be indirect or internally illuminated lighting, as defined herein, and all floodlights shall be shielded. No sign shall be illuminated, in whole or part, where the illumination is intermittent or varies in color or intensity from time to time. The use of searchlights is prohibited. LED lighting is permitted. 
(h)  Moving parts. No sign shall contain any moving parts, other than time and temperature. 
(i)  Logos and logograms. Graphic symbols, used to represent or identify a business entity or organization, are permitted to be displayed on signs only under the following conditions: 
(1)  The design and materials comprising the logo shall be consistent with the guidelines in this section. 
(2)  Logos shall be consistent with those generally utilized by the applicant on business cards, stationary, and other similar uses. 
(3)  Changeable copy is allowed on all signage. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 1(150.201), 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 391, § 1, 1-22-2009) 
Sec. 66-12. - Wind pressure, dead load, lighting, and building code requirements. 
    Any sign shall be designed and constructed to withstand wind pressures and received dead loads as required in the International Building Code (IBC) and shall be designed and constructed in conformance with all applicable provisions of the IBC as adopted by the city. Lighting or illumination of any signs shall, in addition to complying with the requirements of this chapter, comply with all applicable regulations of lighting, illumination and electrical installation. Note: Refer to all current building, electrical, lighting, and landscaping regulations. The building inspector will check for code compliance after sign installation. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 1(150.202), 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 391, § 1, 1-22-2009) 
Secs. 66-13-66-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXEMPTED AND RESTRICTED SIGNS 

Sec. 66-21. - Exempted signs. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following signs: 
(1)  Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of erection when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or similar metal; 
(2)  Official government notices and notices posted by governmental officers in the performance of their duties, and governmental signs to control traffic or for other regulatory purposes such as neighborhood crime watch areas, or to identify streets, or to warn of danger; 
(3)  Signs to control traffic within a gated community that were placed within the gated community at the direction of its developer or homeowners' association; 
(4)  In/on window signs listing hours of operation, open or closed status, or restaurant menu signs if the sign does not exceed two square feet; 
(5)  Works of fine art which in no way identify or advertise a product or business; 
(6)  Temporary decorations or displays, when they are clearly incidental to and are customarily and commonly associated any national, local or religious holiday or celebration; provided that such decorations are maintained in an attractive condition and do not constitute a fire, traffic or pedestrian hazard; 
(7)  Temporary or permanent signs erected by public utility companies or construction companies to warn of danger or hazardous conditions, including signs indicating the presence of underground cables, gas lines and similar devices; 
(8)  Signs displayed on trucks, buses, trailers or other vehicles which are being operated in the normal course of business, indicating the name of the owner, business and location (e.g., moving vans, delivery trucks, rental trucks and trailers and the like); provided, that the primary purpose of the vehicles is not for display of signs, and provided that they are parked in areas appropriate to their use as vehicles normally used in the course of business and are in operable condition, and carry a current and valid license plate and state inspection tag; and 
(9)  Signs or tablets when constructed of metal or other permanent material and associated with nationally recognized nonprofit, religious or civic organizations such as the Rotary Club or Kiwanis Club, which are to identify the local area chartered group. Signs are limited in size to a total of eight square feet and to a height of eight feet with no lighting permitted. Design, size, and location shall require prior approval of the P&Z, based on criteria as outlined in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 1(150.301), 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 391, § 1, 1-22-2009) 
Sec. 66-22. - Restrictions. 
(a)  Generally. The only signs permitted in the city are those which meet the requirements of this chapter, and amendments thereto. 
(b)  Location requirements. 
(1)  Obstruction of exits. No sign shall obstruct any door or fire escape of any building. 
(2)  Traffic hazards. No sign shall be erected in such a way as to present any traffic hazard, to obstruct or distract the vision of motorists or to impede progress of pedestrians on sidewalks or walkways. 
(3)  Construction over other property. No sign shall be erected which projects over any property other than that owned or leased by the applicant. In no case shall any portion of a sign or its supporting structure be erected on or extend over public property or right-of-way. 
(4)  Proximity to other signs. The P&Z shall review each sign request to include the effect on neighboring properties as well as the proximity to other signs. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 1(150.302), 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 391, § 1, 1-22-2009) 
Secs. 66-23-66-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROHIBITIONS 

Sec. 66-31. - Prohibited signs. 
    The following signs are prohibited: 
(1)  Pole signs. 
(2)  Roof signs. 
(3)  Off-premises signs, except as specifically permitted herein. 
(4)  New off-premises signs. From, and after the effective date, no new construction permit shall be issued or written permission granted for the erection of an off-premises changeable electronic variable message sign (CEVMS) or the conversion of an existing non-CEVMS off-premises sign to a CEVMS, within the sign code application area. 
(5)  Changeable electronic variable message signs. From, and after the effective date, no CEVMS shall be allowed within the sign code application area. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 1(150.401), 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 357, § 2, 5-22-08; Ord. No. 391, § 1, 1-22-2009) 
Sec. 66-32. - Prohibited acts. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the following acts: 
(1)  Post, paint, or otherwise exhibit any commercial advertisement, poster, bill or other notice or sign on any property not owned or controlled by him, without the permission of the person owning or controlling such property. 
(2)  Tear down, remove, or otherwise interfere with any notice, sign, advertisement, bill or poster erected by another, unless the same was placed or maintained on the property of the person removing the same, without permission previously given. 
(3)  Paint, mark or write on, or post or otherwise affix, any handbill or sign to or upon any sidewalk, right-of-way, crosswalk, curb, curbstone, streetlamp post, hydrant, tree, shrub, tree stake or guard, electric light or power or telephone, wire pole or wire appurtenance thereof or upon any fixture of the fire alarm or police system or upon any lighting system, public bridge, or lifesaving equipment, street sign or traffic sign. Any handbill or sign found posted or otherwise affixed upon any public property contrary to the provisions of this section may be removed by the police department or other department or individual so designated by the city. The person responsible for any such illegal posting shall be liable for the cost incurred in the removal thereof. The code enforcement officer is authorized to effect the collection of such cost. 
(4)  Place or cause to be placed anywhere in the city any poster, placard, handbill, or advertising material on any vehicle, or in any location, in such a manner that the same may reasonably be expected to be blown about by the wind. It shall be presumed that the person's name that appears on such poster, placard, handbill or advertising material has knowledge of the location and manner that such item was placed. It shall be further presumed that, if a large number of such items are found scattered about and being blown about by the wind, the items were placed in such a manner that they might reasonably be expected to be blown about by the wind. 
(5)  Erect, maintain, or paint any sign or other message or outdoor advertising upon a tree, rock, or other natural feature. 
(6)  Erect within the city limits, or the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, any sign or outdoor advertising without having prior thereto obtained from the city a permit therefor, except as specifically exempted by the provisions of this chapter. 
(7)  Remove, alter, change, or obscure, without authorization of the code enforcement officer, any official tag or identification, which was placed on any outdoor advertising material. 
(8)  Violate any provision contained in this chapter within the corporate limits of the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(9)  Fail to remove an abandoned sign and sign structure, if not conforming, within 30 days of the date that the event the sign advertises has passed or business that the sign advertises has been discontinued. 
(10)  Raise or elevate the finish ground level where a sign is located or is proposed to be located in any manner that would have the effect of causing the average grade (where the aforementioned sign is located or proposed to be located) to be higher than the finish ground level of the lot. Commentary: The purpose of this prohibition is to prevent any attempted circumvention of the height restriction set out in this chapter by placing a sign on an artificially created mound of earthen material. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 1(150.402), 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 391, § 1, 1-22-2009) 
Secs. 66-33-66-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SIGN CLASSIFICATIONS; PERMIT 

Sec. 66-41. - Generally. 
(a)  This article concerns those types of permanent and temporary signs requiring a sign application permit under the provisions of this chapter. This article further includes the purpose of each sign type, size, height, number, location, design and landscaping requirements, and special provisions for each type of sign. 
(b)  Below is a listing of sign categories allowed under the provisions of this chapter: 
(1)  Residential signs (section 66-42); 
(2)  Residential subdivision entry signs (section 66-43); 
(3)  Banners, temporary and site development signs (section 66-44); 
(4)  Traffic control and directional amenity signs (section 66-45); 
(5)  Freestanding real estate signs (section 66-46); 
(6)  Political signs (section 66-47); 
(7)  Public institution, school, public athletic facility, non and not-for-profit, and church signs (section 66-48); 
(8)  Monument signs: single-business use only (section 66-49); 
(9)  Monument signs: commercial multi-tenant shopping center, business park or office complex (section 66-50); 
(10)  Joint directory signs for a multi-tenant center, business park or building or office complex (section 66-50); 
(11)  Wall, projecting and hanging signs, and signs in/on windows/doors (section 66-51); 
(12)  Miscellaneous signs (section 66-52): 
a.  Service station price per unit; 
b.  Menu boards; 
c.  Flags; 
d.  Canopy; 
e.  Joint directory commercial (pedestrian scale); 
f.  ATM machines; 
g.  Creative signs. 
(c)  All uses shall be required to display the city designated street address of the use in a location visible from the closest street and/or public access. The copy height of the address shall be not less than four inches and no greater than 18 inches. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 1(150.501), 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 326, § 1, 11-30-06; Ord. No. 391, § 1, 1-22-2009) 
Sec. 66-42. - Residential signs. 
    No residence shall display a sign advertising a commercial enterprise other than: 
(a)  A "for rent," "for lease," or "for sale" sign that advertises the sale or lease of the residential property on which the sign is placed in accordance with regulations contained in section 66-46 regarding freestanding real estate signs; and 
(b)  Garage sale signage that advertises a garage or estate sale on residential property in accordance with regulations contained in section 66-53. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 1(150.502), 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 391, § 1, 1-22-2009; Ord. No. 469, § 1, 06-14-2012) 
Sec. 66-43. - Residential subdivision entry signs. 
    Residential subdivision entry signs shall be regulated as follows: 
(1)  Purpose. Identify a residential subdivision. 
(2)  Size. Surface area shall not exceed 145 square feet. 
(3)  Height. No part of the sign shall extend above eight feet from average grade. 
(4)  Number. Limited to one sign for each entry to the subdivision. 
(5)  Location. Subdivision entry. 
(6)  Design. In accordance with the criteria in section 66-11. 
(7)  Lighting. Indirect or internally illuminated. 
(8)  Landscaping. 
a.  A landscaped area shall be required at the base of the sign and for each sign face shall extend no less than two feet from the base, subject to the granting of an exemption by the P&Z if justified by unusual site conditions; 
b.  All landscaped areas shall be maintained in a neat, clean and healthy condition; and 
c.  A plan showing the landscaping must be presented to the P&Z by the applicant at the time of application. 
(9)  Duration. So long as the residential subdivision is in existence. 
(10)  Special provisions. The surface area shall not contain any type of advertising. 
(11)  Permit. A permit must be obtained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter prior to installation. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 1(150.503), 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 391, § 1, 1-22-2009; Ord. No. 570, § 1, 6-11-2015) 
Sec. 66-44. - Banners, temporary signs and site development signs. 
(a)  Banners. Banners shall be regulated as follows: 
(1)  Purpose. To advertise a special event, other than a recurring event, which occurs on a regular basis. 
(2)  Size. Banner signs used to identify a special event shall not exceed 64 square feet. 
(3)  Height. No part of a banner shall extend above 12 feet from average grade in the immediate area of the banner. 
(4)  Number. One per lot, unless within a multi-tenant retail center, in which case two banners are allowed per lot. Multi-tenant retail center applicants must receive approval from the property manager or owner prior to applying for a banner permit. 
(5)  Location. Parallel or perpendicular to the public right-of-way and located on private property or on public rights-of-way. 
(6)  Design. Banners shall be maintained in a well-kept manner and shall have a professional appearance. 
(7)  Lighting. None allowed. 
(8)  Landscaping. None required. 
(9)  Duration. A maximum time period of up to 30 calendar days each quarter of the calendar year per business or organization. A new permit must be obtained each quarter. 
(10)  Special provisions. Two separate banners are allowed for unique special events, as determined by the city administrator, with a single banner maximum size of 150 square feet and a maximum combined total size for two banners of 250 square feet. Banners permitted under this provision shall require only one permit for both banners. 
(11)  Permit. A banner permit is required for all banners placed parallel or perpendicular to the public right-of-way. Section 66-44 shall not apply to special event banners placed within private property and not parallel or perpendicular to the public right-of-way or along property lines, provided said special event banner does not exceed 150 square feet in size. The permit shall state the 30 days that the banner shall be displayed, including the beginning and ending dates, and describe the location where the banner will be placed. The banner must be removed within 24 hours of the expired time period. 
(b)  Temporary/portable signs. Temporary/portable signs shall be regulated as follows: 
(1)  Purpose. To advertise a newly opened, or soon-to-be open, business. 
(2)  Size. Temporary/portable signs used to identify soon-to-be or newly opened businesses shall not exceed 64 square feet. 
(3)  Height. No part of a temporary/portable sign shall extend above 12 feet from average grade in the immediate area of the sign. 
(4)  Number. One per lot. One temporary/portable sign may be installed in conjunction with a banner sign on the same lot. 
(5)  Location. Parallel or perpendicular to the public right-of-way. 
(6)  Design. Temporary/portable signs shall be maintained in a well-kept manner and shall have a professional appearance. 
(7)  Lighting. None allowed. 
(8)  Landscaping. None required. 
(9)  Duration. A maximum of 90 calendar days from the day an applicant submits a signage application to city staff for planning and zoning commission and/or city council review and approval. This provides time for the design, review, approval, construction, and installation of a permanent sign. 
(10)  Special provisions. A one-time extension of 30 calendar days may be granted by the development services department. 
(11)  Permit. A permit is required. The permit shall state the beginning and ending dates that the temporary/portable sign shall be installed and removed and describe the location where the sign will be placed. A temporary sign permit governed by this Section shall not be renewable. 
(c)  Site development signs. Site development signs shall be regulated as follows: 
(1)  Purpose. Signs with the intended use of identifying or indicating construction and development projects. 
(2)  Size. The size of the site development sign shall be a maximum of 40 square feet. 
(3)  Height. No part of the sign shall extend above eight feet from average grade in the immediate area of the sign. 
(4)  Number. One sign per lot or tract of land. 
(5)  Location. On premises and located within the setback lines of a lot or tract, subject to the approval of the development services department. 
(6)  Design. Signs shall be maintained in a well-kept manner and shall have a professional appearance. 
(7)  Lighting. None allowed. 
(8)  Landscaping. None required. 
(9)  Duration. Site development signs shall not be erected before the submittal to city staff of a plan for development and shall be removed when the certificate of occupancy is issued by the city or at the end of one year, whichever occurs first. 
(10)  Special provisions. The information permitted on site development signs is limited to the project name, project address, general contractor, architect, project rendering, and project description. At the end of one year, a new permit must be obtained according to the provisions of this chapter. 
(11)  Permit. A permit is required. The permit shall state that the site development sign shall be removed upon the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or within one year of the date of issuance, whichever occurs first. The permit shall describe the location where the sign will be placed. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 1(150.504), 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 391, § 1, 1-22-2009; Ord. No. 444, § 1, 2-24-2011; Ord. No. 469, § 1, 6-14-2012; Ord. No. 536, § 1, 8-14-2014) 
Sec. 66-45. - Traffic control signs. 
(a)  Traffic control signs upon private property. This shall not apply to an individual residential lot so long as the sign is not less than 50 feet from the right-of-way or 25 feet from an adjoining lot. Traffic control signs upon private property other than uniform traffic control devices (see definition of "MUTCD" in section 66-91) upon private property shall be regulated as follows: 
(1)  Purpose. To relieve vehicular and pedestrian traffic congestion and promote the safe and expedient flow and parking of traffic on private property. 
(2)  Size. All vehicular traffic control signs shall not exceed three square feet. 
(3)  Height. No part of the sign shall extend above ten feet from average grade. 
(4)  Number. The number of traffic control signs shall be determined during the review process; consideration shall be given to acreage of the property and the layout of internal streets, buildings and parking in order to determine number of signs necessary. 
(5)  Location. Shall be determined by the P&Z, with a letter of approval from the chief of police for any sign placed adjacent to a public street or way. Please reference the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(6)  Design. In accordance with criteria in section 66-11. 
(7)  Lighting. Indirect or internally illuminated. 
(8)  Landscaping. None required. 
(9)  Duration. So long as the signs fulfill the intended purpose. 
(10)  Special provisions. Shall be as follows: 
a.  All traffic control signs shall be of a uniform design approved by the P&Z; 
b.  No individual sign shall be approved unless it conforms to an overall sign program for the entire site, submitted by the applicant; and 
c.  No sign shall contain any advertising, but may identify the owner by name. 
(11)  Permit. A sign permit is required in order to place traffic control signs on private property. In addition to a sign permit the applicant shall submit a private property traffic control plan to the P&Z as required by section 66-71(e). 
(b)  Traffic control and directional amenity signs in master-planned residential developments. Traffic control signs other than uniform traffic control devices (see definition of "MUTCD" in section 66-91) shall be regulated in master-planned residential developments as follows: 
(1)  Purpose. To relieve vehicular and pedestrian traffic congestion and promote the safe and expedient flow and parking of traffic in a master-planned residential development. 
(2)  Size. All vehicular traffic control signs shall comply with subsection (a) of this section. All directional amenity signs shall not exceed 20 square feet. 
(3)  Height. No part of the sign shall extend above ten feet from average grade. 
(4)  Number. The number of traffic control or directional amenity signs shall be determined during the review process; consideration shall be given to acreage of the property and the layout of internal streets, buildings and parking in order to determine number of signs necessary. 
(5)  Location. Shall be determined by the P&Z, with a letter of approval from the chief of police for any sign placed adjacent to a public street or way. 
(6)  Design. In accordance with criteria in section 66-11. 
(7)  Lighting. Indirect or internally illuminated. None required. 
(8)  Landscaping. None required. 
(9)  Duration. So long as the signs fulfill the intended purpose. 
(10)  Special provisions. Shall be as follows: 
a.  All traffic control signs shall be of a uniform design approved by the P&Z; 
b.  No individual sign shall be approved unless it conforms to an overall sign program for the entire site, submitted by the applicant; and 
c.  No sign shall contain any advertising, but may identify the owner by name. 
(11)  Permit. A sign permit is required in order to place traffic control signs or directional amenity signs in master planned residential developments on private property. In addition to a sign permit the applicant shall submit a traffic control plan to the P&Z as required in section 66-71(e). 
(Ord. No. 249, § 1(150.505), 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 391, § 1, 1-22-2009) 
Sec. 66-46. - Freestanding real estate signs. 
    Freestanding real estate sign use shall be regulated as follows: 
(1)  Purpose. To identify real estate for sale or for lease. 
(2)  Size. Size for freestanding real estate signs shall be as follows: 
a.  Residential. A sign advertising residential property shall not be larger than six square feet (including all riders) in total surface area; 
b.  Commercial. A sign advertising commercial property or a residential development shall not be larger than 40 square feet and may not be more than ten feet in width. 
(3)  Height. No part of a sign advertising commercial or residential property shall extend above 12 feet from average grade. 
(4)  Number. One sign per each public street the lot or tract abuts. 
(5)  Location. A real estate sign must be located within the property boundary of a lot where they do not obstruct either vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
(6)  Design . No specific design standard. 
(7)  Lighting. None allowed. 
(8)  Landscaping. None required. 
(9)  Duration. Signs shall be removed within 15 days after the property has been sold (date of closing) or leased. 
(10)  Special provisions. None. 
(11)  Permit. No permit shall be required if the sign meets the criteria in this section. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 1(150.506), 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 391, § 1, 1-22-2009) 
Sec. 66-47. - Political signs. 
    Political signs on private property shall be regulated as follows: 
(1)  Purpose. Signs with the intended use of denoting a political campaign headquarters, party affiliation, or advertising of a political figure or cause. 
(2)  Size. The size of the on-premises sign shall be limited to a maximum of 36 square feet per sign face. 
(3)  Height. No part of the sign shall extend above eight feet from the existing grade. 
(4)  Number. There is no limit on the number of signs placed on a parcel. 
(5)  Location. A political sign may be placed, erected or maintained on private property with the permission of the property owner: 
a.  A political sign must be located within the property boundary of a lot provided it does not obstruct either vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
b.  Prohibited locations. No off-premises sign shall be posted or otherwise affixed to or upon any sidewalk, crosswalk, curbstone, street lamp, post, hydrant, tree, shrub, tree stake or guard, railroad trestle, electric light or power, telephone or telegraph wire pole, or wire appurtenance thereof or upon any fixture of the fire alarm or police system or upon any lighting system, public bridge, drinking fountain, or lifesaving equipment, street sign or traffic sign or any other structure within the right-of-way of public streets or highway within the city. 
(6)  Design. Signs shall be maintained in a well-kept manner and shall have a professional appearance. 
(7)  Lighting. None. 
(8)  Landscaping. Not applicable. 
(9)  Special provisions. None. 
(10)  Duration. 
a.  On private property. No political sign may be erected and maintained more than 90 days prior to the date of the pertinent election. All signs are to be removed within 72 hours after the election. In the event that the election is a primary or run-off, the run-off candidates for the later election may leave their signs in place to be removed within 72 hours after the general or run-off election. 
b.  At polling place. Reference Chapter 30 Elections. 
(11)  Permit fee. No sign permit is required for political signs. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 1(150.507), 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 391, § 1, 1-22-2009; Ord. No. 536, § 1. 8-14-2014) 
Sec. 66-48. - Public institution, school, public athletic facility, non and not-for-profit, and church signs. 
    Public institution, school, public athletic facility, non- and not-for-profit, and church signs shall be regulated as follows: 
(1)  Purpose. To identify a public institution, school, athletic facility, non and not-for-profit, or church and to display current factual information about activities on premises. 
(2)  Size. Follow size requirements as outlined in this chapter for the particular sign type used. 
(3)  Height. Follow height requirements as outlined in this chapter for the particular sign type used. 
(4)  Number. One sign per facility. If the facility fronts on two streets a sign is permitted for each street on which the facility fronts. 
(5)  Location. 
a.  On the premises of the institution, adjacent to the vehicular street that the building abuts, subject to the approval of the P&Z. 
b.  Wall signs perpendicular to, hung from, or attached to a projecting structural element of the exterior wall of the institution, adjacent to the street, parking lot or major pedestrian walkway which the building abuts. 
(6)  Design. In accordance with the criteria in section 66-11. Changeable copy allowed. 
(7)  Lighting. Indirect or internally illuminated 
(8)  Landscaping. Shall be as follows: 
a.  A landscaped area shall extend a minimum of two feet in all directions around the base of the sign, subject to the granting of an exemption by the P&Z if justified by unusual site conditions; 
b.  All landscaped areas shall be maintained in a healthy, neat and clean condition; 
c.  Any unhealthy or dead landscaping materials shall be replaced with comparable materials; and 
d.  A plan showing the landscaping must be submitted to the P&Z by the applicant. 
(9)  Duration . So long as the institution is operating. 
(10)  Special provisions. None. 
(11)  Permit. A permit must be obtained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter prior to installation. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 1(150.508), 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 391, § 1, 1-22-2009) 
Sec. 66-49. - Commercial signs: single-business use (monument-type). 
(a)  Commentary. A single business or office may display monument-type signage. Such signs must be submitted to the P&Z for review and approval prior to installation. 
(b)  Driveway entrance signs (monument type). 
(1)  Purpose. To identify the name of a single business or office located on a lot or tract. 
(2)  Size . The surface area of the sign shall not exceed 84 square feet, including the sign face, frame, and mounting hardware. 
(3)  Height. No part of the sign shall extend above eight feet from average grade, including a base which is not less than 18 inches above the average grade. 
(4)  Number. One sign for each street frontage on which the building abuts. 
(5)  Location. On premises of the business or office and adjacent to major traffic way which the building abuts subject to the required clear vision area. 
(6)  Design. Reference Chapter 98 Zoning, Article IX Architectural Review by Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council, section 98-253, subsection (f) signage. 
(7)  Lighting. Indirect or internally illuminated. 
(8)  Landscaping. Shall be as follows: 
a.  A landscaped area shall extend a minimum of two feet from each sign face around the base of the sign subject to the granting of an exception by the P&Z if justified by unusual site conditions; 
b.  All landscaped areas shall be maintained in a healthy, neat and clean condition; 
c.  Any unhealthy or dead landscaping materials shall be replaced. 
(9)  Duration . The sign shall be permitted so long as the center or office is open for business. 
(10)  Special provisions . None. 
(11)  Permit. A permit must be obtained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter prior to installation. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 1(150.509), 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 391, § 1, 1-22-2009; Ord. No. 536, § 1, 8-14-2014; Ord. No. 18-13 , § 2, 7-12-2018) 
Sec. 66-50. - Commercial signs: multi-tenant shopping center, business park or office complex (monument-type). 
(a)  Commentary. A multi-tenant shopping center, business park or office complex may display monument-type signage. Such signs must be submitted to the P&Z for review and approval prior to installation and shall be regulated as follows. 
(b)  Regulations. Multi-tenant monument type signs for a multi-tenant shopping center, business park or office complex shall be regulated as follows: 
(1)  Purpose. To list tenants within a multi-tenant building and to guide the public to the individual tenant within the building or complex. 
(2)  Size. Not more than 145 square feet, including sign face, framing, and mounting hardware. 
(3)  Height. No part of the sign shall extend above 12 feet from average grade, including a base which is not less than 18 inches above the average grade provided, however, that a sign located on a lot that has frontage on Bandera Road shall not extend above 15 feet from average grade, including a base which is not less than 18 inches above the average grade. 
(4)  Number. One sign for each street frontage on which the building abuts. Proposals for additional multi-tenant signs may be approved at the discretion of the P&Z; the proposal shall conform to the other provisions of this section. 
(5)  Location. On premises of the multi-tenant building and adjacent to major traffic-way which the building abuts. 
(6)  Design. Reference Chapter 98 Zoning, Article IX Architectural Review by Planning and Zoning Commission, section 98-253, subsection (f) signage. Sign content shall be limited to appropriate information necessary to identify the business and to carry out the normally accepted activities for a business of its type. The multi-tenant monument sign design should contain the street number where it is located, but the street number may be placed on the sign frame or face. The base of the multi-tenant monument sign shall have a minimum height of 18 inches above average grade and be in a landscaped setting, and any design shall be shown not to create a traffic hazard. Changeable copy allowed. 
(7)  Lighting. Indirect or internally illuminated. 
(8)  Landscaping. 
a.  A landscaped area shall extend a minimum of two feet from each face around the base of the sign subject to the granting of an exception by the P&Z if justified by unusual site conditions; 
b.  All landscaped areas shall be maintained in a neat, clean and healthy condition; and 
c.  Any unhealthy or dead landscaping materials shall be replaced. 
(9)  Duration. The sign shall be permitted so long as the center or office is open for business. 
(10)  Special provisions. Must submit a master sign plan in accordance with section 66-71(c). Further, no business may advertise on both a multi-tenant sign and a single business use sign on the same platted lot. 
(11)  Permit. A permit and master sign plan approval must be obtained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter prior to installation. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 1(150.510), 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 391, § 1, 1-22-2009; Ord. No. 536, § 1, 8-14-2014) 
Sec. 66-51. - Commercial signs: projecting, wall and hanging, or in or on windows. 
(a)  Commentary. In addition to the monument signage authorized for multi-tenant shopping centers in section 66-50, or the monument signage authorized for single business use in section 66-49, individual businesses within a multi-tenant shopping center or office complex or single businesses may also elect to have one of the following signs per street or pedestrian way which the building faces or abuts, with a maximum of two such signs. Such signs must be submitted to the P&Z for review and approval prior to installation. 
(b)  Wall signs. Wall signs by single businesses or an individual business in a multi-tenant shopping center, office complex or business park shall be regulated as follows: 
(1)  Purpose. To identify a business or organization. 
(2)  Size. One square foot per linear foot of building or unit facade to which it is attached; a maximum of 100 square feet. A minimum area of ten square feet will be allowed if a business has insufficient footage. The size of a multi-paneled sign shall be determined by dividing the maximum size allowed by the number of panels. 
(3)  Height. The top of the sign shall be below the lower roofline and at a height no greater than 20 feet above the ground immediately adjacent to the sign. 
(4)  Number. One sign per street or pedestrian way which the building faces or abuts with a maximum of two signs, subject to review by the P&Z. 
(5)  Location. All wall signs shall be installed flat against the wall of a building and shall not extend from the wall more than 12 inches. 
(6)  Design. Reference Chapter 98 Zoning, Article IX Architectural Review by Planning and Zoning Commission, section 98-253, subsection (f) signage. Sign content shall be limited to appropriate information necessary to identify the business and to carry out the normally accepted activities for a business of its type. 
(7)  Lighting. Indirect, internally illuminated, or neon. 
(8)  Landscaping. Not applicable. 
(9)  Duration. The sign shall be permitted so long as the business or office is open for business. 
(10)  Special provisions. Shall be as follows: 
a.  A business or organization having a wall, projecting, or hanging sign is not excluded from participating in a multi-tenant commercial sign. 
b.  Businesses or organizations not having exterior public entrances are subject to the provisions of the multi-tenant commercial sign for multi-tenant building, in section 66-50. 
c.  An individual business with a basement entrance with no calculable frontage may have one sign with a maximum area of six square feet. 
(11)  Permit. A permit and master sign plan approval must be obtained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter prior to installation. 
(c)  Commercial signs: projecting and hanging signs. Hanging commercial signs may be used by single businesses or an individual business in a multi-tenant shopping center, office complex or business park and shall be regulated as follows: 
(1)  Purpose. To identify a business or organization. 
(2)  Size. A maximum area of 24 square feet. 
(3)  Height. No part of the sign shall extend below eight feet from the average grade nor shall it extend above the lower roofline of the building to which it is attached. 
(4)  Number. One sign per street or pedestrian way which the building faces or abuts, as determined by the code enforcement officer, with a maximum of two signs, subject to review by the P&Z. 
(5)  Location. Oriented generally perpendicular to the front of the business or to a parking area abutting the business. 
(6)  Design/message. Reference Chapter 98 Zoning, Article IX Architectural Review by Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council, section 98-253, subsection (f) signage. 
(7)  Lighting. Indirect, internally illuminated, or neon. 
(8)  Landscaping . Not applicable. 
(9)  Duration. The sign shall be permitted so long as the business or office is open for business. 
(10)  Special provisions. Must hang from a structural element of the exterior wall awning or overhang. 
(11)  Permit. A permit must be obtained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter prior to installation. If applicable, a master sign plan must be approved prior to installation. 
(d)  Commercial signs in/on windows or doors. Commercial signs in/on windows or doors may be used by single-businesses or an individual business in a multi-tenant shopping center and shall be regulated as follows: 
(1)  Purpose. To identify a business or organization as the occupant of the space on the other side of the window or door or to advertise the same business or organization. 
(2)  Height. No part of the sign shall extend above 12 feet from the average grade, unless a greater height is necessary to center the sign in the window or on the door. 
(3)  Number. Maximum of eight signs allowed. Window or door signs used for the address, hours of operation, method of payment, professional association, security company, governmental notices, and open or closed status are excluded from the maximum number limit. 
(4)  Location. In/on the window/door and entirely within the perimeter of the window/door. 
(5)  Design/message. Reference Chapter 98 Zoning, Article IX Architectural Review by Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council, section 98-253, subsection (f) signage. 
(6)  Lighting. None allowed, except on signage displaying open or closed status of business or organization. 
(7)  Landscaping. Not applicable. 
(8)  Duration. The sign shall be permitted so long as the business or office is in operation. 
(9)  Special provisions. None. 
(10)  Permit. No permit is required for an in/on window signage. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 1(150.511), 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 391, § 1, 1-22-2009; Ord. No. 536, § 1, 8-14-2014; Ord. No. 582, § 1, 1-14-2016; Ord. No. 18-13 , § 1, 7-12-2018) 
Sec. 66-52. - Miscellaneous signs. 
(a)  Service stations price-per-unit-volume change panels. 
(1)  Purpose. To advise consumers of the price per gallon, liter or other unit of measure of gasoline, diesel, propane or other fuel that may be used to propel vehicles registered to travel on public roads and highways. 
(2)  Size. A maximum size of two square feet per numbered or lettered panel. . 
(3)  Height. May not exceed the height authorized for monument signs. 
(4)  Number. Up to four price-per-unit-volume change panel signs for fuel on each street the service station fronts. 
(5)  Location. Located on the monument sign authorized for the service station. 
(6)  Design. The sign may state the grade of fuel and price per unit volume for such fuel. Changeable copy allowed. 
(7)  Lighting. Indirect, internally illuminated, or neon. 
(8)  Landscaping. Not applicable. 
(9)  Duration. So long as the service station is in operation. 
(10)  Special provisions. None. 
(11)  Permit. A permit must be obtained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter prior to installation. 
(b)  Menu boards. 
(1)  Purpose. To advise consumers of the price of menu items at drive-through restaurants. 
(2)  Size. A maximum total size signs of 60 square feet (total for one or for two signs). 
(3)  Height . No part of the sign shall extend above eight feet from average grade. 
(4)  Number. Up to two menu signs per restaurant. 
(5)  Location. Menu signs shall be placed at or near drive-through lanes so that the signs can be read by drive-through customers, do not pose a traffic hazard, and are not readily visible from the street on which the restaurant fronts. 
(6)  Design. The sign may provide the name of the restaurant, the names and prices of the menu items available, and a picture of the menu item. Changeable copy allowed. 
(7)  Lighting. Indirect, internally illuminated, or neon. 
(8)  Landscaping. No landscaping is required. 
(9)  Duration. The sign shall be permitted so long as the restaurant is open for business. 
(10)  Special provisions. None. 
(11)  Permit. A permit must be obtained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter prior to installation. 
(c)  Flags. 
(1)  Purpose. This subsection regulates the display of flags by businesses. Municipal activities are exempt from this subsection. 
(2)  Size. The maximum size is 40 square feet. A business or corporate flag may not be larger than a federal, state, county or city flag that is displayed on the property. 
(3)  Height. The maximum height of the flagpole shall not extend above 30 feet from average grade. 
(4)  Number. The business may display one business (or corporate), city, county or national flag. The United States flag or a state flag shall not be subject to a limit number. 
(5)  Location. Flagpoles should be located in settings of meaningful open space as approved by the P&Z. 
(6)  Design. Flagpoles and surrounding space shall be maintained as to present a pleasing appearance. 
(7)  Lighting. Indirect. 
(8)  Landscaping. None required. 
(9)  Duration. A flag shall be permitted so long as the business is open. 
(10)  Special provisions. The city council may, by declaration, allow displays of specific flags as it deems appropriate on special occasions. 
(11)  Permit. A permit must be obtained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter prior to installation to fly a flag other than the flag of a nation located in North America or a state flag. 
(d)  Canopy signs. 
(1)  Purpose. To identify a business or organization. 
(2)  Size. Not more than 64 square feet total. 
(3)  Height. Must be flush with the canopy. 
(4)  Number. One per lot or not more than three that total less than 64 square feet. 
(5)  Location. On the canopy and not extending from it horizontally or vertically. 
(6)  Design. Must be approved by P&Z. 
(7)  Lighting. Indirect. 
(8)  Landscaping. Not applicable. 
(9)  Duration. So long as the business is in operation. 
(10)  Permit. A permit shall not be issued unless the sign design is approved by the P&Z. 
(e)  Joint directory signs (pedestrian scale). Joint directory commercial signs for a multi-tenant shopping center or office complex shall be regulated as follows: 
(1)  Purpose. To list all tenants within a multi-tenant building and to guide the pedestrian to the individual tenant within the building. 
(2)  Size. One square foot per tenant within the multi-tenant building or center. 
(3)  Height. No part of the sign shall extend above 12 feet from average grade. 
(4)  Number. One sign per tenant on the major pedestrian way which the building abuts. If a building has two or more major public entrances or distinct, separate pedestrian ways, proposals for additional joint-business directories may be approved at the discretion of the P&Z; the proposal shall conform to the other provisions of this section. 
(5)  Location. Attached to the building at the major pedestrian entrance or if freestanding at a site where the sign is not clearly visible from a public street. 
(6)  Design. In accordance with criteria in section 66-11. Changeable copy allowed. 
(7)  Lighting. Indirect, internally illuminated, or neon. 
(8)  Landscaping. Shall be in accordance with the landscaping provisions of section 66-50. 
(9)  Duration. The sign shall be permitted so long as the center or office is open for business. 
(10)  Special provisions. None. 
(11)  Permit. A permit and master sign plan approval must be obtained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter prior to installation. 
(f)  ATM signs. ATM signage must be approved by the P&Z prior to installation. 
(g)  Creative signs. 
(1)  Purpose. This section establishes standards and procedures for the design, review, and approval of creative signs in the city. Creative signs that meet the character and intent of the city's comprehensive plan and the guidelines of this chapter may be permitted upon approval of the city council. The purposes of this creative program are to: 
a.  Encourage signs of unique design and those that exhibit a high degree of thoughtfulness, imagination, inventiveness, and spirit; and 
b.  Provide a process for the application of sign regulations in ways that will allow creatively-designed signs that make a positive visual contribution to the overall image of the city while mitigating the impacts of large or unusually designed signs. 
(2)  Applicability. An applicant may request approval of a sign permit under this creative sign program to authorize on-site signs that employ standards that differ from the other provisions in this chapter but comply with the provisions of this section. 
(3)  Approval authority. A sign permit application for a creative sign shall be subject to review by the planning and zoning commission and approval by the city council. 
(4)  Design Criteria . In approving an application for a creative sign, the planning and zoning commission and city council shall ensure that a proposed sign meets the following design criteria: 
a.  Design quality. The sign shall: 
1.  Constitute a substantial aesthetic improvement to the site and shall have a positive visual impact on the surrounding area; 
2.  Be of unique design, and exhibit a high degree of thoughtfulness, imagination, inventiveness, and spirit; and 
3.  Provide strong graphic character through the imaginative use of graphics, color, texture, quality materials, scale, and proportion. 
b.  Contextual criteria . The sign shall contain at least one of the following elements: 
1.  Classic historic design style; 
2.  Creative image reflecting current or historic character of the city; 
3.  Inventive representation of the use, name, or logo of the structure or business. 
c.  Architectural criteria. The sign shall: 
1.  Utilize and/or enhance the architectural elements of the building; and 
2.  Be placed in a logical location in relation to the overall composition of the building's façade and not cover any key architectural features/details of the façade. 
d.  Consistency. The sign shall be consistent with the character and intent for the city as described in the city's comprehensive plan. 
(5)  Review procedures, variances. No sign variances shall be granted except through the creative sign review provisions above. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 1(150.512), 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 391, § 1, 1-22-2009; Ord. No. 492, § 1, 01-24-2013) 
Sec. 66-53. - Garage sale signs 
    Garage sale signs shall be regulated as follows: 
(1)  Purpose. To identify a garage or estate sale on residential property within zoning districts pre-development district (PD), single-family residential district (R-1), cluster development, two-family residential district (R-2), mobile home district (R-3), and Old Town Helotes Special District (OTHSD). Residences located within commercial zoning districts shall be permitted to operate and display signage for a garage sale in compliance with this Section; however, no commercial entity or business shall be permitted to operate or display signage for a garage sale in any Municipal Zoning District. 
(2)  Size. Sign face shall not exceed six square feet. 
(3)  Height. No part of the sign shall extend above four feet from average grade. 
(4)  Location. Garage sale signs shall not be placed in the public right-of-way; however, garage sale signs may be placed on private property with the permission of the property owner. 
(5)  Lighting. None. 
(6)  Duration. Garage sale signs shall not be erected more than 24 hours prior to the commencement of the garage or estate sale, and the agent/owner shall remove all garage sale signs no later than 6:00 p.m. CST on the last day of the garage sale. 
(7)  Permit. None required. 
(Ord. No. 469, § 2, 6-14-2012) 
Sec. 66-54. - Handheld signs. 
    Handheld signs shall be regulated as follows: 
(1)  Purpose. To identify the name and location of a single business or office, or a special event held by the same single business or office, located on a lot or tract. 
(2)  Size. Sign face shall not exceed nine square feet. 
(3)  Number. Limited to one handheld sign per single business or office. 
(4)  Location. Subject to the required clear vision area, handheld signs utilized for commercial purposes shall be located on the premises of the single business or office and adjacent to a major traffic way which the building abuts. If a public sidewalk is present on the premises or in the public right-of-way abutting the premises, handheld signs shall be located on or to the rear of the public sidewalk. When no public sidewalk is present, handheld signs shall be located on or behind the front property line of the premises. 
(5)  Lighting. None allowed. 
(6)  Duration. A maximum time period of up to 90 calendar days each quarter of the calendar year per business or organization. A new permit must be obtained each quarter. 
(7)  Permit. A permit is required. The permit shall state the 90 calendar days that the handheld sign shall be displayed, including the beginning and ending dates, and describe the location where the handheld sign will be placed. Any violation of this section shall be cause for immediate termination of an issued handheld sign permit, and the issuance of a subsequent handheld sign permit may be reasonably withheld from an applicant by the city administrator for prior violations of this section by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 469, § 2, 6-14-2012; Ord. No. 482, § 1, 10-11-2012) 
Secs. 66-55-66-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - NONCONFORMING SIGNS 

Sec. 66-61. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Determination. A nonconforming sign is a sign that is not allowed under this chapter, but which, when first constructed, was allowed and continued in its legal status until the adoption of this chapter. Nonconforming signs include the following: 
(1)  A sign constructed prior to June 8, 1982, that was registered pursuant to Ordinance No. 14, passed June 8, 1982; 
(2)  A sign constructed prior to adoption of Ordinance No. 52, passed December 8, 1988, that met all applicable requirements of Ordinance No. 14; or 
(3)  A sign constructed prior to the adoption of this chapter. 
(b)  Removal. 
(1)  By acts or omission of sign owner. Nonconforming signs shall be terminated immediately upon the occurrence of any of the following events specified below: 
a.  A sign that, having been permitted to remain in place as a nonconforming use, is required to be removed because the sign, or a substantial part of it, is blown down or otherwise destroyed or dismantled for any purpose other than maintenance operations or for changing the letters, symbols, or other matter on the sign; for purpose of this subsection, a sign or substantial part of it is considered to have been destroyed only if the cost of repairing the sign is more than 60 percent of the cost of erecting a new sign of the type at the same location; 
b.  A nonconforming sign that has been abandoned; 
c.  A nonconforming sign that has been discontinued for a continuous period of 90 days; or 
d.  A nonconforming sign that has become obsolete or substandard under any applicable ordinance of the city to the extent that the sign becomes a hazard or danger to public health or safety. 
(2)  By city action. The city may require the removal, relocation, or reconstruction of any nonconforming sign provided that the owner of the sign is compensated for such costs that are associated with the removal, relocation, or reconstruction as is required by Vernon's Texas Statues and Codes Annotated (V.T.C.A.), Local Government Code ch. 216. In cases where the city requires the removal, relocation, or reconstruction of a nonconforming sign, the mayor is authorized to appoint a municipal board, with city council approval, in order to determine the amount of compensation as prescribed in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 216.004. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 1(150.601), 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 391, § 1, 1-22-2009) 
Secs. 66-62-66-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE 

Sec. 66-71. - Permits, certificates and approval required; master sign plan. 
(a)  General requirements. It is unlawful for any person to erect, alter, or relocate any sign within the city and its area of extraterritorial jurisdiction without complying with the following requirements: 
(1)  Completion of a sign application permit; 
(2)  Review by the city staff for completeness and general compliance; 
(3)  Review and approval by the P&Z; and, as applicable, forwarding to the city council for variance or appeal action; and 
(4)  Final inspection report from the city's building inspector. 
(b)  Sign permit application. An application for a sign permit shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the applicant, the owner of the property and the owner of the sign, and date of application; 
(2)  Numerical location of the building structure upon its lot, block and plat designation, and street address upon which the sign is to be located; 
(3)  Section number and paragraph of this chapter under which the application is being made; 
(4)  Position of the sign on the building or on the ground in both plain view, drawn to scale, and elevation views, drawn to scale; 
(5)  Thirteen 11-inch by 17-inch sets of scaled drawings of the plans and specifications, including one digital file, size and color of the sign and its various parts, the style of lettering, the message, lighting, type of material of which it is fabricated and the method of attachment to the building or to the ground and associated landscaping; and ten color sketches, color photographs, or similar presentation of the sign and building, as well as any contiguous street or building in order to display how they would appear in relation to one another; 
(6)  Name of the parties responsible for constructing and erecting the sign; 
(7)  Written consent of the owner of the building, structure, or land to which or on which the sign is to be erected; 
(8)  Letter of compliance approval by the chairperson or acting chairperson of the P&Z, after review; 
(9)  If required by the building inspector, a copy of stress sheets and calculations showing that the structure is designed for dead load and wind pressures in any direction in the amount required by this chapter and all other laws and ordinances of the city; and 
(10)  Linear feet of street frontage. 
(c)  Master sign plan application. Any application for a sign permit for a shopping center, business park, or office complex shall include a presentation of a master sign plan. An application for approval of a master sign plan shall be processed as follows: 
(1)  Thirteen 11-inch by 17-inch copies (and one digital file) of a master sign plan for the shopping center or office complex shall be submitted, with the permit application, for review by the P&Z. 
(2)  The master sign plan shall include details of the design, construction, and location of all signs except traffic control signs, which fall under the purview of subsection (e) of this section. 
a.  An accurate plot plan of the lot. 
b.  Location of buildings, parking lots, driveways, and landscaped areas on the lot. 
c.  An accurate indication of the plot plan of the proposed location of each present and future sign of any type requiring a permit. 
d.  Color scheme. 
e.  Lettering or graphic style. 
f.  Lighting. 
g.  Location of each sign. 
h.  Materials. 
i.  Sign dimensions. 
j.  Provisions for leasing information. 
(3)  The P&Z shall review the master sign plan for compatibility and harmony with the architecture of the facility, the surrounding area, and all applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(4)  All signs to be installed, as described in the plan, shall obtain separate permits once the master sign plan is approved. 
(5)  The P&Z may approve, disapprove or condition its approval of a master sign plan by requiring such modifications to the plan that would be necessary for compliance with this chapter. Should a plan be disapproved the P&Z shall advise the applicant in writing of the specific deficiencies in the plan. 
(d)  Amendments to existing master sign plan; existing nonconforming signs. Any change to an approved master sign plan may be submitted as an amendment to the original plan. Thirteen 11-inch by 17-inch copies and one digital file of the proposed amendment, attached to the approved plan, shall be submitted for review by the P&Z in accordance with the criteria set out in subsection (c) above. 
(e)  Private property traffic control sign plan. An application for traffic control signs on private property shall include 13 11-inch by 17-inch copies and one digital file of a diagram of the parking lot on which the signs are proposed to be placed, depicting the location and types of signs, parking spaces, drive and fire lanes, and driveways. Private property traffic control sign plans shall be submitted for review by the P&Z in accordance with the criteria set out in subsection (c) of this section. 
(f)  Schedule of fees. Sign permit fees shall comply with the most recent adopted fee schedule passed and approved by the city council. 
(g)  Electric signs. All electric signs must comply with the applicable provisions of this chapter, as well as with the electrical code as adopted by the city council. 
(h)  Permits issued in violation of chapter. Any permit which is issued in violation of any provision of this chapter, or issued upon erroneous information provided by the applicant, shall be absolutely void and no rights whatsoever shall be accrued therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 1(150.701), 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 391, § 1, 1-22-2009) 
Sec. 66-72. - Representations by applicant. 
    All representations, made by the applicant or his agent on behalf of the application for a sign permit under this chapter must be in writing and become conditions upon which a permit is issued. It shall be unlawful for the permittee to vary from such representation unless the permittee first makes application, as required by the provisions of this chapter, to amend the permit and such amendment is approved by the proper authority. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 1(150.702), 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 391, § 1, 1-22-2009) 
Sec. 66-73. - Planning and zoning commission review and city council action. 
    The commission shall review the appearance, lighting, form, color, character, dimensions, and materials of all signs required under this chapter. The commission shall determine that all signs applied for under this chapter are in conformance with this chapter. All sign permit applications shall be subject to review by the commission and action by the city council. The city council shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny all sign permit applications within 60 days of application submittal. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 1(150.704), 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 391, § 1, 1-22-2009; Ord. No. 18-13 , § 1, 7-12-2018) 
Sec. 66-74. - Review by the planning and zoning commission. 
(a)  The development services department, upon review and acceptance by the city staff of a properly completed sign permit application, shall forward the application to the commission for review and its recommendation for action to the city council. 
(b)  Following receipt of the sign permit application, the commission shall consider the application at its earliest available meeting in accordance with the commission's policies. 
(c)  All applications shall be approved, approved with conditions, or denied within 60 days of application submittal. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 1(150.706), 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 391, § 1, 1-22-2009; Ord. No. 18-13 , § 1, 7-12-2018) 
Sec. 66-75. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Violation; citation. If the code enforcement officer finds that any sign is maintained in violation of the provisions of this chapter, he shall give written notice of the violation by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner or person entitled to possession of the sign or the owner of the property where the sign is located. 
(b)  Failure to comply; city abatement. If the person fails to alter or remove the sign so as to comply with this chapter within ten days after the receipt of the notice, the code enforcement officer may cause the sign to be altered or removed at the expense of the owner or person entitled to possession of the property or sign, and shall, upon the determination of the expenses, certify them to the city. 
(c)  Lien. The city shall notify the owner or person entitled to possession of the sign or property of the total costs incurred for the alteration or removal and destruction of the sign, and if that person fails within 30 days after the date of notification to pay the entire costs and expenses of the repair, alteration or removal, then the costs and expenses shall become a lien against the property. 
(d)  Costs. The costs incurred under this section shall include the actual cost of repair or removal of the sign, plus 15 percent, and in addition thereto shall include an amount equal to ten percent, representing penalty and interest for the cost of collection, and reasonable attorney's fees. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 1(150.707), 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 391, § 1, 1-22-2009) 
Sec. 66-76. - Maintenance required. 
    The city council shall have the authority to order the painting, repair, or removal of a sign and accompanying landscaping which constitutes a hazard to safety, health or public welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence or abandonment. Notification shall be by certified mail return receipt requested. If, within 15 days, the maintenance orders are not complied with, the code enforcement officer may order the sign removed at the owner's expense under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 1(150.708), 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 391, § 1, 1-22-2009; Ord. No. 394, § 6, 2-12-2009) 
Sec. 66-77. - Penalty; removal and impoundment of signs. 
(a)  Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $500.00. Each day of violation under this chapter shall be a separate violation. 
(b)  Additionally, the code enforcement officer or his designee shall have the authority, and the duty, to remove or cause to be removed and impounded any sign, poster, handbill, banner, streamer or other outdoor advertising erected, placed, altered, maintained, or neglected in violation of this chapter, if the same is located on, in, or above any public street, right-of-way or sidewalk area, or other public property. 
(c)  The cost of any such removal or impoundment shall be chargeable to the person or persons, jointly or severally, who were responsible for or who caused the erection or placement of the offending sign or advertising, and their sureties. 
(d)  Any item impounded by authority of this section shall be held for period of 30 days and then disposed of in any manner designated by the code enforcement officer. During the 30 days, the owner of such item upon proof of same may reclaim such item at the place of storage by paying to the city the actual cost of removal and impounding. This charge shall in any event be not less than $25.00. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 1(150.709), 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 391, § 1, 1-22-2009) 
Sec. 66-78. - Appeals. 
    Appeal from any administrative action or determination by the P&Z or the code enforcement officer pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be filed with the city council and shall be placed on the agenda at its earliest available meeting. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 1(150.710), 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 391, § 1, 1-22-2009) 
Secs. 66-79, 66-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - VARIANCES 

Sec. 66-81. - Purpose; limitations. 
(a)  In order to lessen practical difficulties and prevent unnecessary physical hardship, variances from the regulations may be granted. A practical difficulty or unnecessary physical hardship may result from the size, shape, or dimensions of a structure, or the location of the structure, from topographic or physical conditions on the site or in the immediate vicinity, or from the other physical limitations, street locations or traffic conditions in the immediate vicinity. Cost or inconvenience to the applicant of strict or literal compliance with a regulation shall not be a reason for granting a variance. 
(b)  A variance may be granted by the city council with respect to any regulation contained in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 1(150.801), 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 391, § 1, 1-22-2009) 
Sec. 66-82. - Application. 
    Application for a variance from the provisions of this chapter shall be made upon a form provided by the development services department. The variance application shall include the application for a sign permit and shall also state the applicant's reasons for requesting the variance in accordance with the criteria set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 1(150.802), 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 391, § 1, 1-22-2009) 
Sec. 66-83. - Fees. 
(a)  The applicant shall pay the fee as prescribed in the most recent adopted fee schedule passed and approved by the city council. The fee shall be nonrefundable. If work requiring a variance is begun/completed before obtaining approval for such variance, the owner of the property and/or the person/entity responsible for the commencement of such work shall request approval of an "after-the-fact" variance and pay triple the established, nonrefundable fee. Payment of such fee does not relieve the applicant from liability under the penalty provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Acceptance of the increased fee by the city does not constitute any commitment or warranty to approve the variance requested, nor relieve any person/entity from fully complying with the requirements of this chapter. A stop work order shall be in effect until a decision on approval/denial is taken. Fees shall not be refunded if the request for variance is disapproved. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 1(150.803), 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 391, § 1, 1-22-2009) 
Sec. 66-84. - Hearing. 
    Upon receipt of a variance application, including a creative sign application, under this article, the city secretary shall set a date for hearing before the P&Z. The hearing shall take place at the planning and zoning commission's earliest available meeting. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 1(150.804), 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 391, § 1, 1-22-2009) 
Sec. 66-85. - Recommendation by the planning and zoning commission. 
    At the closing of a hearing on a variance application, the P&Z shall act on the application. The P&Z may recommend approval on the application as submitted, or may recommend approval of the application subject to such modifications or conditions as it deems necessary to accomplish the purpose of this chapter, or the P&Z may recommend denial of the application. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 1(150.805), 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 391, § 1, 1-22-2009) 
Sec. 66-86. - Planning and zoning commission action. 
    The commission may recommend allowing changes of up to 25 percent of the sign area to accommodate longer words and names while retaining appropriate scale and proportions of lettering to open space for readability and aesthetic consideration. 
(Ord. No. 391, § 1, 1-22-2009; Ord. No. 18-13 , § 1, 7-12-2018) 
Sec. 66-87. - Action by city council. 
    Following review and recommendation by the planning and zoning commission, the application shall be promptly transmitted to the city council and placed on the agenda at its earliest available meeting. The city council shall either approve the application as submitted, approve the application subject to such modifications or conditions as it deems necessary to accomplish the purpose of this chapter, or deny the application. If the council deems insufficient information is presented to provide the basis for a sound decision, it may postpone the application to a subsequent meeting. The council should render a decision within 60 days after the first presentation of the application to the city council, providing all pertinent information has been provided with the application. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 1(150.807), 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 391, § 1, 1-22-2009; Ord. No. 18-13 , § 1, 7-12-2018) 
Secs. 66-88-66-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 66-91. - Definitions. 
    Words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, as follows: 
    Abandoned sign means a sign that: 
(1)  Is not in use for 60 continuous days; 
(2)  Advertises an event for which the date for the event has passed; or 
(3)  Advertises a business that has been discontinued at that location for any reason. 
    Address sign means a sign that contains only the official street address of a building or part thereof. 
    Attractive condition means the absence of evidence of wear or disrepair (including but not limited to discoloration, fading, fraying, or containing broken or missing elements). 
    Average grade means the grade of the natural finished ground level at the midpoint of each exterior surface of a sign, or a structure, if the sign is attached to the structure. 
    Awning means a structure made of fabric, plastic, metal, or similar material used to provide protective cover over a door, entrance, window or outdoor service area. 
    Banner means any sign of lightweight fabric, paper, or similar material that is mounted between two poles or a building at one or more edges or attached in any manner to another structure or vehicle. 
    Billboard means any sign that is freestanding or attached to or part of a building and is an off-premises sign. 
    Canopy sign means a sign placed upon a freestanding canopy structure. 
    Changeable copy sign means a sign on which message copy is changed manually through the utilization of attachable letters, numbers, symbols, and other similar characters of changeable pictorial panels. 
    Changeable electronic variable message sign (CEVMS) means a sign which permits light to be turned on or off intermittently or which is operated in a way whereby light is turned on or off intermittently, including any illuminated sign on which such illumination is not kept stationary or constant in intensity and color at all times when such sign is in use, including an LED (light emitting diode) or digital sign, and which varies in intensity or color. A CEVMS sign does not include a sign located within the right-of-way that functions as a traffic control device and that is described and identified in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) approved by the Federal Highway Administrator as the National Standard. 
    City means the City of Helotes, Bexar County, Texas, and its area of extraterritorial jurisdiction as defined by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 42. 
    Clear vision area means the area established by the city administrator around a sign which shall be unobstructed to assure that the sign, when erected, is not placed in regard to vehicle and pedestrian traffic as to constitute a hazard to such traffic under normal conditions. The city administrator, with the assistance of the city engineer, shall establish clear vision area regulations that will be made available to all applicants for a sign permit. 
    Code enforcement officer means a member of the city staff appointed by the mayor and city council, designated to administer and enforce the provisions of the Municipal Code of Ordinances. 
    Commercial sign means a sign (other than a real estate "for sale" or "for lease" sign, political sign, residential nameplate sign, public information sign, traffic control sign or exempted sign) which directs the attention of the general public to a business, product, service, or other commercial or business activity. 
    Compensable cost means those costs for which the owner of a nonconforming sign required to be relocated, reconstructed or removed by this chapter is entitled to be compensated pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 216, which costs, if required to be paid by the statute, shall be calculated in accordance with the formula set forth in the statute. 
    Erect means to build, construct, alter, reconstruct, pour, lay, move upon, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix, and also includes the painting of wall signs, murals or supergraphics, or any physical operation on the premises which is required for the construction of a sign, including excavation, site clearance, landfill and the like. 
    Farm means property which has been granted an agriculture exemption to ad valorem tax. 
    Fine art means sculpture, fountain or similar object. 
    Flag means any fabric, banner or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns, or design, used as a symbol. 
    Freestanding sign means any sign which is not attached to or on the walls, face, or exterior of a building. A pole sign is considered for purposes herein a freestanding sign. 
    Future tenant sign means a temporary sign which identifies a future use of a site or building. 
    Garage sale sign means a display or illustration which is placed upon a piece of land, directs attention to a garage or estate sale on a residential property, and is visible from any street, right-of-way, sidewalk, alley, park, or other public property. 
    Grand opening means a promotional activity not exceeding 30 calendar days used by newly established businesses, within 60 calendar days after the official date of occupancy, to inform the public of their location and service available to the community. "Grand opening" does not mean an annual or occasional promotion of retail sales by a business. 
    Handheld sign means a display or illustration which is supported by a human being, directs attention to a single business, office, or single business/office special event and is visible from any municipal street, right-of-way, sidewalk, alley, park, or other public property. 
    Historical site sign means a sign erected by a government agency which exclusively denotes a government-recognized historical site. 
    Illegal sign means a sign which does not meet the requirements of this chapter or which is not a registered nonconforming sign. This specifically includes a sign that remains standing when the time limits set by the permit are exceeded and any sign not removed after notification from the code compliance officer to remove the sign. 
    Indirect lighting means an external light source separated from the surface of a sign and illuminating that sign. 
    Informational sign means a sign which provides service; direction or courtesy information intended to assist the public and which is not displayed for the general purpose of advertising products or services. Informational signs shall include the location of business facilities (i.e., store entrances, walk-up windows and self service operations) and courtesy information (e.g., payment options, hours of operation, menus, handicapped accessibility, restrooms). 
    Internally illuminated means a light source that is both separated from the surface of a sign and located within the sign frame illuminating only the sign lettering, numbering, and/or company logo. 
    Landscaping means to change the natural features by adding trees, bushes, flowers, etc. 
    Lot means a parcel of land whose boundaries have been established by some legal instrument, such as a recorded deed or plat, and which is recognized as a separate legal entity for purposes of transferring title. This term shall include any number of contiguous lots, or portions thereof, upon which a single principal building and its accessory buildings are located or intended to be located. 
    Logo means any registered trademark of an organization, individual, company, or product which is commonly used in advertising to identify that organization, individual, company or product. 
    Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) means the state publication for streets and highways. 
    Master sign plan means a coordinated sign plan which includes details of all signs other than exempt or temporary signs, which are or will be placed on a shopping center, office complex, business park or PUD. 
    Monument sign means a nonmetallic self-supporting sign in which the entire bottom of the sign is mounted on, or incorporated into, a solid base. 
    Neon lighting means a light with a bulb, usually tube-shaped, containing neon gas, that glows when a high-voltage electrical current is passed through it. 
    Nonconforming sign means a sign that met all legal requirements when constructed but is not in compliance with current sign regulations. A registered nonconforming sign is not an illegal sign. 
    Notice means actual notice or written notice sent through the U.S. Postal Service. 
    Office complex means two or more offices and/or office establishments, sharing customer parking area, regardless of whether said offices or office establishments occupy separate structures or are under separate ownership, or on separate tracts or lots of land. 
    Official sign means any sign erected by or at the direction of any governmental body. 
    Off-premises sign means any sign other than an on-premises sign. 
    On-premises sign means a sign which advertises only goods, services, facilities, events or attractions available on the premises where located, or identifies the owner or occupant or directs traffic on the premises. 
    Pennant means any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind. 
    Planning and zoning commission means the commission established by the City of Helotes, Texas on November 20, 1981, and outlined within the V.T.C.A., Texas Local Government Code tit. 7, subtit. A, ch. 211, § 211.007. 
    Pole sign means a free standing sign, usually double-faced, mounted on a round pole, square tube, or other fabricated member, without any type of secondary support. 
    Political sign means any sign which is designated to influence the action of the voters for the passage or defeat of a measure appearing on the ballot at any national, state, or local election or which is designed to influence the voters for the election of a candidate for nomination or election to any public office at any national, state or local election. 
    Portable sign means any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure or a sign designed to be transported, including, but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by wheels; signs made as A-frames or T-frames; balloons used as signs; umbrellas used for commercial messages; and signs attached to or painted on vehicles or trailers parked and visible from the public right of way. 
    Premises means a lot or tract within the city, and contiguous lands in the same ownership, which is not divided by any public highway, street or alley, or right-of-way. 
    Private safety and traffic control signs means on-premises signs which direct movement of traffic on private property or warn of obstacles, overhead clearances, or control parking. 
    Projecting or hanging sign means any sign attached to a building, awning or overhang and extending in whole or in part more than 12 inches beyond the building line. Allowable size does not include supporting structure. 
    Promotional sign means a sign erected on a temporary basis to promote the sale of new products, new management, new hours of operation, a new service, or to promote a special sale. 
    Public information sign means any sign or banner which is intended to identify community, civic and social events, and is not a commercial sign, official sign, political sign, or real estate sign. 
    Ranch means property which has been granted an agriculture exemption to ad valorem tax. 
    Real estate "for sale" or "for lease" sign means a temporary sign designating that the premises upon which it is erected is for sale, rent, or lease of buildings or real property. 
    Reflective surface means any material or device which has the effect of intensifying reflected light, such as scotch light, day glow, glass beads and luminous paint. 
    Residential nameplate sign means a sign permitted for the sole purpose of identifying the inhabitant residing therein, the house name or identifying the address of the house. The sign may contain no advertising of any kind. 
    Restoration means the routine maintenance and painting of existing, approved signs that do not change the approved design and color in any way. 
    Roof ridge. The upper and lower roof ridges are the horizontal lines formed by the juncture of two sloping planes formed by the surfaces of a roof. 
    Roof sign means a sign attached to, or erected, on a roof of a building or structure, including porches and overhangs. 
    Roofline means the top edge of a roof or building parapet, whichever is higher, but excluding any mansard, cupolas, pylons, chimneys or any minor projections. 
    Shopping center means two or more retail stores and/or service establishments, or one retail store and one service establishment, sharing a common customer parking area, regardless of whether such stores and/or establishments occupy separate/common structures or are under separate ownership or on separate lots on tracts of land. 
    Sign means a name, identification, image, light device, figure, painting, drawing, message, plaque, poster, billboard, description, display or illustration which is affixed to, painted or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, picture, window (attached inside or outside), or piece of land, and which directs attention to an object, product, place, activity, facility, service, event, attraction, person, institution, organization or business which is visible from any street, right-of-way, sidewalk, alley, park or other public property. Displays of merchandise customarily sold at the site without illumination or lettering which are placed behind a store window are not signs or parts of signs. 
    Sign code application area shall mean the corporate limits of the city and the area of its extraterritorial jurisdiction as defined by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 42.021. 
    Sign structure means a cabinet, frame, support pole or brackets, base or any other material that supports, elevates or encases a sign. 
    Site development sign means a sign permitted to identify a project under construction or that will be under construction, including the project name, project address, project rendering, general contractor, and architect. 
    Special event sign means a sign for events such as grand openings, craft shows, benefits, fundraisers, festivals, and other limited term events. 
    Street or highway frontage means the distance along any one side of any public street or highway, street or alley, measured along the right-of-way line or parallel to the normal right-of-way where the right-of-way line is not fixed. 
    Surface area of a sign means the total surface. 
    Temporary sign means a sign that is not permanently attached to a building, structure, or the ground and that is intended to remain in use for a limited period of time. 
    Time/temperature sign means an electronic or mechanical device which shows time and/or temperature, but contains no business identification or advertising. 
    Traffic control sign means a permitted sign for the purpose of identifying parking areas and directing the flow of traffic on private property. 
    Wall sign means a sign attached to, painted on, or erected against the wall of a building or structure with the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel to the face of the wall and not projecting more than 12 inches from the face of the wall at any point. 
    Zone means a zoning district as shown on the official zoning map of the city. 
(Ord. No. 249, § 1(150.901), 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 357, § 1, 5-22-08; Ord. No. 391, § 1, 1-22-2009; Ord. No. 444, § 2, 2-24-2011; Ord. No. 469, § 1, 6-14-2012; Ord. No. 570, § 2, 6-11-2015) 
Chapter 70 - SOLID WASTE 
ARTICLE I. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Historical Footnote- Ord. No. 468 adopted May 24, 2012, repealed the former Article I Secs. 1 through 9 and enacted a new Article I as set out herein. Rules and regulations can be found in the current Solid Waste Collection and Disposal Contract and Municipal Franchise Contract. 

Sec. 70-1. - Service provider. 
    The city may either establish its own solid waste and recyclable material collection, removal, and disposal services system or it may by ordinance designate a solid waste and recyclable material collection, removal, and disposal services system franchise holder as its exclusive agent. 
(Ord. No. 232, § 2, 2-13-2003; Ord. No. 468, § 1, 5-24-2012) 
Sec. 70-2. - Participation in service. 
    Each residential, commercial, or industrial unit shall utilize the solid waste and recyclable material collection, removal, and disposal services provided by the city or the city's franchise holder. Failure to utilize such disposal services does not negate the charges for the services, nor does it relieve the unit of the responsibility to pay said charges even when the city or franchise holder initiates stop service for failure by a unit to pay the city or franchise holder for solid waste and recyclable material collection, removal, and disposal services. Units producing a volume of solid waste or recyclable material above the quantity limitations prescribed herein or within the franchise holder's contract shall, after first applying for and receiving a written permit from the city, contract with the city or the franchise holder at the unit's expense for the removal of the solid waste or recyclable material under conditions to be set out fully in said permit. 
(Ord. No. 232, § 3, 2-13-2003; Ord. No. 468, § 1, 5-24-2012) 
Sec. 70-3. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  Unless authorized elsewhere in this article or within the franchise holder's contract, it shall be unlawful for any unit or other entity to dump any solid waste or recyclable material of any type on any vacant property or along any public right of way within the city limits. 
(b)  Unless authorized elsewhere in this article or within the franchise holder's contract, it shall be unlawful for any unit or other entity to dump any solid waste or recyclable material of any type in any public right of way within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 232, § 9, 2-13-2003; Ord. No. 468, § 1, 5-24-2012) 
Sec. 70-4. - Penalty. 
    Any unit or entity charged with violating any provision of this article shall be cited for a misdemeanor offense, and, upon conviction for such violation, shall be punished by a penalty of not less than $25.00 nor more than $2,000.00. Each day of continuation of each such violation shall be a separate offense and punishable as such. 
(Ord. No. 232, § 11, 2-13-2003; Ord. No. 468, § 1, 5-24-2012) 
Secs. 70-5-70-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DUMPING AND DUMPED MATERIALS 

Sec. 70-21. - Dumping prohibited; dumped materials in developed areas. 
    It shall be unlawful to dump any weeds, brush, rubbish, trash or other debris whatever in any lot or parcel of real estate in the developed areas within the city. In developed areas of the city, whenever and wherever dumped materials such as weeds, brush or rubbish from dumping shall exist, covering or partially covering the surface of any lot or parcel, such condition is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, the prompt abatement of which is a public necessity. All property within the developed areas of the city shall be kept completely free and clear of dumped materials, such as weeds, brush, rubbish and trash, whether dumped by the owner or with his permission or not. 
(Ord. No. 37, § 1, 11-25-1985) 
Sec. 70-22. - Dumped materials in other areas. 
(a)  In other areas of the city, that portion of any lot or parcel of land within 100 feet of any creek bed or within 50 feet of any public street or road which is within 75 feet of any building shall be kept completely free and clear of any dumped materials, such as weeds, brush, or rubbish. 
(b)  Whenever and wherever dumping from materials such as weeds, brush or rubbish shall exist, covering or partially covering this portion of any lot or parcel in a city block which is not a developed area, such condition is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, the prompt abatement of which is a public necessity. 
(Ord. No. 37, §§ 2 - 3, 11-25-1985) 
Sec. 70-23. - Duty of property owners. 
    It is the duty and responsibility of the owners of property within the city to keep and maintain their properties in compliance with the above standards. 
(Ord. No. 37, § 4, 11-25-1985) 
Sec. 70-24. - Notice of violation. 
    Whenever the building inspector receives information of the existence of any property not meeting the standards set out in sections 70-21 and 70-22, he, or any building inspector or sanitary officer assigned such responsibility, shall serve the owner of the property with a written notice informing the owner of such condition and directing that action be taken to bring the property into compliance within 15 days. 
(Ord. No. 37, § 5, 11-25-1985) 
Sec. 70-25. - Enforcement; penalty. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or tenant of any land within the city to fail to have any dumped materials, such as weeds, brush, or rubbish and trash removed, or otherwise bring property into compliance with the standards set forth above, within 15 days after notice is received directing that such standards be met; the employee of the city assigned such duties shall, whenever a violation is found, file a complaint with the municipal court; and the prosecutor of the municipal court assigned such duties shall prosecute the case and upon conviction for violation hereof the owner shall be subject to a fine of not more than $4,000.00. Each day's violation hereof shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 37, § 6, 11-25-1985; Ord. No. 580, § 1, 10-22-2015) 
Chapter 74 - PARKS, STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES 
ARTICLE I. - PARKS AND RECREATION 

Sec. 74-1. - Definitions. 
    Commercial purposes means an activity intended to promote a commercial establishment or transaction or that results in a commercial transaction. 
    Director means the city administrator or other person authorized to act as the director. 
    Park means land designated for public recreation and owned or leased by the city. 
    Park building means a building within a city park and owned or leased by the city. 
    Park facility means any land, athletic field, or other special use facility owned or maintained by the city for park and recreational activities, other than a park building. 
    Special use means any temporary gathering, rally, parade, festival, exhibit, display, entertainment, performance, or presentation held in a park, park building, or park facility: 
(1)  In which more than 25 persons are expected to attend or participate and that requires the placement or erection of one or more stages, booths, kiosks, tables, tents, barricades, or similar temporary structures or facilities to support or serve the special use; or 
(3)  That provides an alcoholic beverage for sale or consumption to attendees. 
A special use does not include persons gathering in a city park, park building, or park facility to participate in or observe an athletic event held at the facility designed for that purpose, unless alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed by attendees. 
(Ord. No. 398, § 3, 3-12-2009) 
Sec. 74-2. - Parks. 
(a)  It is appropriate to name city parks, park buildings, and park facilities in honor and recognition of outstanding individuals who have served the community. It is further appropriate to name such facilities with a geographical name. The following parks and facilities are hereby named as shown below: 
(1) Helotes City Park 8.06 acres, more or less, of property located at 12951 Bandera Road (2) Helotes Fitness Park and Disc Golf Course Fitness Park: 4.96 acres, more or less, of property adjacent to the Disc Golf Course and fronting on F.M. 1560, 12809 F.M. 1560 N; Disc Gold Course: 3.07 acres, more or less, of property located at the corner of Parrigin Road and F.M. 1560, 10483 Parrigin Road (3) Iron Horse Canyon Natural Area 129.089 acres, more or less, of property located in Iron Horse Canyon Subdivision (4) Helotes Creek Linear Park 2.97 acres, more or less, of property located in the Old Town Helotes Special District  
(b)  The Helotes City Park, Helotes Fitness Park and Disc Golf Course, and the Helotes Creek Linear Park are consolidated into the Helotes Creek Linear Park System. It is a city goal to interconnect the Helotes Creek Linear Park System and add pedestrian and bicycle amenities, as appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 398, § 3, 3-12-2009; Ord. No. 18-06 , § 1, 5-10-2018) 
Sec. 74-3. - City council and director authority. 
    The city council may adopt, revise, or rescind rules, regulations, city policies and procedures, create or alter recreational programs, and take action regarding the day-to-day management and operations of the parks, park buildings, and park facilities. The director may take the following actions relating to the operation of the parks, park buildings, and park facilities: 
(1)  The closing of all or part of a park, park building, or park facility because of weather or unsafe conditions that could endanger users or result in damage to the park, park building, or park facility; 
(2)  The reservation, scheduling, and use of parks, park buildings, and park facilities designed for or designated for specific or special uses; 
(3)  Processing applications for special use permits; 
(4)  Regulating the use of parks, park buildings, and park facilities for public, private, and commercial purposes; and 
(5)  Any other action reasonably necessary to manage and operate parks, park buildings, and park facilities. 
(Ord. No. 398, § 3, 3-12-2009) 
Sec. 74-4. - Park hours. 
(a)  City parks, park buildings, and park facilities shall be open to the public from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. on weekdays and 7:00 am. to 10:00 p.m. on weekends, unless otherwise posted. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if the person enters or remains on park property when it is closed. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (b) of this section that a person was on park property between 9:01 p.m. and 6:59 a.m. on weekdays and 10:01 p.m. and 6:59 a.m. on weekends, and: 
(1)  The person was attending an event for which a permit extending park hours had been issued by the city; or 
(2)  A sign had been posted on the park property by the city extending park hours and the person was on park property during the posted, extended park hours. 
(Ord. No. 398, § 3, 3-12-2009) 
Sec. 74-5. - Prohibited activities. 
    It is unlawful for a person to do any of the following in a park, park building, or park facility: 
(a)  Alcoholic beverage. It shall be unlawful to consume or possess an alcoholic beverage in an open container. There is a rebuttable presumption that a person in possession of an alcoholic beverage in an open container intends to consume the beverage. It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the person consumed or possessed the alcoholic beverage in an open container at a time and place allowing the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages under a special use permit. 
(b)  Animals. It shall be unlawful to abandon any animal in a park. All pets must be on leash or humanely restrained at all times. 
(c)  Bathe. It shall be unlawful to bathe in or pollute the water of any fountain, pond, lake, or stream within any park, park building, or park facility. 
(d)  Bicycle riding in parks. Bicycle riding shall be prohibited in playgrounds, special display areas, in pavilion or other monument type structures, or in any area where other activities are in progress. Bicycle riding in parks shall be governed by safe riding practices and consideration for use of park areas by others. Where special provisions have been made for bicycles, parking shall be limited to that area. 
(e)  Displays, to place or maintain an unattended display. For purposes of this provision, an unattended display means any item, including a picture, statue, symbol, or similar item, that is intended to serve or be seen as a visual depiction or expression of an idea where the person responsible for the placement or maintenance of the display is not in attendance or in close proximity to the item displayed. The city may remove any display that violates this provision. The prohibition of this paragraph does not apply to an unattended display that is required by or placed by the city or other governmental entity for a governmental purpose. 
(f)  Firearms. In this section, firearms shall mean guns, air guns, slingshots, bows and arrows, and gigs. Firearms are prohibited within parks, park buildings, and park facilities. 
(g)  Fires. Fires shall be permitted only in enclosed fireplaces or grills provided by the city for this purpose. It shall be unlawful to leave an area without extinguishing a fire, and privately-owned charcoal, gas, or wood grills are not permitted. After use, coals shall be thoroughly extinguished with water and cooled and then disposed of in a trash can. 
(h)  Glass and other dangerous objects. It shall be unlawful to possess bottles or other glass or similarly dangerous objects on any public property. No glass beverage containers are allowed in parks, park buildings, or park facilities. 
(i)  Golfing. Playing or practicing golf is prohibited within parks, park buildings, or park facilities, except those specifically designated for golf. 
(j)  Horses. Unless authorized by the city, it shall be unlawful for any person to ride or lead a horse upon any part of a city park, park building, or park facility, except upon designated driveways, parking lots, or bridle paths. 
(k)  Litter. It shall be unlawful to litter in any park, park building, or park facility. Persons are encouraged to practice the National Park Service program called Leave No Trace (LNT). LNT skills and ethics help visitors leave minimum impact, while enjoying city facilities. 
(l)  Overnight camping. Overnight camping shall be prohibited, except by a special use permit issued by the city. Permits may be issued only to those groups whose program includes camping, both overnight and day, and whose leaders, as well as participants, have received special training in camping and related activities. 
(m)  Interfere with city park activities. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with a city-scheduled activity, whether such activity is publicly or privately operated, or interfere with any activity operating under a special use permit. 
(n)  Minor child unattended. It shall be unlawful for a parent, guardian, or any other type of custodian to abandon, or, in any way, leave a minor child (under seven years) unattended in a park, park building, or park facility, except for a supervised program or activity. 
(o)  Noise . Loud music or excessive noise breaching the public peace in any park, park building, or park facility is prohibited. 
(p)  Plants in parks, park buildings, or park facilities. It shall be unlawful to damage, cut, carve, mark, remove, transplant, break, pick, or, in any way, injure, damage, or deface any plants or turf within or upon any park, park building, or park facility. It shall further be prohibited to bring in any vegetation to any park, park building, or park facility, except by a special use permit issued by the city. For the purposes of this section, plants shall be defined to include any vegetation, shrubs, bushes, trees, vines, hedges, grasses, flowers, or the seeds thereof. 
(q)  Protracted sleeping or lounging and disorderly conduct. It shall be unlawful to sleep or protractedly lounge on the seats, benches, or other areas or engage in loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting, or indecent language, or engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to a breach of the public peace in any park, park building, or park facility. 
(r)  Smoking. Smoking within any park, park building, or park facility is prohibited. 
(s)  Hunting. It shall be unlawful for any person to frighten, annoy, injure, or kill or attempt to frighten, annoy, injure, or kill any wild or native animal or bird in any park, park building, or park facility, with the exception of city staff and or approved representatives of the city who may need to attend to wildlife management issues. 
(t)  Destruction of property. It shall be unlawful to intentionally or knowingly destroy any property owned by the city or located on property owned by the city. 
(u)  Unauthorized sale of goods. It shall be unlawful to offer any goods, services, or thing for sale within parks, park buildings, or park facilities, unless specifically authorized by the city through the issuance of a special use permit. 
(v)  Vehicles. It is unlawful to operate or park any motorized vehicle in an area not specifically designated or intended to be used for the parking or movement of motorized vehicles within a park, park building, or park facility. It is further prohibited to park a vehicle within a park, park building, or park facility when the park is closed. It is a defense to prosecution under this paragraph that the motor vehicle was a city vehicle, was operated by a person performing an activity sponsored or approved by the city, or that the motor vehicle was an emergency vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 398, § 3, 3-12-2009) 
Sec. 74-6. - City exclusive control of park facilities. 
    The city may allow various groups to make use of parks, park buildings, and park facilities for organized events, including the city's scheduling or reservation of such facilities for those groups, based on rules and regulations adopted and administered by the city. The city's authorization to an organization to use a park, park building, or park facility for a particular purpose at a specific time does not grant the organization any right to regulate or control the use of that facility. It is unlawful for any person, organization, or group, other than the city, to: 
(1)  Charge any person a fee for the use of a park, park building, or park facility, unless: 
a.  The activity or event is scheduled through the city; and 
b.  The fee is authorized by the city. 
(2)  Take any direct action to physically prevent or prohibit any other person from using a park, park building, or park facility, unless such prohibition is authorized by the city. 
(Ord. No. 398, § 3, 3-12-2009) 
Sec. 74-7. - Special uses. 
(a)  Permit required. It is unlawful for any person to sponsor, hold, or conduct a special use without first receiving a permit from the city. 
(b)  Application process. A person seeking a permit for a special use in a city park, park building, or park facility must file an application with the city on a form provided for that purpose. A complete application must be filed not less than 15 days before the proposed date of the special use. The application must be signed by the person or persons responsible for the special use and must include the following information: 
(1)  A description of the use and the number and type of activities planned; 
(2)  The date and time of the special use; 
(3)  The number and types of vendors that will be present; 
(4)  The number of people expected to attend the special use; 
(5)  The arrangements, if necessary, that will be made for traffic control, security, additional restroom facilities, medical care, and other services or facilities to support the special use; 
(6)  Charges for the special use and the basis upon which persons may or may not be admitted to the event, if other than a charge; 
(7)  A description of any structures that will be used or erected to support the event; 
(8)  The circumstances under which any alcoholic beverages will be served or possessed; 
(9)  Any other information the city determines is necessary to evaluate the application and determine whether the special use meets the requirements of this article. 
(c)  Fees and deposits. The city council may establish and collect fees, deposits, and bonds to pay for or ensure the payment of costs incurred by the city relating to the use of a park, park building, or park facility for a special use, including costs incurred for trash cleanup and removal, providing security, protection, or medical care, for the administration of this article, and for any other necessary or related services that arise directly from the use of a park, park building, or park facility. 
(d)  Permit decision. The director will make a decision on the permit application as promptly as possible after the applicant has provided all the information required by the city, but in no case shall the city not make a decision on the permit application later than ten business days after the date a complete application is submitted. The city will grant a special use permit unless the city finds one or more of the following exist: 
(1)  The submitted application is not complete, provides false information, does not comply with this article or a regulation approved hereunder, or was not submitted with required documents, fees, or deposits; 
(2)  The time or location of the proposed special use conflicts with the time or place of either a city-sponsored event or a special use for which a permit has already been issued or an application was already pending and there is insufficient space in the park, park building, or park facility to accommodate both events; 
(3)  The applicant has failed to arrange or provide for adequate parking, trash cleanup, security, or other arrangements to ensure that the special use will be safe, secure, and healthful for the participants thereof; 
(4)  The special use does not comply with this article, State or Federal laws or regulations, or a reasonable condition imposed by the director for issuance of a permit; 
(5)  The applicant has held a prior special use for which the applicant failed to comply with a requirement of this article, failed to pay required fees, charges, or deposits, failed to comply with all of the conditions of the permit, failed to pay for or remedy damage incurred to public property, created a dangerous condition or situation, failed to comply with reasonable requests of the director, or otherwise violated the purpose or intent of this article; 
(6)  The special use is being held primarily for commercial purposes; or 
(7)  The proposed special use would present an unreasonable danger to the health or safety of the applicant, attendees, or other users of the park, park building, or park facility. 
(e)  Conditions. The director may impose reasonable conditions on a special use permit to ensure compliance with city rules, regulations, and this article. The issued permit will contain, in writing, all conditions and requirements that apply to the special use permit. 
(f)  Denial of permits. If the director refuses to issue a special use permit, as authorized by this article, the director will specify in writing the provisions of this article upon which the refusal was based, as well as any factual information in support of the determination. 
(g)  Permit revocation. The director may revoke a permit for a special use after it is issued because of the failure to comply with any condition or requirement of the permit or this article. The director will give written notice of the revocation of the permit to the address of the applicant, as listed on the application. 
(h)  Appeals from denial or revocation. An applicant may appeal a permit denial, revocation, or imposition of conditions by the director to the city council at its next regularly scheduled meeting after such denial or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 398, § 3, 3-12-2009) 
Sec. 74-8. - Persons excluded from parks. 
(a)  The city may exclude any person from the use of a park, park building, or park facility if the person: 
(1)  Engages in conduct that the director determines poses a continuing threat to the safety of park users; 
(2)  Intentionally damages park property; or 
(3)  Continually violates park rules or regulations. 
(b)  The director will provide to a person excluded from a park, park building, or park facility a written notice of the exclusion. If the exclusion applies to a minor, the notice will be issued to the parent or guardian of the minor. The notice will include: 
(1)  The facts upon which the director determined that the person should be excluded; 
(2)  The park or parks to which the exclusion applies; 
(3)  The period of time the exclusion applies; and 
(4)  The penalty that may be imposed if the person violates the exclusion. 
(c)  A person may appeal their exclusion from a park, park building, or park facility to the city council at its next regularly scheduled meeting after such exclusion. 
(Ord. No. 398, § 3, 3-12-2009) 
Sec. 74-9. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction, shall be fined a sum not less than $1.00 nor more than $200.00 with each day or fractional part thereof constituting a separate offense 
(Ord. No. 398, § 3, 3-12-2009) 
Secs. 74-10-74-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ENCROACHMENT LICENSE 

Sec. 74-31. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide a methodology for the city to authorize encroachments on city rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 193, § 1, 12-20-2002) 
Sec. 74-32. - Application. 
    A property owner who wishes to place an encroachment upon city rights-of-way must submit a written application to the city administrator. The application shall describe the nature and location of the proposed encroachment. The applicant shall pay the fee as prescribed in the most recent adopted fee schedule passed and approved by the city council. The fee shall be nonrefundable. 
(Ord. No. 193, § 2, 12-20-2002; Ord. No. 368, Ex. A(D), 9-11-2008; Ord. No. 394, § 7, 2-12-2009) 
Sec. 74-33. - License agreement. 
    Along with the license application, and the application fee, the applicant shall execute an encroachment license agreement, which acknowledges that, should the license be granted, the applicant shall indemnify and hold harmless the city for any injury or property damage that may occur as a result of the granting of the license. The mayor shall be authorized to execute the license agreement on behalf of the city upon the approval of same by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 193, § 3, 12-20-2002) 
Sec. 74-34. - Denial; revocation. 
    The city council may deny a license application whenever the city council deems it is in the city's best interest and in the furtherance of public health, safety, morals or general welfare. The city council may revoke a license it has granted whenever the city council deems such revocation is in the best interest of the city and in furtherance of the protection of the public health, safety, morals or general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 193, § 4, 12-20-2002) 
Sec. 74-35. - Violations. 
    It is a violation of this article to construct, place, maintain, or allow an encroachment upon the city rights-of-way without prior city council consent. 
(Ord. No. 193, § 5, 12-20-2002) 
Sec. 74-36. - Penalty; removal of encroachments by city. 
    Any person who violates any portion of this article is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall upon conviction be subject to a fine of not less than $35.00 and not more than $2,000.00. Each day that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the aforementioned criminal penalties, the city council may by ordinance direct the removal of any unauthorized encroachment on the city's right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 193, § 6, 12-20-2002) 
Secs. 74-37-74-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 74-61. - Utility excavation criteria manual adopted. 
    The City of San Antonio's Utility Excavation Criteria Manual, including amendments or subsequent editions, is incorporated and adopted by reference for all purposes, subject to the following: 
(1)  The City of San Antonio's Utility Excavation Criteria Manual (UECM), shall serve as the official technical and policy manual for the city; 
(2)  Any provision within the UECM to the contrary notwithstanding, the city administrator shall, with the city engineer, oversee the administration of the provisions of the manual; 
(3)  The city engineer shall interpret the UECM and may waive compliance with any provisions therein that the city engineer deems not applicable to the city; 
(4)  Any person who feels aggrieved by a interpretation or decision of the city engineer may appeal such interpretation or decision as set out in section 74-76; 
(5)  Any conflict between the UECM and this article shall be resolved in favor of this article; and 
(6)  Copies of the UECM shall be placed on file and available for inspection in the offices of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 3, 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-62. - Administrative official. 
    The administrator is the principal city official responsible for the administration of the right-of-way, right-of-way permits, the regulation of same and ordinances related thereto. The administrator may delegate any or all of the duties hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-106), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-63. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions apply in this article. The terms, phrases, words, abbreviations, and their derivations shall have the same meanings herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular include the plural. The word "shall" is mandatory and not merely permissive. 
    Abandoned facilities means facilities no longer in service or physically disconnected from the operating facilities, or from any other facilities that are in use or that still carry service. 
    Administrative fee means the fee charged by the city to recover its costs incurred for right-of-way management; including, but not limited to, costs associated with registering applicants; issuing, processing, and verifying right-of-way permit applications; inspecting job sites and restoration improvements; determining the adequacy of right-of-way restoration; revoking right-of-way permits and other costs the city may incur in implementing the provisions of this article. 
    Administrator means the city administrator or his designee. 
    Applicant means an owner or authorized agent of an owner who submits an application for a permit under these provisions. 
    Area of influence means that area around a utility excavation where the pavement and subgrade is impacted by the excavation and is subject to more rapid deterioration due to the trench excavation. 
    Certificated telecommunications provider or CTP means a person who has been issued a certificate of convenience and necessity, certificate of operating authority, or service provider certificate of operating authority by the Texas Public Utility Commission or "PUC" to offer local exchange telephone service as defined by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 283, or "the Act." 
    City means the City of Helotes. 
    Contractor means any public or private person or organization, other than the City of Helotes. 
    Day means business day unless otherwise specified. 
    Emergency operations means those operations and repairs necessary to prevent damage or injury to the health or safety of the public or any person and the work necessary to address a service interruption. Upgrading of facilities, new service installation and neighborhood improvement projects are not emergency operations. 
    Excavation means an activity that removes or otherwise disturbs soil, pavement, driveways, curbs, or sidewalks in the right-of-way and does not include landscaping activity unless the activity removes or disturbs the paved portion of the right-of-way. 
    Facilities means the plant, equipment, and property, including but not limited to lines, poles, mains, pipes, conduits, ducts, cables, and wires located under, on, or above the surface of the ground within the right-of-way and valves, and related facilities and equipment used or useful for the provision of utility services. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
    Governing body means the Mayor and the City Council of the City of Helotes, Texas. 
    Governmental entity means any county, township, city, town, village, school district, library district, road district, drainage or levee district, sewer district, water district, fire district or other municipal corporation, quasi-municipal corporation or political subdivision of the State of Texas or of any other state of the United States and any agency or instrumentality of the State of Texas or of any other state of the United States or of the United States. 
    New street means the paved portion of the right-of-way that has been constructed, reconstructed, or resurfaced with an asphalt overlay, hot in-place recycling, full-depth reclamation, reconstruction or other structural street maintenance treatment. "New street" includes all concrete paved streets, streets constructed or structurally resurfaced during the preceding seven years for a collector or arterial street or during the preceding five years for a residential street or alley, or any street with a Pavement Condition Index greater than 95 as defined herein. 
    Pavement condition index (PCI) means a measure of the condition of the right-of-way on a scale of 1-100. The PCI is available through the department. 
    Pavement degradation recovery fee means the cost incurred by the city and the public associated with a decrease in the useful life of a street caused by excavations and failures in restoration of the right-of-way. 
    Permit means a permit issued under this article authorizing excavation in the right-of-way. 
    Permittee means any person or right-of-way user to whom a permit is issued to excavate a right-of-way. 
    Person means any person, company, partnership, agency or other public or private entity, excepting the city. 
    Registration means the application process of a ROW user to use any portion of the right-of-way. 
    Repair means the temporary or permanent construction work necessary to make the right-of-way usable. 
    Repair area means that area around an excavation where the pavement and subgrade is impacted by an excavation. 
    Restoration means the process by which an excavated right-of-way and surrounding area, including pavement and foundation, is returned to the same condition, or better, than existed before the commencement of the work. 
    Resurfacing means any repaving, overlay, seal or reconstruction which creates a new pavement surface over the entire width of the street, excluding crack seals and localized base and pavement repairs. 
    Right-of-way or public right-of-way means the surface of, and the space above and below, any street, road, highway, freeway, lane, path, drainage way, channel, fee interest, public way or place, sidewalk, alley, boulevard, parkway, drive, or other easement now or hereafter held by the city or over which the city exercises any rights of management or control and shall include but not be limited to all easements now held, or hereafter held, by the city but shall specifically exclude private property. 
    Right-of-way (ROW) user means a person, its successors and assigns, that uses the right-of-way for purposes of work, excavation, provision of services, or to install, construct, maintain, repair facilities thereon, including, but not limited to, landowners and service providers. 
    Routine service operation means a work activity that makes no material change to the facilities and does not disrupt traffic. 
    Service means a commodity provided to a person by means of a delivery system that is comprised of facilities located or to be located in the right-of-way, including, but not limited to, gas, telephone, cable television, internet services, open video systems, alarm systems, steam, electric, water, telegraph, data transmission, petroleum pipelines, or sanitary sewage. 
    Street means the pavement and sub-grade of a city residential, collector or arterial roadway. 
    Supplementary application means an application made to excavate or obstruct more of the right-of-way than allowed in, or to extend a permit that has already been issued. 
    TMUTCD means Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, latest edition. 
    UECM means Utility Excavation Criteria Manual, current edition. 
    Utility means any privately or publicly owned entity which uses public rights-of-way to furnish to the public any general public service, including, without limitation, sanitary sewer, gas, electricity, water, telephone, petroleum products, telegraph, heat, steam or chilled water, together with the equipment, structures, and appurtenances belonging to such entity and located within and near the right-of-way. Poles are regulated herein only as specifically set forth in this article. 
    White lining means marking the excavation site with white washable marking paint or flags prior to requesting a utility locate in order to further identify the site. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-107), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-64. - Field utility coordination. 
(a)  The ROW user shall notify the administrator at each of the following times during a project: (i) 48 hours before the start of construction; (ii) upon completion of the initial backfill; and (iii) upon completion of the project. The ROW user shall mark the site of the proposed excavation with white lining and/or flags prior to making a request for locate and actual excavation. White lining is not required for excavations of more than 60 feet long unless the excavation is located in pavers, cobblestone, pavements, sidewalks, or other public flatwork. 
(b)  The ROW user shall make a request for a utility locate not more than 14 days and not less than 48 hours prior to the commencement of the proposed excavation. Such request shall be made to the state One-Call Center. Such requests shall be made by telephone or facsimile and shall include the date, location, extent and reason for such proposed excavation. 
(c)  The use of markers, stakes, poles, barricades or other devices shall be used in such a way to avoid damage to adjoining property. The use of "non-washable" markers is prohibited. The ROW user shall mark the proposed excavation site with paint and/or flags in colors established by the One-Call System. The markings shall be placed a distance of not less than five feet in all directions from the outside boundary of the site to be excavated. 
(d)  All excavations shall commence within 14 days of the date of the utility locate. In the event that the excavator fails to commence work within 14 days or the utility locate marks are not visible at the time the excavation is scheduled to commence, the ROW user is required to request a new utility locate. 
(e)  Compliance with the Texas Utilities Code is required at all times. 
(f)  All barricades, plates, cones, traffic directional equipment, and all other traffic control devices owned by the ROW user and used on or near any excavation shall be clearly and visibly marked with the name of the permittee and/or ROW user, as applicable, at all times such equipment is used on or near the right-of-way. An exception to the marking requirement may be made in the event the traffic control equipment is not owned by the permittee or ROW user. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-109), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-65. - Maps and records of registrants. 
    Each ROW user must maintain accurate maps and records of its facilities. The information shall be made available to the administrator within five days of request by the department. The maps and records shall depict horizontal and vertical locations of all facilities in and near the right-of-way. Maps and records shall indicate horizontal location and a description of the facility for the area involved in the permit application and two-block radius. The administrator may have facilities located if the ROW user does not provide the requested information. In such event the ROW user shall reimburse the cost to the city to locate the facilities. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-110), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-66. - Notices to city. 
    Notice for purposes of this article shall be made to city via overnight courier (generally used carrier with tracing available), or hand delivery with signed receipt, or United States mail return receipt required, and shall be directed to the administrator. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-111), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-67. - Registration required. 
    All ROW users must register with the city within 30 days of the effective date of this article. Any person who is not an existing ROW user prior to the effective date of this article and who wishes to become a ROW user must first register with the city. All ROW users shall report all changes in its registration information within 30 days of such change. No ROW user shall be authorized to utilize the right-of-way in any capacity or manner without registering and obtaining the necessary right-of-way permit from the city. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-112), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-68. - Registration information. 
    The information required for registration includes the following: 
(1)  Identity and legal status of ROW user and names of all operators of any facilities on the right-of-way. 
(2)  Name, address, telephone number, fax number and email address of the officer, agent or employee responsible for the accuracy of the registration information. 
(3)  Name, address, telephone number, fax number and email address of the local representative of the ROW user who shall be available at all times to act on behalf of the ROW user in the event of an emergency. 
(4)  If applicable, certification number issued by the public utilities commission. 
(5)  General description of services to be provided. 
(6)  Insurance and bonding information. 
(7)  Employee safety certification information. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-113), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-69. - Employee safety certification. 
    The ROW user operating facilities or constructing facilities in any public right-of-way is responsible for the safe movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic through the construction area. The ROW user shall obtain certification through a city approved training organization for a sufficient number of employees working within the right-of-way such that a certified employee is present at the job site during construction activities. The ROW user shall meet all requirements for barricading and traffic control as specified in the TMUTCD. Alternative training programs may be submitted to the administrator for city certification. Only those individuals who are qualified by means of adequate training in safe traffic control practices and have a basic understanding of the principles established by applicable standards and regulations, including those in TMUTCD, as evidenced by certification, shall place and maintain the traffic control devices in the construction area. Employee certificates shall be maintained current by the ROW user at all times. An employee shall produce, upon request of an inspector or certified police officer, proof of a valid training certificate. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-114), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-70. - Reporting obligations; proof of permits and other authorizations. 
    All ROW users shall provide, on demand, proof of any necessary permit, license, certification, grant, registration, franchise agreement or any other authorization required by any governmental entity, including, but not limited to, the city, state or federal government, including a description of the ROW user's intended use of the right-of-way, information sufficient to determine whether the ROW user is subject to franchising or licensing by the city, and information to determine whether the ROW user has applied for and received any certificate of authority required by the PUC. The information provided shall be sufficient to determine that the ROW user has applied for and received any permit or other approvals required by the FCC. ROW users shall provide all such other information as may be reasonably required by the city to complete the registration statement. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-116), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-71. - Permit required. 
    It is unlawful for any person, its agents, servants or employees to dig, plow, blast, make cuts, openings, bore, excavate or use the right-of-way for any purpose without first having made application and obtained a permit therefor. It is unlawful for any person, its agents, servants or employees to make or cause to be made any excavation in or under the surface of any right-of-way for the installation, repair or removal of any facilities, or for any other purpose, without first obtaining from the administrator a permit in compliance with this article. 
(1)  Before issuing a permit, the administrator shall have been provided a written application, on a form furnished by the administrator, setting forth the name and residence or business address of the applicant; the location and approximate area of the excavation, including its approximate length and width, and, if the excavation is in a street, whether it is parallel or transverse to the direction of the travel lanes; and the purpose of the excavation. The application form shall include plans prepared in accordance with city specifications. 
(2)  At the time the permit is issued, the applicant shall pay a nonrefundable application fee in an amount as provided for in this article. 
(3)  The proposed location, depth and other characteristics of any facilities for which the permit is issued shall be subject to approval of the administrator, and all backfilling, compaction and pavement restoration performed for any excavation shall comply with the requirements of this article. 
(4)  No fee or requirement authorized or imposed pursuant to this article shall be construed to affect or alter in any way any obligation of public and private utilities with facilities installed in any right-of-way to relocate the facilities at no cost to the city, subject to state law, if applicable, in the event that relocation is required by the city to accommodate a proper governmental use of the right-of-way. 
(5)  Combinations of permits shall be permitted at the discretion of the administrator. Fees shall be assessed based on the excavations permitted. 
(6)  Subdivision monuments, historical markers, and any other signs or structures with foundations in the right-of-way, excluding billboards, are subject to this article. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-117), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-72. - Application for permit; term. 
(a)  Application form. Application for a permit shall be addressed to the administrator and made on a form furnished for that purpose, stating the extent, dimensions, character and purpose of the cut or excavation to be made, the location, by street and number if possible, where the work is to be done, and the time in which it is to be completed. The application form shall be accompanied by maps of the existing facilities in the area, to the extent available, and the location of the proposed facilities, methodology of construction, and proposed start and completion dates. 
(1)  Joint applications. Applicants may apply jointly for permits to excavate the right-of-way at the same time and place. Applicants who apply jointly for a right-of-way permit may share in the payment of the permit fee. Applicants must agree among themselves as to the portion each shall pay. The city will recognize only one point of contact. 
(2)  Supplementary applications. A permit shall only be valid for the area of the right-of-way specified within the permit. No permittee may cause any work to be done outside the area specified in the permit, except as provided herein. Any permittee who determines that an area greater than that which is specified in the permit must be excavated must: 
a.  Make application for a permit extension and pay any additional fees required thereby; and 
b.  Receive a new right-of-way permit or permit extension. 
(b)  Permit issuance or denial. Permits will be issued or denied within ten days of application. Unless granted for a longer period, an excavation permit shall be valid for 30 days and for the dates specified in the permit. The applicant may request the permit be valid for such longer period as may be necessary in the circumstances, in advance, as part of the application. The city may approve or deny the application for such extended permit period. No permittee may commence work before the permit start date or, except as provided herein, may continue working after the end date. If a permittee does not complete the work by the permit end date, the permittee must apply for and may receive a new right-of-way permit or a permit extension for additional time. This supplementary application must be submitted to the city prior to the permit end date. An expedited permit may be requested, and shall be issued within two days of application upon a showing of good cause. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-118), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-73. - Issuance of permit. 
    Every person making application for a permit in accordance with the provisions of this article and having complied with each provision thereof shall, upon filing such application to the administrator, be entitled to said permit. 
(1)  Upon receiving a written application for an excavation permit and a plan prepared in accordance with city specifications, the administrator's designee shall set forth all requirements, approve or disapprove the application, and sign and return it to the applicant. Excepting only emergency excavations, at least one working day prior to the start of work, the applicant shall telephone the administrator and request a permit number, informing the city of the date the work will commence. A permit number shall then be assigned to the job and a permit shall be sent to the applicant. 
(2)  No permit shall be transferable. A permit shall be void unless the excavation to be made pursuant thereto is commenced within the time stated therein and the work diligently completed. 
(3)  Each permit shall state a time period for completion of all the work to be done thereunder. The administrator may grant extensions of time. 
(4)  No person in violation of any requirement of this article shall be issued an excavation permit, nor shall any contractor or agent apply for or be issued an excavation permit on the person's behalf, until the outstanding violation is corrected or a plan for correction is approved by the administrator. The foregoing requirement is in addition to any penalty or remedy for violation that may be imposed or sought by the city at law or equity. 
(5)  No work shall be done under any permit issued under this article except as stated in the permit. If the permit is allowed to expire, the ROW user shall procure a new permit, paying the applicable fee therefor as before, before proceeding with any such work. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-119), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-74. - Duties of permittee. 
(a)  Any ROW user engaged in making or backfilling any excavation in any right-of-way shall at all times while such work is in progress keep at the job location the permit, or a copy thereof, and shall, on demand, exhibit the permit to the administrator or any police officer. At all times while the work is in progress the ROW user shall also maintain at the job location, a sign, barricade, or other device bearing the ROW user's name. 
(b)  The ROW user shall protect from damage, utility conduits, sewer conduits, water conduits, lawns, shrubbery, trees, fences, structures, or other property at, near or encountered in his work. The ROW user shall determine the boundary of the right-of-way. All excavations and other construction in the streets shall be conducted so as to interfere as little as practicable with the use of rights-of-way and with the use of private property, in accordance with any lawful and reasonable direction given by or under the authority of the governing body of the city under the policy and regulatory powers of the city necessary to provide for public convenience. The ROW user shall reasonably protect from damage, utility facilities, sewer facilities, water facilities, lawns, shrubbery, trees, fences, structures, or other property encountered in his work. The ROW user shall not trespass upon private property. The ROW user shall determine the boundary between public right-of-way and private property. 
(c)  All transmission and distribution structures, lines, equipment and facilities erected by a ROW user within the city shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of the public rights-of-way, and to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who join any of the said streets. The city reserves the right to lay, and allow to be laid, electricity, sewer, gas, water and other pipe lines or cables and facilities, as well as drainage pipes and channels and streets and to perform, and allow to be performed, any underground and overhead installation or improvement that may be deemed necessary or proper by the governing body of the city, in, across, along, over or under any right-of-way or public place occupied by a ROW user and to change any curb or sidewalk or the grade of any street and to maintain all of the city's facilities. In allowing such work to be performed by others, the city shall not be liable to a ROW user for any damage caused by those persons or entities. Nothing herein shall relieve any third party from responsibility for damages caused to a ROW user by such third party. 
(d)  If the city requires a ROW user to adapt or conform its facilities, or in any way or manner to alter, relocate or change its property to enable any other corporation or person, except the city, to use, or to use with greater convenience, any right-of-way or public place, the ROW user shall not be required to make any such changes until such other corporation or person shall have undertaken, with solvent bond, to reimburse a ROW user for any loss and expense which will be caused by or arise out of such removal, change, adaptation, alteration, conformance or relocation of a ROW user's facilities; provided, however, that the city shall never be liable for such reimbursement. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-120), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-75. - Additional permit for excavation of larger area. 
    Subsequent to issuance of a permit, if it is necessary to excavate a larger area than originally estimated, the permittee shall at once pay to city the amount necessary to obtain the additional permit necessary. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-121), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-76. - Appeals. 
    A right-of-way user that: (i) has been denied registration; (ii) has been denied a permit; (iii) has had a permit revoked; or (iv) believes that fees imposed are invalid, may have the denial, revocation, or fee imposition reviewed, upon written request, as follows: 
(1)  The appellant shall provide, within five days of denial, a written notice of appeal filed with the administrator. The notice must state the alternatives available and routes explored, hardship encountered, cost comparison of other alternatives and a statement of any other significant factors. The administrator shall provide a written decision within five days of receipt of the appeal. Failure to render a decision within five business days shall constitute a denial. 
(2)  If a further denial is given, the appellant may thereafter file a written notice of appeal to the city council with the city clerk within five business days of receipt of the administrator's written decision. The clerk shall notify the administrator and the appellant of the placement of the appeal on the first available city council agenda in compliance with the Texas Open Meetings Law. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-122), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-77. - Denial of permit. 
    A permit may be denied or suspended for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to provide proof of a surety bond or liability insurance acceptable to the city. 
(2)  Failure to secure a contractor's license or other required license. 
(3)  Failure to perform in accordance with the requirements of the UECM or in accordance with these provisions. 
(4)  The excavation would be in a new street and not otherwise permitted by this article. 
(5)  The proposed warning or other traffic control procedures or equipment do not comply with the requirements of the TMUTCD or the requirements of the administrator. 
(6)  The proposed activity would violate a city ordinance or state or federal statute. 
(7)  The permit application contains false or misleading information. 
(8)  The activity would cause a public health or safety hazard. 
(9)  The ROW user is not authorized within the city. 
(10)  The ROW user is in violation of this article relative to work in progress. Denied permits may be appealed as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-123), 9-19-2002) 
Secs. 74-78-74-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 74-101. - Energy, electric and gas standards. 
    Technical standards for energy, electric and gas are defined in the UECM. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-124), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-102. - Water and sewer regulations and standards. 
    Water and sanitary sewer providers shall work to provide a connection service point beyond the pavement to all commercial and residential tracts in their service area as streets are constructed either by connection or conduit, for existing development. Technical standards for water and sanitary sewer are defined in the UECM. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-125), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-103. - Storm sewer standards. 
    Technical standards for storm sewer are defined in the UECM. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-126), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-104. - Compliance with safety regulations. 
    The permittee and ROW user shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local safety regulations and requirements, including, by example and not limitation, the occupational safety and health standards for the construction industry. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-128), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-105. - Commencement and completion of work. 
    After obtaining the permit and prior to commencing the work, the permittee shall notify the administrator, and shall commence and complete all work within the time specified in the permit unless an extension of time is granted by the administrator. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-129), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-106. - Safe conduct of work. 
    Every permittee and ROW user shall prosecute its work diligently and in a good, safe, and workmanlike manner, and shall safeguard and protect the public using the street or right-of-way where the work is being performed from accidents or damage by placing barriers, lights and other sufficient safeguards around all cuts, openings, and excavations. All material, implements and tools stored upon the premises and used in connection with the excavation shall be stored in a safe and nonhazardous manner. All work must be performed only within the hours and days as set forth in the UECM and in accordance with the requirements of the permit. Work in residential areas may only occur during daylight hours. Certain commercial areas and hospital districts are subject to noise controls and other limitations. Details are available in the UECM and from the administrator. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-130), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-107. - Emergency excavations. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent any person maintaining any pipe, conduit, or duct in or under any street, or right-of-way by virtue of any law, ordinance or permit from making such excavation as may be necessary for compliance with law or for the preservation of life or property when the necessity arises, provided that the person making the excavation shall notify the administrator within 24 hours. Except as specifically provided otherwise in this article, excavations authorized by this section shall be subject to all fees and requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-131), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-108. - Traffic control safety. 
    In the event of noncompliance with the TMUTCD, the ROW user shall be notified in writing of the violation. In the event of continued noncompliance, the administrator may revoke the permit, in addition to any other remedies available to the city. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-132), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-109. - Excavation in streets in good condition. 
    The permittee shall complete pavement restoration of the excavated area within 30 days on major arterial, minor arterial and collector streets and within 30 days on residential and alley streets after final backfill is completed and accepted by the administrator. The permittee shall conduct the work with a minimum disturbance to existing utilities and shall coordinate all work in or near the existing utilities with the utility owners. 
(1)  Excavation in new streets. There shall be no excavation in new streets without the prior approval of the administrator. Any request for a permit to excavate a new street shall include a description of the proposed work and proposed restoration of the area, as well as a statement as to why alternate procedures cannot or should not be used in lieu of excavating a new street. 
(2)  Excavation in arterial streets in good condition. A permit holder shall perform jacking and boring operations in a manner that does not weaken or impair the right-of-way upon completion of restoration of the excavation. Excavation in all streets in good condition regardless of age should not occur without prior approval of the administrator. Streets assigned a PCI of 96 or above by the pavement management system are deemed to be in good condition and are subject to the review procedures of excavation of new streets. Restoration of the excavated area of streets in good condition shall be in accordance with this article. 
(3)  Excavation in Portland cement concrete (PCC) pavement surface. If the existing pavement is PCC, the concrete shall be cut first with a saw to a minimum depth of half the thickness of the concrete which shall also cut the reinforcing steel. The concrete can then be broken out with an air chisel or pavement breaker. No more than six inches of PCC shall be broken back beneath the saw cut. Further criteria is set forth in the UECM. The guidelines for jacking and boring are set forth in the UECM. 
(4)  Responsibility for excavated area maintenance. A permittee or ROW user shall maintain their repairs in the right-of-way for the life of the street as defined in this article. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-133), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-110. - Lawful use of right-of-way. 
(a)  The use of the right-of-way in any manner which violates federal, state, or local laws, or city codes and regulations, including, without limitation, those relating to health, safety, noise, environmental protection, waste disposal and water and air quality, is prohibited. All permittees shall provide satisfactory evidence of compliance with the foregoing upon request of the city. 
(b)  The permittee shall dispose of all material removed from the right-of-way and any waste created by the permittee in compliance with all state, federal and local laws and requirements. 
(c)  If a permittee discovers any contaminated, regulated, or hazardous materials in the right-of-way, the permittee shall be responsible for environmental assessment, excavation, testing, transportation, and disposal of any such contaminated or regulated material in accordance with applicable law, or the permittee may elect to abandon the contaminated area of the right-of-way and reroute around the contaminated area. The permittee shall promptly notify the city in writing of the condition. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-134), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-111. - Tree trimming; graffiti abatement. 
    Permission is granted to a ROW user, subject to the requirements of the city's tree ordinance (Chapter 94), which may be amended from time to time, to trim trees upon and overhanging the public right-of-way, so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with a ROW user's facilities. When so directed by the city, the tree trimming shall be done under the supervision and direction of the city. The city shall report damage or vandalism to the ROW user's facilities as soon as practicable after city discovers or learns of such event. The ROW user shall make the necessary repairs or restoration, including cleaning of graffiti, within 48 hours after the ROW user discovers or learns of any misuse, destruction, damage, or vandalism to its facilities. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-135), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-112. - Rights of user upon vacation of right-of-way. 
    In the event the city closes, vacates, abandons or conveys any right-of-way containing facilities of the ROW user, any such closure, vacation, abandonment or conveyance of land shall be subject to the rights of the ROW user. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-137), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-113. - Supervision of location of poles and conduits. 
    All poles in the rights-of-way shall be of sound material and straight, and shall not interfere with the flow of water in any gutter or drain, and shall be placed so as not to unduly interfere with either vehicular or pedestrian travel. The location and route of all conduits, fiber, cables, and utilities, and facilities placed and constructed by a ROW user in the construction and maintenance of its system in the city shall be subject to the reasonable and proper control, direction and approval of the city. Any "non-standard" placement of poles, stubs, guys and anchors is subject to all provisions of this article. Any "standard" placement of poles, stubs, guys, and anchors is exempt from this article. "Standard" is defined by the provisions of the UECM. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-138), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-114. - Attachments to poles. 
(a)  Nothing shall obligate or restrict a ROW user from exercising its rights to enter into pole attachment, pole usage, joint ownership or other wire space or facilities agreements with light and/or power companies or with other wire-using companies authorized to operate within the city. 
(b)  A ROW user shall utilize existing poles, conduits, and other facilities whenever reasonably and/or economically possible. Prior to the utilization of any right-of-way for the placement of any of its facilities, the ROW user shall make available to the administrator any utility pole usage agreement with each utility within the city currently owning poles, conduits, and other facilities, whose poles, conduits and facilities are to be used. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-139), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-115. - Temporary rearrangement of aerial wires. 
    The ROW user shall rearrange its transmission media temporarily as necessary to permit the moving of houses or other bulky structures. The requesting parties shall pay the reasonable and necessary expense of such temporary rearrangements. The ROW user may require payment in advance. The ROW user shall be given not less than five days' advance notice to arrange for such temporary rearrangements. The ROW user shall remove its transmission media in connection with the demolition of unsafe structures, including emergency or ordered demolitions at no cost to the city. The ROW user may invoice third parties for the cost of this work where applicable. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-140), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-116. - Backfill of excavated area. 
    Open trenches may be temporarily backfilled for the convenience of the permittee or the public safety. At least one hour prior to beginning permanent backfill operations, the permittee shall notify the administrator of the time the backfill will begin. All excess water and mud shall be removed from the trench prior to backfilling. Any backfill placed during a rainy period or at other times, where excess water cannot be prevented from entering the trench, will be considered temporary and shall be removed as soon as weather permits. All disturbed base material or any base that has been undermined shall be removed and discarded. The new roadway base material shall be a minimum depth of six inches asphalt treated base or other approved roadway base material, as detailed in the UECM. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-142), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-117. - Restoration of pavement. 
    Unless otherwise specified in the permit, restoration of the asphalt pavement of any street, alley, right-of-way or other public place shall be performed by the permittee or by the city, upon request by the permittee. Nothing in this section shall relieve the ROW user from the responsibility to maintain the excavation or installation in a safe condition until it is repaved by city or otherwise restored. In addition to all other applicable fees or charges, if the ROW user or permittee making the excavation requests repaving by the city, the ROW user shall pay for repaving at a rate to be established by the city. 
(1)  No trench shall be opened in any street for the purpose of laying pipes, conduits or ducts more than 400 feet in advance of the pipe, conduit or ducts being placed in the trench, other than with the prior written consent of the administrator. 
(2)  All excavations shall comply with the standards and requirements established from time to time by the administrator for compaction, backfill and pavement restoration. 
(3)  Any excavated pavement, debris and other rubble shall be removed, together with any surplus material, within one working day from the time such material is placed upon the street. After backfilling is completed, and prior to repaving the cut, the ROW user shall remove all loose paving material and trim the edges of the excavation at the street surface to the satisfaction of the administrator. 
(4)  Whenever any caving occurs in the sidewalls of any excavation, the pavements above such caving shall be cut away, trench backfilled and pavement restored in accordance with the UECM. In no case shall any side or lateral tamping fill any void under a pavement. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-143), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-118. - Excavation specifications. 
    All excavations shall be made in accordance with plans submitted with the permit application and in accordance with specifications set forth in the UECM. All plans shall be prepared in accordance with all city specifications and the UECM. All excavations shall be repaired in such a way so as not to become depressed, cracked, broken, or in any way fail during the remaining life of the street. The remaining life of the street for this purpose shall be until the PCI Index drops to below 50 or until the subject area is repaved by the city or other entity. Additional specifications may be contained in the UECM. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-144), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-119. - Cleanup of right-of-way. 
    In every case and at all times, the work of removing from the right-of-way all obstructions, surplus materials, debris and waste matter of every description caused by and accumulated from the excavation shall be the responsibility of the ROW user. Streets shall be cleaned by use of a regenerative air or vacuum street sweeper. The ROW user shall clean the surrounding area, as outlined above, within one day upon completion and approval of all trench work and pavement restoration unless the administrator, sufficient reason therefor having been given to his satisfaction, grants an extension of time. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-145), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-120. - Substandard repair of pavement or right-of-way. 
    In case the pavement or the surface of the street, alley, or right-of-way in, over or near any excavation should become depressed, cracked, or broken at any time or fails in any way at any time after the excavation has been made and during the remaining life of the street, the ROW user shall comply with any applicable obligations of this article, including, without limitation, reimbursement to city of the cost to restore the street or right-of-way and payment of the pavement degradation recovery fee as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-146), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-121. - Failure to complete work within specified time. 
    In the event any work governed by this article is not completed by the ROW user within the time required or in accordance within the specifications required herein or by the administrator, the administrator may cause such work to be performed as is necessary to secure the work area to a safe and passable condition. The ROW user shall reimburse the city for the costs of securing the site. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-147), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-122. - City and user responsibility for permanent pavement repairs. 
    All permanent pavement repairs shall be made under one of the two following methods: 
(1)  Permanent pavement repairs by city. If the city is to make the permanent pavement repairs, the ROW user shall maintain the excavated area for a period of two weeks after acceptance by the administrator. After the two-week period, the city will be responsible for maintaining the excavated area until final restoration is made. Backfill failures shall remain the responsibility of the ROW user. The ROW user shall reimburse the city for all costs of any backfill failure before and/or after permanent pavement repair. 
(2)  Permanent pavement repairs by ROW user. If the ROW user is authorized to make permanent pavement repairs, the ROW user will maintain the excavated area until permanent pavement restoration of the excavated area is complete. The ROW user shall make final repairs within 30 days on arterial and collector streets and within 30 days on residential, local and alley streets after the administrator makes final inspection. Backfill failures shall remain the responsibility of the ROW user. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-148), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-123. - Standards and responsibility for signs, barricades and warning devices. 
    The ROW user working in any right-of-way is responsible for the safe movement of traffic, both pedestrian and vehicular, through the construction area. The ROW user shall meet all requirements for barricading and traffic control as specified in the TMUTCD. 
(1)  Only those individuals who are qualified by means of adequate training in safe traffic control practices and have a basic understanding of the principles established by applicable standards and regulations, including those in TMUTCD, may place and maintain the traffic control devices in a construction area. 
(2)  The ROW user must either: 
a.  Subcontract the barricading to a firm specializing in traffic control; or 
b.  Submit the qualifications and name(s) of employees to the administrator for approval prior to the work commencing. 
(3)  The ROW user must submit a traffic control plan for review with all signs and barricades conforming to the requirements of the TMUTCD. 
(4)  All barricades, plates, and other traffic control equipment must conform to TMUTCD specifications and must be inspected and approved by the administrator if not provided by a traffic control firm. 
(5)  All barricades, plates, and other traffic control equipment must display accurate and sufficient information including the name of the ROW user. 
(6)  Noncompliance with the TMUTCD shall be cited in writing. 
a.  In the event of noncompliance after citation, the administrator may place the necessary devices as required and the ROW user shall pay the charges therefor. 
b.  The ROW user shall reimburse the city for all such expenses as well as $500.00 for noncompliance. 
c.  Failure to comply with this provision may result in denial of application for future permits. 
(7)  All traffic control devices must be removed immediately upon completion of work. Prior to commencement of any excavation, or any work relative to a permit, the ROW user shall install at the work site informational sign in conformance with the requirements of the UECM. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-149), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-124. - Placement of barricades and lights. 
    At all times during construction activity, the contractor and/or ROW user, as applicable, shall place and maintain all necessary and proper barriers and other safeguards, including watchmen certified in accordance with the safety training described in this article, if necessary, upon and around the work for the prevention of accidents, and, after daylight hours, shall place, maintain and keep suitable sufficient lights, in accordance with the TMUTCD. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-150), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-125. - Inspections. 
    The permittee shall make the work site accessible to the city, and others as authorized by law, for inspection at all reasonable times during performance of the work. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-151), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-126. - Materials testing. 
    The administrator may require testing of materials used in construction in or near the right-of-way to determine conformance to required specifications, including, but not limited to, compaction tests on backfill materials, subgrade, aggregate base course, Portland concrete (rigid pavement), asphaltic concrete (flexible pavement) and other construction materials as deemed necessary by the department. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-152), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-127. - Duties of persons making excavations or creating obstructions. 
    Any person who shall cause to be made any excavation or obstruction in any street or right-of-way may not suffer the same to remain there beyond a time reasonably sufficient for the completion of the work and/or removal of the obstruction, and shall repair the subject portion of such street or right-of-way so as to restore the same to its condition previous to the making of such cut or obstruction. It shall be the duty of such excavators to protect the area while such condition exists and promptly to repair the same so as to leave the street or right-of-way in as good condition as before the excavation. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-153), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-128. - Order to cease work. 
    At any time, the administrator may order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a threat to the health, safety or well being of the public. The administrator may revoke the permit of any permittee in any instance where there is a threat to the health, safety or well being of the public. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-154), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-129. - Notice of noncompliance. 
    The administrator may issue a written notice to the permittee indicating work that does not conform to the terms of the permit, applicable standards, conditions, or codes, or other applicable regulations. Within ten days after issuance of written notice, the permittee shall present proof to the administrator that the violation has been corrected. If such proof has not been presented within the required time, the administrator may revoke the permit. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-155), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-130. - Notification of completion of work. 
    When the work under any permit hereunder is completed, the permittee shall furnish the administrator a completion certificate. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-156), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-131. - Revocation of permit. 
(a)  The city reserves its right, as provided herein, to revoke any permits, without refund of the permit fee, in the event of a breach by the permittee of the terms and/or conditions of the permit or of this article or any city ordinance. A breach of the terms of the permit shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  The violation of any provision of the permit; 
(2)  An evasion or attempt to evade any provision of the permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit upon the city or its citizens; 
(3)  Any material misrepresentation of any fact in the permit application; 
(4)  The failure to meet insurance, surety bond, or indemnification requirements; 
(5)  The failure to complete the work in a timely manner; 
(6)  The failure to correct a condition indicated on an order issued pursuant to this article; 
(7)  Repeated traffic control violations; 
(8)  Failure to repair facilities damaged in the right-of-way; or 
(9)  Violation of any part of this article. 
(b)  If the administrator determines that the permittee has committed a breach of any law or condition of the right-of-way permit, the administrator shall make a written demand upon the permittee to remedy such violation. Continued violation may be cause for revocation of the permit, or legal action, or both. The administrator may revoke the permit, provide specifications to cure the breach, or both. Within five calendar days of receiving notification of the breach, the permittee shall contact the administrator with a plan, acceptable to the administrator, for correction of the breach. The permittee's failure to do so or the permittee's failure to timely implement the approved plan shall be cause for revocation of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-157), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-132. - Work done without permit. 
    No cut, excavation, grading or disturbing of the right-of-way in any way shall be made other than excavations necessary for emergency work without first securing a permit. No person or ROW user shall at any time open or encumber more of the right-of-way than shall be reasonably necessary to complete a project in the most expeditious manner. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-158), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-133. - Right-of-way restoration requirements. 
(a)  The work to be done pursuant to the permit and any repair and subsequent restoration of the right-of-way must be completed within the dates specified in the permit. In the event of circumstances beyond the control of the permittee or when work is prohibited by unseasonable or unreasonable conditions, the administrator may extend the dates on receipt of a substantiated supplementary application for a permit extension. All earth, materials, sidewalks, paving, crossing, or improvements of any kind which are owned or possessed by city and damaged, disturbed, or removed by a ROW user shall be fully repaired promptly by the ROW user at its sole expense, to the reasonable satisfaction of the administrator. 
(b)  After any excavation, the ROW user shall, at its expense, restore the right-of-way, trench envelope, pavement structure and the surrounding area, to the same or better condition than it was prior to the excavation. The restoration shall be made in accordance with specifications set forth in the UECM and the repair shall endure without failure for the remaining life of the street, as such period is described in this article. 
(c)  In the event the ROW user fails to restore the right-of-way in the manner and to the condition required herein, or fails to satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration, the city may, at its option, serve written notice upon the ROW user that, unless within five days after serving of such notice a satisfactory arrangement can be made for the proper restoration of the right-of-way by the ROW user, the city may take over the work and prosecute same to completion, by contract or otherwise, at the expense of the ROW user, and the ROW user and its surety shall be liable to the city for any and all cost incurred by the city by reason of such prosecution and completion, including, without limitation, the applicable public inconvenience penalty. Nothing contained herein shall limit any other remedies available to the city. If any excavation cannot be backfilled immediately, the ROW user shall securely and adequately cover the excavation and maintain proper barricades, safety fencing and/or lights as required, from the time of the opening of the excavation until the excavation is surfaced and opened for travel. 
(d)  In all right-of-way restoration, the ROW user guarantees its work and shall maintain it for the remaining life of the street following completion of the restoration. During the period following completion, the ROW user shall, in the event of any failure of the restoration, upon notification from the administrator, reimburse the city for (i) pavement restoration costs, and (ii) the pavement degradation recovery fee as provided for in this article. Additionally, the ROW user, in the event of such failure, shall, within 48 hours of notice from city, repair the subject trench envelope. 
(e)  The life of the street guarantee period shall be applicable to failure of the pavement surface as well as failure of the trench envelope. Notwithstanding remediation of the pavement structure by city, the ROW user retains repair responsibility at all times during the guarantee period for the trench envelope. 
(f)  Excavations in streets and/or right-of-way with PCI values of 96 or greater shall be deemed 100 percent loss of pavement life. These excavations require (i) block to block and curb to curb pavement reconstruction, or (ii) use of a hot mix asphalt repaving process, or (iii) such other method of repair as the administrator approves, for all cuts. Specifications are available in the UECM. 
(g)  A right-of-way user whose work is completed by the city shall, on completion of the work and according to the certified bill of the cost thereof to be prepared by the administrator, pay to the city, on its order, the amount of the certified bill as reimbursement for such work. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-159), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-134. - Excavations not in accordance with permit. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make, cause or allow to be made any excavation, or to install, cause or allow to be installed any tank, pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, utility pole or other utility or appliance, in or under the surface of any street, alley, sidewalk, right-of-way or other public place, at any location, other than that described in the application for the permit and as shown on the plans filed with the administrator, and in accordance with the requirements of the permit. If the circumstances appearing after the excavation is commenced make it impossible to comply with the permit, the administrator may grant a waiver to take the circumstances into account. 
(b)  Failure to comply with requirements set forth in this article or in any permit shall be cause for revocation of the subject permit and of any other permits held by the same permittee until the violations have been corrected or the administrator has approved alternative requirements. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-160), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-135. - Removal and reconstruction where work defective. 
    All construction work in the streets, right-of-way, sidewalks and public places of the city is declared to be subject to the exclusive control of the city, and whenever, in the opinion of the administrator, any such work shall not have been duly completed within a reasonable time or shall have been executed in a defective manner, whether because of bad workmanship or materials or because not true to the lines or grades or specifications therefor given to him by the administrator, then upon written demand or notice from the administrator, such ROW user or contractor shall promptly remedy, complete or remove and reconstruct such incomplete or defective work all as the administrator may require, and these provisions shall also apply to all repair and maintenance work. If the contractor or ROW user shall fail or refuse to do so within a reasonable time to be specified by the administrator, then, if the administrator shall so order, such work shall be completed or corrected or removed and wholly or partially reconstructed by the city, in such manner as in the opinion of the administrator may be necessary to make such work as good as originally required, and such work may be done by contract or otherwise, under the direction of the administrator. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-161), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-136. - Location and relocation of facilities. 
    Subject to applicable federal, state, and local law, the ROW user shall, upon the request of the city, locate and/or relocate its facilities situated within any right-of-way, at no expense to the city, where reasonable and necessary to accommodate street construction, widening, or public improvement projects of the city. When relocation is necessitated by federal government requirements, and includes reimbursements, the city will reimburse the applicant for its proportionate share from funds provided the city in such reimbursements. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-162), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-137. - Pre-excavation facilities location. 
    The ROW user shall contact the One-Call Center, so long as that center is in existence and utilized by the city, or such other center at the time utilized by city, at least 48 hours prior to excavation. The ROW user shall protect and support all utility facilities during construction. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-163), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-138. - Relocation of facilities at request of city. 
    In the event the city finds it necessary to move a ROW user's equipment to protect it, city shall notify the local representative of the ROW user. The ROW user shall promptly move or facilitate the relocation of the subject facilities at the ROW user's expense. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-164), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-139. - Relocation of facilities upon vacation of right-of-way. 
    In the event of vacation of a right-of-way requiring the relocation of facilities, the ROW user being relocated shall pay the costs of the relocation where the ROW user does not own an easement or other real property interest. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-165), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-140. - Abandoned facilities. 
(a)  A ROW user owning abandoned facilities in the right-of-way shall: 
(1)  Remove its facilities and repair, at its expense, any damage caused by the removal. The administrator may allow some or all facilities to remain if the administrator determines same is in the best interest of the public to do so; or 
(2)  Provide information satisfactory to the city that the ROW user's obligations for its facilities in the right-of-way have been lawfully assumed by another authorized ROW user. 
(b)  The facilities of a ROW user who fails to comply with this section, and those facilities which remain unused for two years, shall be deemed to be abandoned unless, within the aforesaid two-year period, the city receives written confirmation and reasonable evidence that the ROW user intends to use the facilities. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to, taking possession of the abandoned facilities or requiring the removal of the facilities by the ROW user. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-166), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-141. - Routing and spatial assignment. 
    The city reserves the right, in the permit or otherwise, to restrict or determine the route (pathway) and/or spatial location, whether horizontal, vertical or depth, of any facility and/or structure or improvement in the right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-167), 9-19-2002) 
Secs. 74-142-74-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COSTS, FEES AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 74-161. - Fees. 
(a)  Permit application fee. There is a permit application fee of $25.00. Permits shall be issued or denied within ten days. There is an expedited application fee of $250.00 for permits which shall be issued or denied within two days. The fees are paid by an applicant when a permit is issued. The fees are charged for administration and input of permit data. An expedited permit may be requested upon a showing of good cause, including but not limited to a pending order for service that cannot be met by means of existing facilities of the ROW user; an expedited permit may be requested and shall be issued or denied within two days of application. 
(b)  Inspection fee. The work allowed by each permit shall be subject to inspection as determined by the administrator. There is an inspection fee of $200.00 per inspection. The department shall collect the fee from an applicant for each inspection by the department for any excavation. The fee shall be paid at the time of application for a permit. Inspections may be performed on any and all excavations, at the discretion of the administrator, based on previous performance of the utility owner, location of excavation, type of work and/or construction methodology. Overtime inspection fees are incurred at a rate of $40.00 per hour and $70.00 per hour on Sundays and holidays. 
(c)  Permit expiration fee. A fee of $30.00 will be charged for any permit that has not been extended before its expiration date and for any permit wherein work has not been completed by the expiration date provided for in the permit. The 30-day period begins with the date of issuance of the permit. 
(d)  Electronic maps submittal fee. A fee of $40.00 per hour will be charged for each hour of labor necessitated by information submitted to city in hard copy format in lieu of submittals to city in electronic format. There is a minimum of two hours. 
(e)  Pavement degradation recovery fee. 
(1)  Basis for reimbursement to the city. This reimbursement to the city is due upon failure of any ROW user's restoration, or upon a ROW user's failure to restore the right-of-way. The following provisions apply to excavations in streets with certain PCI indexes. 
a.  PCI of 0-50. Excavations in streets and/or rights-of-way with PCI values of 50 or less shall be deemed to be excavations in streets with nominal loss of life. The ROW user excavator shall promptly repair the trench envelope and surface in accordance with specifications set forth herein and in the UECM. The repair shall have a guarantee by the ROW user as set forth herein. 
b.  PCI of 51-95. In the event of an excavation in a street or right-of-way having a PCI of 51-95, the ROW user excavator shall promptly repair the trench envelope and surface in accordance with the specifications set forth herein and in the UECM. The repair shall have a guarantee as set forth herein. In the event of failure of the repair during the guarantee period, the ROW user/excavator shall (i) reimburse the city for its pavement restoration cost, and (ii) pay the pavement degradation recovery fee, calculated as set forth herein. 
c.  PCI of 96-100. Excavations in streets and/or right-of-way with PCI values of 96 or greater shall be deemed 100 percent loss of pavement life. These excavations require block to block and curb to curb pavement reconstruction. Use of a hot mix asphalt repaving process is an option with approval of the administrator. Specifications are available in the department. In the event of any trench failure in the street or right-of-way during the guarantee period, the ROW user shall (i) reimburse the city for its costs to repair the failure, and (ii) pay the pavement degradation recovery fee, calculated as set forth herein. Additionally, in the event of such failure, the ROW user shall within 48 hours repair the subject trench envelope, if required by the administrator. 
(2)  Guarantee of repairs. All repairs for streets or right-of-way of any PCI are guaranteed by the excavator making the repair, and the excavator causing the repair to be made, for the life of the street. The life of the street for these purposes is defined to be until such time as that certain street or right-of-way is repaved by the city or another, in the same location as the excavation, or until such time as the PCI Index of such street or right-of-way drops to below 50. 
(3)  Pavement degradation recovery fee calculation. The area of influence adjacent to the trench is calculated by using the following formula: [(Length of cut in feet + (2 × the depth of trench in feet) × (Width of the cut in feet + (2 × the depth of trench in feet))]/9 = Square yards of area of influence. All damage(s) caused directly or indirectly to the street surface or subsurface outside the pavement excavated area shall be regarded as a part of the excavation repair area. This includes any holes drilled into the pavement and not properly plugged, as well as damages caused by work equipment. These areas, as established by the administrator, will be included in the total area to be repaired. 
The pavement degradation recovery fee is determined by multiplying the percent loss of life by the pavement cost per square yard determined above by the area of influence. Unit costs shall be updated annually. 
(Ex. Trench = 15' long × 2' wide × 4' deep = (15 + (2 × 4)) × (2 + (2 × 4))/9 = Area of Influence of 25.56 SY) 
a.  Damage recovery cost calculation. The damage recovery cost per square yard shall be based on the pavement thickness and/or street classification (residential, collector minor arterial or major arterial), and the PCI. 
b.  Pavement cross-sectional thickness determination. Determine the pavement cross-sectional thickness (in inches) from one of the following sources: 
1.  City pavement management system (PMS) data base information; 
2.  Infrastructure plans on file in the city engineer's office; or 
3.  The as-built drawings on file in the city engineer's office. 
c.  Pavement equivalent granular thickness (EGT) determination. The pavement equivalent granular thickness (EGT) value is equal to the sum of all the layers in the existing pavement section times the respective value for each material as follows: 
Pavement Material EGT Value per Inch Lime stabilized subgrade 0.6 Crushed limestone base 1.0 HMACP, Type A or B 2.0 HMACP, Type C or D 1.8 Asphalt stabilized base 1.7 Asphalt in-place base stabilization 1.6 Old or weathered concrete 2.0 Newly or mildly weathered concrete 3.0  
d.  Pavement section classification determination. Use the calculated EGT value from above to determine the classification of the pavement section. 
Total EGT Value Classification Cost Less than or equal to 15 Thin $28.00/SY Greater than 15 but less than 20 Medium $34.00/SY Equal or greater than 20 Thick $42.00/SY  
Using the PCI value determine the percent loss of life of the pavement by locating the value at the bottom of the graph in the utility excavation criteria manual and moving up to intersect the curved line. Read the percent loss of life on the left side of the figure. Round the value to the nearest whole number. The percent loss of life can also be calculated using the following formula: 
Percent Loss of Life = 0.0039 × ((PCI/20)6.963) 
e.  Pavement cost per square yard determination. Use the classification from above to determine the cost per square yard for the area to be excavated. The cost per square yard rates shall be updated annually. Pavement restoration cost is the cost reimbursement owning the city for repair of the pavement riding surface and base and sub-base courses in the event of a failure or a failure of restoration or no restoration by a right-of-way user. 
(f)  Registration fee. There is a fee of $35.00 per right-of-way user per year for processing registration information, which fee will be collected upon registration. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-168), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-162. - Penalty. 
    Each violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. Each day during which a violation continues shall be deemed a separate violation of this article. Any fines that are collected pursuant to this section shall be deposited into Fund No. 29, Project 014000, Streets/Drainage Maintenance and Improvement Fund. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-169), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-163. - Public inconvenience penalty. 
    Public inconvenience penalties are assessed and calculated from the date of expiration of the permit until date of completion of work or repair or of final backfill if turned over to the department for repair. This penalty shall not exceed and is capped by statutory limits. Public inconvenience penalties are charged per day as follows: 
Fee Rate Type of Facility Unit of Cost 
(per day) 31-75 Days 76-90 Days 90-100 Days 100 Days Traffic lane Per square foot $0.0521 $0.1042 $0.1563 $0.2084 Sidewalk Per square foot $0.0026 $0.0052 $0.0078 $0.0104 Driveway Per each $39.00 $78.00 $117.00 $156.00 Parking Per meter $14.00 $21.00 $28.00 $42.00 Metered traffic lane *In addition to traffic lane fee  
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-170), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-164. - Clean-up costs. 
    The ROW user shall maintain the area on and around the excavation and related work in a clean, safe and orderly fashion at all times during conduct of the excavation and shall clean the same area upon completion of work. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-171), 9-19-2002) 
Secs. 74-165-74-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - INDEMNIFICATION, INSURANCE, BONDING AND LIABILITY 

Sec. 74-191. - Liability of right-of-way user. 
    To the extent allowed by law, the right-of-way user shall be liable to the city for any damage or loss occasioned by any act or omission occurring in connection with his excavation, and subject to state law, the ROW user shall fully indemnify, hold harmless and defend the city, its officers and employees from and against any and all suits, actions, judgments, losses, costs, demands, claims, expenses (including attorney's fees), damages, and liabilities of every kind to which the city, its officers or employees may be subjected for injury of any type, death or property damage arising from or connected with any such act or omission. The city shall promptly notify a permittee, or ROW user, at the address set forth in the permit, or last known address, of any claim or suit served upon the city and alleging negligent or wrongful conduct by the permittee or ROW user in connection with an excavation. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-172), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-192. - Insurance. 
(a)  Right-of-way users shall furnish an original completed certificate of insurance or the city's standard certificate of insurance form to the city's finance department, city clerk's office, and public works department, which shall be completed by an agent authorized to bind the named underwriter(s) and their company to the coverage, limits, and termination provisions shown thereon, and which shall furnish and contain all required information referenced or indicated thereon. The original certificate(s) or form must have the agent's original signature, including the signer's company affiliation, title and phone number, and be mailed directly from the agent to the city. The city shall have no duty to pay or perform under this article until such certificate shall have been delivered to the city's finance department, city clerk's office, and public works department, and no officer or employee, other than the city's risk manager, shall have authority to waive this requirement. 
(b)  The city reserves the right to review the insurance requirements of this section to modify insurance coverage and their limits when deemed necessary and prudent by the city's risk manager based upon changes in statutory law, court decisions, or circumstances surrounding this article, but in no instance will the city allow modification whereupon the city may incur increased risk. 
(c)  Subject to the right-of-way user's right to maintain reasonable deductibles in such amounts as are approved by the city, right-of-way users shall obtain and maintain in full force and effect for the duration of the permit, and any extension thereof, and/or duration of time it maintains facilities in the public right-of-way, at the right-of-way user's sole expense, insurance coverage written on an occurrence basis, by companies authorized and admitted to do business in the State of Texas and rated A- or better by A.M. Best Company and/or otherwise acceptable to the city, in the following types and amounts: 
Type Amount (1) Workers' Compensation Statutory Employer's Liability $500,000.00/$500,000.00/$500,000.00 (2) Commercial general (public) liability insurance to include coverage for the following: Bodily injury and property damage of $2,000,000.00 per occurrence 
$5,000,000.00 general aggregate or its equivalent in umbrella or excess liability coverage  a. Premises/operations  b. Independent contractors  c. Products/completed operations  d. Contractual liability  e. Personal injury  f. Explosion, collapse, underground  g. Broad form property damage to include fire legal liability *(3) Business automobile liability: Combined single limit for bodily injury and property damage of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence or its equivalent.  a. Owned/leased vehicles  b. Non-owned vehicle  c. Hired vehicles *(4) Professional liability (claims made form) $1,000,000.00 per claim to pay on behalf of the insured all sums which the insured shall become legally obligated to pay as damages by reason of any act, malpractice, error or omission in professional services. *(5) Contractor's pollution liability coverage $1,000,000.00 written on a claims made form with a 2-year extended reporting period *(6) Pollution liability motor carrier and trucker coverage endorsing the upset, overturn and remediation of a load in transport $1,000,000.00 per occurrence written on an occurrence form (combined single limit for bodily injury and property damage) *If applicable.  
(d)  The city shall be entitled, upon request and without expense, to receive copies of the policies and all endorsements thereto as they apply to the limits required by the city, and may make a reasonable request for deletion, revision, or modification of particular policy terms, conditions, limitations or exclusions (except where policy revisions are established by law or regulation binding upon either of the parties hereto or the underwriter of an such policies). Upon such request by the city, the rights-of-way user shall exercise reasonable effort to accomplish such changes in policy coverage, and shall pay the cost thereof. 
(e)  Right-of-way users shall ensure that all insurance contracts and certificate(s) of insurance contain the following required provisions: 
(1)  Name the city and its officers, employees, volunteers, agents, and elected representatives as additional insureds with respect to the operations and activities of, or on behalf of, the named insured performed in the right-of-way under provisions of this article, with the exception of the professional liability, workers' compensation and liability policy; and 
(2)  Right-of-way user's insurance shall be deemed primary with respect to any insurance or self-insurance carried by the city; and 
(3)  Provide for an endorsement that the "other insurance" clause shall not apply to the city where the city is an additional insured shown on the policy; and 
(4)  Workers' compensation and employers' liability will provide for a waiver of subrogation in favor of the city. 
(f)  The right-of-way user shall notify the city in the event of any notice of cancellation, non-renewal or material change in coverage and shall give such notices not less than 30 days prior to the change, or ten days' notice for cancellation due to nonpayment of premiums, which notice must be accompanied by a replacement certificate of insurance. All notices shall be given to the city at the following address: 
City of Helotes 
City Administrator 
P.O. Box 507 
Helotes, Texas 78023 
(g)  Nothing herein contained shall be construed as limiting in any way the extent to which the right-of-way user may be held responsible for payments of damages to persons or property resulting from the right-of-way user's or its subcontractors' performance of the work performed in the public right-of-way. 
(h)  The city-owned utilities, City Public Service and San Antonio Water System shall not be required to provide the insurance specified herein. 
(i)  With respect to the right-of-way user's obligation to comply with the requirements for commercial general (public) liability insurance coverage to include pollution coverage, the city may allow the right-of-way user to self-insure upon annual production of evidence that is satisfactory to the city's risk manager. With respect to the right-of-way user's obligation to comply with the requirements for automobile liability insurance and for workers' compensation insurance, a right-of-way user may self-insure, provided the right-of-way user tenders satisfactory evidence of self-insurance as contemplated by the state motor vehicle financial responsibility law, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 601.124, and the Texas Workers' Compensation Act, V.T.C.A., Labor Code § 407.001 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-173), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-193. - Performance/assurance bond. 
    Before a permit shall be issued, the applicant therefor shall execute and deliver to the city, to be kept on file in the city secretary's office, a good and sufficient bond of assurance, in the sum of $10,000.00, to be approved by the administrator and conditioned that the person making the application shall promptly adjust, pay and settle all legitimate claims for damages that may result by reason of carelessness or negligence in the manner of performing such work or by reason of any defects therein caused or arising from careless, negligent or imperfect construction thereof, and to hold the city free and harmless from liability on all such claims for damages to the performance or assurance bond and shall cover the cost of repairs in or upon the street, sidewalk or other public place where the work is to be done that may become necessary by reason of such cut or excavation having been made. The bond shall be maintained until the work is accepted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-174), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-194. - Optional continuing bond and deposit. 
    In lieu of a bond of performance or assurance required for each permit issued under section 74-193, the applicant may maintain a one-time bond of performance or assurance with the administrator in the sum of $100,000.00 for the purposes specified in section 74-193, and shall have on file, in the city clerk's office, an approved bond of performance or assurance in like amount, being then in full force and effect, against which claims shall not have been presented aggregating more than $100,000.00; provided, further, that section 74-193 shall not apply to applications for permits to make cuts, openings or excavations in any street, plaza or other public place paved under contract with the city, unless the contract of maintenance and the maintenance bond therefor shall have expired. The bond shall be maintained until the applicant is no longer working in or on city streets. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-175), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-195. - Liability of contractor and sureties for maintenance and repair work. 
    Any defects of workmanship or material relating to work done by an excavator during the initial project or becoming known or which should have been known during the guarantee period (the life of the street) shall be known as maintenance or repair work and both the excavator and the sureties and/or the contractor's bond shall be fully liable for any default of such contractor under this section. In the event of a failure in the restoration of an excavation, the ROW user shall have one opportunity to repair, in a timely manner, the section of the restoration that has failed at its expense, which repair shall be in accordance with the standards set forth in this article. In the event of any subsequent failure of that section of the restoration, the city retains the right and option to terminate the ROW user's guarantee, upon written notice to the ROW user. In such event, the ROW user shall reimburse the city for its direct costs associated with the repair of the failure of the restoration work. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-176), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-196. - When additional security required. 
    In the event the administrator reasonably believes the contractor or ROW user's solvency is threatened, the administrator may, at any time, make written demand on a contractor or ROW user for bonds and the contractor or ROW user shall immediately furnish such additional bond or bonds. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-177), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-197. - Decision of administrator binding on contractor, right-of-way user and sureties. 
    In any question as to when any work was actually begun or other specific dates, the decision of the administrator shall be conclusive on the contractor, the ROW user, and the sureties on all such bonds. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-178), 9-19-2002) 
Secs. 74-198-74-220. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - VARIANCES AND EXEMPTIONS 

Sec. 74-221. - Generally. 
    A permittee or ROW user may request a variance from any of the requirements of this article by filing a written request with the administrator stating the requirement and the basis for the variance. Incomplete variance requests may be rejected. The applicant shall bear its own expenses of the application process. 
(1)  Any request for a variance from any right-of-way restoration requirement shall be made in writing in advance of any contemplated work and shall be accompanied by digitally formatted detailed plans of the substituted reconstruction and/or repair of the excavated area, if applicable. 
(2)  Any request for an exemption from any penalty or fee other than as provided in this article shall be made in writing, and shall be accompanied by a written detailed request stating the reasons therefor. 
(3)  Any request for an exemption from any permit or any other requirement of this article shall be made in writing, by detailed written request therefor, stating all pertinent reasons. 
(4)  The department shall grant or deny an application for a variance within ten days of receipt of the application for variance. 
(5)  Denial of the variance may be appealed in accordance with section 74-76. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-179), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-222. - Exception for sprinkler systems for residential units. 
    This article shall not be applicable to excavations which are not in pavement and are solely for the purpose of creating a sprinkler system for one or more residential units located in the county. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-180), 9-19-2002) 
Secs. 74-223-74-240. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - CERTIFICATED TELECOMMUNICATION PROVIDERS 

Sec. 74-241. - Authorization required; nonexclusive use. 
    A CTP must provide evidence that the CTP has acquired authorization from the Texas Public Utility Commission pursuant to state law, prior to obtaining a permit to use public rights-of-way. The CTP's right to use and occupy the public rights-of-way shall not be exclusive and the CTP recognizes the city's right to exercise its police powers and manage its public rights-of-way, based on the Act and all other state or federal laws. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-181), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-242. - Additional authority for providing cable television service. 
    The CTP and any of its affiliates are not authorized to provide cable television service as a cable operator or to operate an open video system in the city, but must first obtain a separate franchise agreement from the city for that purpose, under such terms and conditions as may be required by law. This section does not preclude the CTP from providing its services to cable television companies. Unless a cable television operator shows proof of appropriate city authorization, nothing herein shall authorize the CTP to license, sublicense, lease, sublease or by any instrument authorize any cable television operator the right to use or utilize the transmission media or facilities of the CTP. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-182), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-243. - Notification of transfer of business; point-of-contact information. 
    A CTP shall notify the administrator and the city's supervisor of public utilities of any sale, transfer, merger or assignment of the ownership or control of a CTP's business within at least 30 days of such sale, transfer, merger or assignment. A CTP shall also maintain and provide current point-of-contact information with the administrator and the city's supervisor of public utilities at all times during which the CTP uses the right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-183), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-244. - Exemption from fees. 
    Certificated telecommunications providers are exempted from the following fees provided for in this article: 
(1)  Permit application fee, including expedited application fee, and permit expiration fee. 
(2)  Additional excavation permit fee. 
(3)  Inspection fee. 
(4)  Pavement degradation fee. 
(5)  Division 8 fees. 
(6)  Registration fee. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-184), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-245. - Waiver of bonds. 
    Unless determined otherwise by the administrator a CTP will be exempt from the bonding requirements of this article, including sections 74-193 and 74-194; however, in the event that the administrator determines, based upon reasonable grounds, that a bond is necessary to protect the public assets, or the health and safety of the public, then the administrator may require that a CTP post a reasonable bond not to exceed $100,000.00. The administrator shall consult with the city's risk manager prior to imposing a bond on a CTP. Factors to be considered in determining reasonable grounds may include, but not limited to, a conviction for violation of this article, a general pattern of sub-standard adherence to the provisions of this article or the failure to comply with this article. If three years pass from the date that the administrator requires a bond of a CTP and it has not been necessary for the city to seek performance under the bond, then a bond will no longer be required pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-185), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-246. - Indemnification of city. 
    A CTP shall indemnify the city as specified by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 283.057, as may be amended. A CTP shall be exempt from all indemnity requirements of this article that are inconsistent with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 283.057. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-186), 9-19-2002) 
Secs. 74-247-74-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - FISCAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 74-271. - Annual report. 
    A report shall be made to the city council on an annual basis detailing the revenue and expenditure from the street excavation permit and associated fees collected and expended for the right-of-way management program. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-188), 9-19-2002) 
Secs. 74-272-74-280. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 74-281. - Exemption for work done under contract with city. 
    The provisions of this division shall not apply to any sidewalk or curbing construction or repairs done under contract with the city, except to the extent which may be specified in such contract or ordinance passed pursuant thereto, or as further described herein. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-191), 9-19-2002; Ord. No. 314, § 2(App. A), 9-14-2006; Ord. 422, § 1, 1-14-2010) 
Sec. 74-282. - Sidewalk requirements. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided for in the municipal code of ordinances, the provisions of this division shall apply to a division of any tract of land situated within the corporate city limits into two or more parts for the purpose of laying out residential subdivision Development lots and publicly-dedicated streets within a residential subdivision development project, as defined within chapter 94 of the Municipal Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of all internal streets and the subdivision side of all perimeter streets, except as specified in section 74-283 below. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-192), 9-19-2002; Ord. No. 314, § 2(App. A), 9-14-2006; Ord. 422, § 1, 1-14-2010) 
Sec. 74-283. - Sidewalk exceptions. 
    Sidewalks shall not be required in the following situations: 
(a)  When a pedestrian circulation plan, accompanied by the plan review fee prescribed in the most recent adopted fee schedule, has been submitted to and approved by the city council prior to or at the time of plat approval. The plan shall show the location and arrangement of sidewalks and the phasing or time schedule for the construction of the sidewalks. In considering the plan, the city council shall ensure that access to and along the proposed sidewalks is safe, convenient, and provides pedestrians with adequate paths of movement. Proposed sidewalks not located within public rights-of-way shall be included within pedestrian easements on the plat. 
(b)  When the city engineer determines that sidewalks will interfere with or disrupt drainage. 
(c)  When the city administrator determines that public construction project(s) will require sidewalk replacement within two years. In such event, the developer shall place in escrow at a bank or trust company or with a qualified escrow agent an amount equal to the actual construction cost of the sidewalk plus six percent of the actual construction cost per year until the commencement of sidewalk construction, which shall be applied to the construction of the sidewalk at the time of the public construction. The escrow or trust account shall be established by agreement between the city and the developer, and the city administrator is authorized to sign the agreement on behalf of the city. 
(d)  When the city arborist determines that the preservation of trees and existing landscaping warrants the elimination, reduction in width, or modification of the sidewalk. 
(e)  When a variance to the requirements of this division is granted by the city council based upon its finding that there are special circumstances or conditions unique to the land involved such that the strict application of these requirements would be unreasonable and the granting of the variance would not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare. An application for a variance shall be submitted in writing to the city administrator and accompanied by the fee prescribed in the most recent adopted fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-193), 9-19-2002; Ord. No. 314, § 2(App. A), 9-14-2006 Ord. No. 422, § 1, 1-14-2010) 
Sec. 74-284. - Sidewalk specifications. 
(a)  Sidewalks shall have a minimum unobstructed width of four feet on all streets, except that sidewalks abutting the curb shall have a minimum unobstructed width of six feet. Unless otherwise allowed above or prohibited by the Texas Department of Transportation (TxDOT), the edge of the sidewalk must be located a minimum of two feet from the curb or in the location approved by TxDOT within TxDOT right-of-way. Where no curb is present or where TxDOT prohibits the placement of sidewalks within TxDOT right-of-way, the sidewalk shall be placed on private property, within two feet of the property line. The public's right to use such sidewalks shall be noted by an instrument conveying an easement or plat note. 
(b)  Sidewalks shall not be installed in such a manner that they conflict with or are obstructed by existing power lines, telephone poles, fire hydrants, traffic/street signs, mail boxes, trees, et cetera. Sidewalks shall be installed around existing or anticipated obstructions and shall maintain the required sidewalk width. When utility layouts are required as part of a plat, the location and extent of sidewalks within the subdivision shall be shown on the utility layout and shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer and other utility agencies. 
(c)  Changes in the sidewalk location are permitted to be approved by the city engineer without amending the street plan or utility layout, provided such plans are annotated with a note stating that intent. 
(d)  Pedestrian handrails shall be required on both sides of all sidewalk drain crossings, in compliance with Texas Accessibility Standards (TAS) and Americans Disabilities Act (ADA) Accessibilities Guidelines (AG). 
(e)  The subgrade shall be thoroughly compacted to a compaction which is not less than 90 percent for noncohesive soils and 85 percent for cohesive soils, as determined by ASTM D 1557. Compaction and density tests may be ordered by the city engineer and paid for by the developer. 
(f)  Class A concrete shall be a minimum of 3,000 psi comprehensive strength, and the subgrade will be thoroughly wetted before placing concrete. 
(g)  Cement shall be type I Portland cement ASTM C 150 and shall conform to the standard specification. 
(h)  Sidewalks shall have a minimum nominal thickness of four inches. 
(i)  Sidewalks shall rise from the elevation of the top of the curb with a maximum slope of one-fourth inch per foot across the sidewalk. 
(j)  Concrete shall be placed and tamped to a dense mass in such a way that all materials will remain well distributed. 
(k)  Dummy joints shall be placed at five-foot intervals and may be struck when concrete is uncured or saw cut after setting. Asphalt-impregnated, treated wood, or cedar wood expansion joints shall be spaced at least every 20 feet, but no more than every 24 feet, along the full length of the sidewalk, all in compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Accessibility Guidelines (ADAAG). 
(l)  Sidewalks adjacent to buildings, curbs, driveway aprons, ADA ramps, or other concrete structures shall be separated from existing structures with a one-half inch (1/2") expansion joint to the full depth of the slab, all in compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Accessibility Guidelines (ADAAG). 
(m)  The finished surface of the sidewalk shall be floated and wire brushed or broomed to provide a nonskid wearing surface, or other finish approved by the city engineer. 
(n)  All concrete sidewalks shall be properly cured. 
(o)  Concrete shall be reinforced with a minimum of six-inch by six-inch by No. 12 gauge wire mesh placed at the vertical center of the sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-194), 9-19-2002; Ord. No. 314, § 2(App. A), 9-14-2006; Ord. No. 422, § 1, 1-14-2010) 
Sec. 74-285. - Pedestrian access routes. 
    Pedestrian access routes along public rights-of-way, including, but not limited to, sidewalk ramps, curbs, blended transitions, detectable warnings, and pedestrian crossings must comply with the Texas Accessibility Standards (TAS) and Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Accessibility Guidelines (ADAAG). 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-194), 9-19-2002; Ord. No. 314, § 2(App. A), 9-14-2006; Ord. No. 422, § 1, 1-14-2010) 
Sec. 74-286. - Procedure when improvements consist of maintenance or repairs. 
(a)  When the city administrator finds that any sidewalk is in need of maintenance or repairs, such maintenance and repairs may be ordered by the city administrator through the issuance of a written notice to the property owner to that effect. The notice shall state the extent of such maintenance and repairs required, the physical address at which such maintenance and repairs are ordered, the property owners responsible for such maintenance and repairs, and the time period within which the maintenance and repairs must be completed. 
(b)  Written notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. If an owner of property is not found or is unknown or is a nonresident, it shall be sufficient service of the notice to publish the same three consecutive times in any newspaper of general circulation published in the city in the English language. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the owners of the property to complete the maintenance and construct the repairs, or cause the repairs to be constructed, so as to lay, construct, and restore the sidewalk to good, safe, and sound condition conforming to the written notice and the city sidewalk specifications. Property owners violating any provision of the written notice shall be adjudged guilt of a misdemeanor 
(d)  Upon the expiration of the time period specified within the written notice requiring maintenance and repairs, the city administrator shall inspect or have inspection made of the premises on which the work was ordered to be constructed and shall cause a complaint to be filed in the Municipal Court against each person who, after the notice, has failed to fully complete and construct such maintenance, improvements, and repairs, as stipulated within the notice and the city sidewalk specifications. Upon inspection and acceptance of the work, the city administrator shall issue a certificate to the property owner showing acceptance thereof. 
(e)  Whenever the city shall, after issuing the requisite notice, construct or contract for, independently of and apart from any contract or other proceeding, the cost of the work, the cost of such work shall nevertheless be a personal liability against the property owner, as well as a first and prior lien and charge against such abutting property, and such cost shall be paid by the property owner to the city or to the contractor constructing and completing the work. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-194), 9-19-2002; Ord. No. 314, § 2(App. A), 9-14-2006; Ord. No. 422, § 1, 1-14-2010) 
Secs. 74-287-74-310. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - WEIGHT-LIMITED BRIDGES 

Sec. 74-311. - Violations. 
    It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive, haul, push or tow, wholly or partially, any load upon a posted weight-limited bridge, which collectively exceeds the officially designated and posted maximum bridge weight, whether or not all load-bearing wheels travel onto the bridge. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-203), 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 74-312. - Penalty. 
    This is not a traffic ordinance authorized under the Texas motor vehicle statutes, and is not governed by the penal provisions thereunder. Any violation of the provisions of this division is hereby declared to be a health and safety related misdemeanor, and upon conviction is punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 218, § 2(29-204), 9-19-2002) 
Chapter 78 - SUBDIVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 78-1. - Extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(a)  The territory described in City of San Antonio Ordinance No. 67064 of May 5, 1988, a true copy of which is attached hereto and made a part hereof by reference as Exhibit A hereto, is hereby declared to be the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city and is incorporated into the city as such for every lawful purpose. 
(b)  City Ordinance No. 50 of May 26, 1988, establishing platting and subdivision rules and regulations for the city, is hereby extended to apply to said extraterritorial jurisdiction pursuant to the provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.003. 
(Ord. No. 51, §§ 1, 2, 5-26-1988) 
Sec. 78-2. - Construction or use of private roads on unplatted land. 
(a)  Definition. "Private road" is hereby defined as it is defined in the Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 541.302, as follows, to wit: "Every place or way in private ownership used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner but not by other persons." Such definition is not intended to include residential driveways as that term is commonly understood. 
(b)  Permit. The construction or use of all private roads on any unplatted land in the city limits is hereby prohibited unless and until the owner of such land first obtains a permit from the city council based on written application and public hearing. There shall be a $100.00 charge for such application. 
(c)  Penalty; additional remedies. Each violation of this section shall be punished by a penalty of a fine of not less than $200.00 nor more than $2,000.00 and each day such offense continues shall constitute a separate offense. Each violation hereof is also declared to constitute a public nuisance which can be summarily abated by police action to protect the public health, safety and welfare. The city may also maintain suits in equity for injunctive relief. 
(Ord. No. 57, §§ 1-3, 9-6-1988) 
Sec. 78-3. - Dedication of right-of-way by subdividers. 
(a)  Dedication required. 
(1)  Subdivisions adjacent to any existing state maintained street, road, or highway. The subdivider shall be required to dedicate on the plat 20 feet of right-of-way width adjacent to the land being platted. No additional pavement shall be required on existing streets where the dedications are required. 
(2)  Subdivisions adjacent to streets located on the City of Helotes Major Thoroughfare Plan, attached hereto and made a part hereof by reference as appendix D to Chapter 78 Subdivisions. Where subdivisions are adjacent to a street, road, or highway located on the City of Helotes Major Thoroughfare Plan, the subdivider shall be required to dedicate on the plat the remainder of one-half of the right-of-way width (shown on the major thoroughfare plan) measuring from the middle of the existing thoroughfare to the adjacent property for future expansion of such street, road, or highway adjacent to the land being platted. The developer shall not be required to construct any portion of the street. 
(b)  Variances. 
(1)  Parties who may appeal. Any subdivider who feels aggrieved by the implementation of the requirements of this section may file a written request for variance to the city council. 
(2)  Authority of city council. Upon receiving a variance request, the variance shall be placed on the next available meeting of the city council. The city council may affirm the requirements of this section in whole or part or waive the requirements of this section. 
(3)  Criteria for review. The city council shall uphold this section if it finds that the city engineer has established, by a preponderance of the evidence, that a nexus exists between the exaction required by this section and the impact of the development and that such exaction is roughly proportional to that impact. Should the city council find that, based upon the above criteria, some exaction less than that is required by this section is appropriate, the city council shall reduce the required dedication accordingly. Should the city council find, based upon the above criteria, that a development shall have no impact on city infrastructure, the city council shall waive the requirement of this section. 
(Ord. No. 255, §§ 1, 2, 7-8-2004; Ord. No. 406, § 1, 7-23-2009; Ord. No. 425, § 1, 03-11-2010) 
Secs. 78-4-78-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Historical note- Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), adopted July 25, 2006, amended Art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. II, §§ 78-31-78-48, 78-61-78-76, 78-101-78-104, 78-131-78-140, 78-161-78-167, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 291, § 1(151.001-151.010, 151.0150-151.0158, 151.020-151.035, 151.045-151.048, 151.060-151.069, 151.080-151.085, 151.999), adopted Nov. 10, 2005. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 78-31. - Short title. 
    This article along with its attachments, exhibits and amendments, shall be known as the "subdivision regulations" of the city. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006) 
Sec. 78-32. - Statutory authority. 
    This article is adopted under the authority of the constitution and laws of the state, including particularly V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 212. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006) 
Sec. 78-33. - Interpretation and purpose. 
    The interpretations and application of the provisions of this article shall be deemed to be minimal in nature, and whenever the principles, standards or requirements of any other applicable provision of other ordinances of the city, which are higher or more restrictive, the latter shall control; and when circumstances warrant, as determined by the city council, the council shall have the authority to impose more restrictive conditions to this article. The purpose of this article is to achieve orderly urban development through land subdivision; to promote and develop the utilization of land to assure the best possible community environment in accordance with a comprehensive plan of the city; to provide for adequate municipal services and safe streets; and to protect and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006) 
Sec. 78-34. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Definitions not expressly prescribed herein are to be construed in accordance with customary usage in municipal planning and engineering practices. 
    Alley. A minor public right-of-way not intended to provide the primary means of access to abutting lots, which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
    Building set back line. The line within a property defining the minimum horizontal distance between a building and the adjacent street property line. 
    Crosswalk way. A public right-of-way, six feet or more in width between property lines, which provides pedestrian circulation. 
    Cul-de-sac. A street having but one outlet to another street, and terminated on the opposite end by a vehicular turn-around. 
    Dead-end street. A street, other than a cul-de-sac, with only one outlet. 
    Drainage easement. An interest in land granted the city, to the public generally, for the construction, use, and maintenance of drainage facilities across, over, and under the private land, together with the right to enter thereon with machinery and vehicles necessary for the maintenance of the drainage facilities. 
    Drainage right-of-way. A public right-of-way granted to the city, to the public generally, for the construction, use and maintenance of drainage facilities across, over and under the public right-of-way. 
    Engineer. A person duly authorized and properly registered under the provisions of the State Engineering Registration Act, as heretofore or hereafter amended, to practice the profession of engineering as evidenced by a current state engineer's seal. 
    Lot. An undivided tract or parcel of land having frontage on a public street and which is, or in the future may be offered for sale, conveyance, transfer or improvement; which is designated as a distinct and separate tract, and which is identified by a tract or lot number or symbol in a duly approved subdivision plat which has been properly filed of record. 
    Nonaccess easement. Easement across which vehicular access is prohibited. 
    Office. Any office referred to in this article by title means the person employed or appointed by the city in that position, or his or her duly authorized representative. 
    Pavement width. The portion of a street available for vehicular traffic; where curbs are laid, it is the portion between the face of curbs. 
    Person. Any individual, association, firm, corporation, governmental agency, or political subdivision. 
    Planned residential development (PRD). A tract of land under the control of a developer, developed in compliance with the performance standards set out in these regulations. A PRD is developed in one or more phases as a single, predominantly residential entity. 
    Planned unit development (PUD). A tract of land developed according to plan as a single entity, in compliance with the use, density, intensity and characteristics of these regulations. 
    Plat. A complete and exact plan for the subdivision of a tract of land into lots for building purposes, which, if approved, may be submitted to the county clerk for recording. 
    Private drainage easement. An interest in, and granted to, the city and to the public generally, for the use of a water course, drainage way, natural channel or stream across private property. Maintenance of the private drainage is a responsibility of the property owner. 
    Private streets. Any nonpublic right-of-way used for vehicular access and constructed and maintained by a private entity. 
    Reserve strip. A reserve strip is any unplatted parcel of land that prevents access to platted property. 
    Safety lane. Shall mean a designated area on an approved plat which has a primary purpose of providing access for safety vehicles in any development where public streets do not adequately provide such access. 
    Street. A public right-of-way, however designated, which provide vehicular access to adjacent land. 
(1)  Secondary street. Primarily provides vehicular circulation to various sections of the city. 
(2)  Collector street. Primarily provides circulation within neighborhoods, to carry traffic from minor streets to arterial streets, or to carry traffic through or adjacent to commercial or industrial areas. 
(3)  Marginal access street. A street which is parallel to and adjacent to an arterial street, which primarily provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
(4)  Minor street. Primarily for access to abutting residential property. 
    Subdivider. Any person or any agent thereof, dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision as that term is defined herein. In any event, "subdivider" shall be restricted to include only the owner, equitable owner, or authorized agent of such owner or equitable owner, of land sought to be subdivided. 
    Subdivision. A division of any tract of land situated within corporate limits, or within or partly within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, into two or more parts for the purpose of laying out any subdivision of any tract of land or any addition of any town or city, or for laying out suburban lots or building lots, or any lots, and streets, alleys, or parts or other portions intended for public use or the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting thereon or adjacent thereto. "Subdivision" includes re-subdivision. 
    Surveyor. A registered public surveyor, as authorized by the state statutes to practice the profession of surveying, as evidenced by a valid state seal. 
    Utility easement. An interest in land granted to the city, to the public generally, and/or to a private utility corporation, for installing or maintaining utilities across, over and under private land, together with the right to enter thereon with machinery and vehicles necessary for the maintenance of the utilities. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006) 
Sec. 78-35. - Application of provisions. 
    No person shall create a subdivision of land within the corporate limits of the city or within its extraterritorial jurisdiction, without complying with the provisions of this article. All plats and subdivisions of any such land shall conform to the rules and regulations herein set forth. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006) 
Sec. 78-36. - Conformance to comprehensive plan. 
    No plat or subdivision of land within the city and within its extraterritorial jurisdiction as determined by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 212 may be approved unless the plat considers the comprehensive plan of the city and its roads, streets, alleys, easements, parks, playgrounds and public utility facilities, including those which have been or may be laid out. Plats will also be compatible with the comprehensive plan for the extension of the city and its roads, streets, alleys, easements and public highways as regards access to public utilities. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006) 
Sec. 78-37. - Policies and special provisions; effect on existing subdivisions. 
(a)  It is unlawful for the county clerk of the county to receive or record any such plan, plat, or replat unless and until the same shall be approved by the city. 
(b)  No plat will be approved with a septic system unless the system is approved by the county in the location indicated on the plat. 
(c)  No permit will be issued for any structure on a lot in a subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved and filed for record, nor for any structure on a lot within a subdivision in which the standards contained herein have not been complied with in full. This Paragraph shall not apply to additions, renovations, or rehabilitations of existing structures, nor shall the same apply to the addition, renovation, or rehabilitation of accessory buildings, associated living quarters, and/or storage buildings. 
(d)  The city will not permit the repair, maintenance, installation or construction of any streets or public utility services in any subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved, nor in which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full. 
(e)  The city shall not sell or permit the sale or supply of any water, gas, electricity or sewage service or any other form of public utilities service within a subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved or filed for record, nor in which standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full. This paragraph shall apply only to vacant tracts of land. 
(f)  If any subdivision exists for which a final plat has not been approved or in which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full, the city council shall pass a resolution reciting the fact of such noncompliance or failure to secure final plat approval, and citing the fact that the provisions of subsections (a), (b), (c), (d) and (e) will apply to the subdivision and the lots therein; the city secretary shall, when directed by the city council, cause a certified copy of such resolution under the corporate seal of the city to be filed in the deed records of the county. If full compliance and final plat approval are secured after the filing of such resolution, the city secretary shall forthwith file an instrument in the deed of records of the county nullifying the previously recorded instrument. 
(g)  Provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit the issuance of permits for any lots upon which a residential building exists and was in existence prior to passage of this subdivision article; nor to prohibit the repair, maintenance, or installation of any street or public utility services for, to, or abutting any lot, the last recorded conveyance of which prior to passage of this Article was by metes and bounds, and/or any subdivision or lot therein, recorded or unrecorded, which subdivision or lot was in existence prior to the passage of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006; Ord. No. 493, § 1, 01-24-2013) 
Sec. 78-38. - Dedication and maintenance of streets. 
    Disapproval of a plat by the city council shall be deemed a refusal by the city to accept the offered dedication shown thereon. Approval of a plat shall not be deemed an acceptance of the proposed dedications and shall not impose any duty upon the city concerning the maintenance of or improvements of any such dedicated parts until the proper authorities of the city have actually appropriated the same by entry, use or improvements. It shall be unlawful for any officer or employee of the city to maintain the streets in a subdivision, and the city will not accept or maintain the streets, unless and until such streets have been surfaced, the required utilities and drainage facilities have been installed and such improvements have been accepted in writing by the city and the city's engineer. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006) 
Sec. 78-39. - San Antonio Unified Development Code adopted; amendments. 
(a)  The city adopts as part of its subdivision chapter the following provisions of the San Antonio Unified Development Code dated August 1987 and the latest revisions thereof. The provisions are adopted verbatim as if written out fully herein except those inconsistent with other provisions of this article. The provisions are as follows: 
(1)  Article IV. Subdivisions, Division 4: Subdivision A, streets and sidewalks; Subdivision B, street numbers; Subdivision C, sidewalks. 
(2)  Article IV. Division 6 Utilities: Subdivision A water; Subdivision B, sanitary sewers; Subdivision C, easements. 
(3)  Article IV. Division 7, flood plains. 
(4)  Article IV. Division 8, mobile home parks. 
(b)  All references in the San Antonio Code herein adopted to the following groups or persons shall mean the following: 
(1)  Director of public works or any other San Antonio staff person shall mean Helotes city staff. 
(2)  City clerk shall mean city secretary. 
(3)  Zoning commission shall mean Helotes City Council. 
(c)  The city adopts as part of its subdivision chapter Article V Division 2 section 35-502 (entitled "Traffic Impact Analysis"), including any and all appendices and tables referenced therein, of the San Antonio Unified Development Code adopted May 3, 2001, and the latest revisions thereof. The provisions are adopted verbatim as if written out fully herein except those inconsistent with other provisions of this chapter. In the context of this ordinance, the term "City of San Antonio Major Thoroughfare plan," found in the note to section 35-502, shall mean the City of Helotes Major Thoroughfare Plan as has been adopted or may be amended by the Helotes City Council, and the term "permit" found in section 35-502(a)(1) shall mean a plat, replat, rezoning, or building permit. 
(Ord. No. 290, § 1, 11-10-2005; Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006) 
Sec. 78-40. - Extraterritorial jurisdiction; application of provisions. 
    Under the provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, § 212.003, the provisions of this article shall apply to public roads within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, and access to public roads within the extraterritorial jurisdiction shall be determined by the city council, considering the general plan for extension of the municipality, the impact of such access on the general health, safety and welfare of the community, and the goals and objectives as set forth in the city's master plan. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006) 
Sec. 78-41. - Plat application procedure. 
    Applicability . The plat application procedure set out in this section (as well as section 78-42 through section 78-48) shall be applicable to any application for preliminary or final plat, replat, or amending plat submitted to the city. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006) 
Sec. 78-42. - Application. 
(a)  Application. Prior to submitting a plat, replat, or amending plat for review by the city or any other agency, the applicant shall complete a plat application, as setout in Exhibit A and obtain a plat number. 
(b)  Payment of fees. At the time the plat application is submitted, the applicant shall pay to the City of Helotes the plat administration and filing fees, according to section 78-76 of this article. 
(c)  Refunds. Platting fees are not transferable to other properties nor are they refundable except that the director of planning is authorized to and may grant full or partial refunds as provided below: 
(1)  If the fees collected are in excess of the amount required at the time of plat filing and such excess is not due to a substantial design change from that which was indicated on the initial plat application; 
(2)  If an error in the plat fee calculation is found; or 
(3)  If the plat is withdrawn by the applicant before it was reviewed by any employee or contract professional of the city or a public utility. 
(d)  Plat application expiration and withdrawal. 
(1)  A plat application shall expire and shall be void for all purposes if a plat is not approved in accordance with this article within two years from the date of plat application submittal. This shall apply to all plat applications filed after the effective date of this amendment. 
(2)  A plat application shall be void for all purposes if it is withdrawn by the applicant. 
(3)  Neither an expired nor a withdrawn plat application may be relied upon as a permit application for the assertion of vested, development or any other right or claim. If after the expiration or the withdrawal of a plat application the applicant wishes future plat approval of the subject property, a new plat application shall be filed, new application fees shall be required and a new plat number shall be assigned. 
(e)  Plat fee exemptions. The following situations shall be exempt from platting fees: 
(1)  City of Helotes projects payable from the general fund; 
(2)  Permeable areas identified on a proposed plat such as private or public drains, conservation, landscape or greenbelt easements; or 
(3)  Public rights-of-way designated on a proposed plat. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006) 
Sec. 78-43. - Filing. 
    Requirements. An applicant seeking approval of a preliminary or final subdivision plat, replat, or amending plat shall file the following with the city administrator: 
(1)  Thirteen blue or black-line copies of the plat, the specifications for which are set out in section 78-65 through section 78-67 (when filing a preliminary plat), section 78-70 through section 78-72 (when filing a final plat), together with one 81/2-inch by 11-inch reduced copy on vellum or similar quality material and the original and one reproducible matte film of the plat. 
(2)  A performance agreement, if one is required by section 78-101. 
(3)  The tax certificates and letters of certification required by section 78-44. 
(4)  Fees. At the time the plat is filed, the applicant shall pay to the City of Helotes adjustments to the platting fees as well as any other required fees specified in section 78-76 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006) 
Sec. 78-44. - Letters and documents of certification. 
    The applicant for plat approval shall submit the following items simultaneously with the filing of the subdivision plat: 
(a)  Tax certificates. Tax certificates from the city, school district and county, which indicate that all ad valorem taxes have been paid up to and including the current year on all land included within the final plat. For tax exempt properties, an applicant may submit evidence of the tax exemption in lieu of tax certificates. 
(b)  Certificates concerning utilities. Letters of certification by the proper authorized official of each public utility company or board involved to be inscribed on the respective utility layouts required herein certifying approval of the same by the utility company or board. 
(c)  Certificates of city engineer, city arborist and fire chief. Letters of certification from the city engineer, arborist, the fire chief and Bexar Metro stating they have received and approved or disapproved the applicable data required by section 78-45. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006) 
Sec. 78-45. - Data required for letters of certification. 
(a)  To obtain the required letters of certification, an applicant for any plat approval shall submit the following data to the certifying agencies/departments. All data shall be annotated with the plat number of the associated plat. 
(b)  To the city engineer: 
(1)  Streets, alleys, sidewalks, crosswalks. Three copies of plans and profiles of all streets, and alleys, and plans for sidewalks and crosswalk ways and three copies of construction specifications and of detailed cost estimates which shall include a 15 percent contingency. Plans are to be drawn at a scale of one inch = 50 feet, longitudinal, and one inch = five feet, vertical. Benchmarks using USGS data are required. Also, if a proposed plat traverses or is contiguous with a state maintained facility, a permit from the state department of highways and public transportation indicating approval of the proposed access point and right-of-way. 
(2)  Storm drainage. 
a.  Two copies of the proposed plat showing two-foot contours in areas where the slope does not exceed five percent and five-foot contours in areas where the slope exceeds five percent. All street widths and grades shall be indicated on the plat, and runoff figures shall be indicated on the outlet and inlet side of all drainage ditches and storm sewers and at all points in the street at changes of grade or where the street enters another street or storm sewer or drainage ditch. Drainage easements shall be indicated. 
b.  A general location map of the subdivision showing the entire watershed. (A USGS quadrangle is satisfactory.) 
c.  Calculations showing the anticipated stormwater flow including watershed area, percent runoff and time of concentration. The 100-year floodplain limits as identified for the most current FIRM published by FEMA for the City of Helotes and/or the applicable county shall be shown on the proposed plan and public works submitted with the drainage report. IN the case that the floodplain boundary for a watercourse is not shown on the FIRM, a professional engineer, using methodologies approved by the city engineer, shall develop the 100-year floodplain limits for each watercourse serving a watershed in excess of 100 acres. 
d.  When a drainage channel, storm sewer or other drainage facility or other requirements are necessary, complete plans and specifications shall be submitted showing complete plans and specifications showing complete construction detail, including calculations showing the basis for design performed in accordance with Exhibit A and included in a submittal report as outlined in section 35-4029(1) of the City of San Antonio's Unified Development Code. 
e.  When conditions upstream or downstream from a proposed channel or storm sewer do not permit maximum design flow, high water marks based on a 25-year frequency shall be indicated based on existing conditions. 
(3)  Stormwater detention. Information necessary to insure compliance with the city's current on-site stormwater detention regulations found in chapter 34, its amendments and codifications or recodifications, including information required in section 34-54 and when applicable, section 34-55. 
(4)  Floodplain data and fees. Two copies of all data, as specified by the latest requirements of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, to apply for a conditional letter of map revision and payment of the associated fees, when the proposed plat shall cause a change in the alignment, width, or elevation of a 100-year floodplain identified on a flood insurance rate map. 
(5)  Landfills . If the proposed plat is located over a landfill site, the following additional information shall be submitted: 
a.  Two copies of the proposed plat showing two-foot contours in areas where the slope does not exceed five percent and five-foot contours in areas where the slope exceeds five percent, and delineating the limits of the landfill; 
b.  A narrative report prepared by a registered professional engineer which includes the following items: 
1.  The name, address, and phone number of the property owner; 
2.  Description of the nature and size of the proposed development, including projected population; 
3.  The percent of impervious cover after development and certification site will have a positive surface drainage; 
4.  History and age of the landfill; 
5.  Site geology, including estimates of past and future ground settlement; 
6.  Description and depth of refuse fill; 
7.  Description of planned excavations, penetration of any landfill liner, and ultimate disposal site for excavated refuse; and 
8.  Depth and movement of shallow groundwater. 
c.  A soil gas survey for methane; and 
d.  A slope stability analysis for all landfill embankments. 
(6)  Sanitary sewers. 
a.  Three copies of plans and profiles of proposed sanitary sewer lines indicating type grades of lines. Plan shall be to a scale of at least 100 feet to an inch with contours and scaled lot dimensions as on plat and shall show existing as well as proposed sewers. 
b.  When a separate sewer system or treatment plant is proposed, three copies of proposed plans. 
c.  Two copies of construction specifications and detailed cost estimates. 
(7)  Septic system. When sewer service for the proposed plat is to be so provided by septic tanks, written approval by appropriate public agency having installation permit and operation control jurisdiction. Such written approval shall state that approval for septic tank systems for each proposed property is granted and installation permits will be issued for same upon request after plat recordation. 
(8)  Recharge zone. When a sewer or septic system is proposed within the recharge zone of the Edwards Aquifer within the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction, written approval or approvals as required by the appropriate state agency having review and enforcement authority jurisdiction regarding the Texas Administrative Code, 31 TAC 331.1-331.11 or the latest revisions thereof regulating such systems. 
(9)  Water lines. 
a.  Three copies of plans of all proposed water lines and fire hydrants, showing type and sizes of the lines. The plan shall be prepared at a scale of at least 100 feet to [one] inch and shall contain scaled lot dimensions as shown on the plat. 
b.  When a separate water system is planned, three copies of the plans, including water lines and hydrants. 
c.  Two copies of construction specifications and detailed cost estimates. 
(c)  A letter of certification from the city's arborist stating that the plat complies with the current tree preservation regulations of the city. 
(d)  A letter of certification from the city's fire chief stating that the plat complies with the current public safety regulations of the city. 
(e)  A letter from the Bexar Metro 911 addressing division indicating street name approval. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006) 
Sec. 78-46. - Procedure for securing letters of certification. 
(a)  Review period. Each certifying department/agency shall review the data submitted by the applicant within 60 days. 
When a certifying department/agency determines that the proposed plat or any of the required accompanying data does not conform with requirements of the city's subdivision regulations, the applicant may at his/her option revise any nonconforming aspects. However, if any data are revised and resubmitted after 45 days from the date of submission, the certifying department/agency may have an additional 60 days from the latest date of submission to issue a letter of certification. 
(b)  Disapproval. If the certifying department/agency issues a letter of certification recommending disapproval of the proposed plat, the letter shall indicate the section and specific requirement of the regulations and the respect in which the proposed plat does not comply. The applicant may then revise the plat or may request the proposed plat be filed with the planning commission provided he/she submits a letter requesting a variance. 
(c)  Validation period. Letters of certification shall remain valid for six months from the date of issuance by the certifying department/agency. After that time period, new or updated letters of certification shall be required to file a proposed plat with the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006) 
Sec. 78-47. - Filing date. 
    For the purpose of the time limits established by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, § 212.009, no application shall be deemed administratively complete nor shall a plat be deemed filed with the planning and zoning commission or city council until the plat, performance agreement as applicable, tax certificates, letters of certification and, if applicable, a request for a variance have all been submitted to the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006) 
Sec. 78-48. - Reviewing agencies. 
    In addition to the certifying departments/agencies, the city engineer may send copies of the plat to the Bexar County Public Works Department, Texas Department of Transportation or other local, state or federal departments agencies or bureaus, as the city engineer in his/her sole discretion seems appropriate. Reviewing departments/agencies may request additional information as necessary from the plat applicant; however, they shall provide their comments back to the city engineer as soon as possible, but no later than 30 days after the filing date. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006) 
Secs. 78-49-78-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLAT PROCEDURES 

Sec. 78-61. - Preliminary conference. 
    Prior to the official filing of a preliminary plat, the subdivider shall consult with and present proposed plan of subdivision to the city staff for comments and advice on the procedures, specifications and standards required by the city for the subdivision of land. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006) 
Sec. 78-62. - Preparation of preliminary plat. 
    The subdivider shall cause to be prepared a preliminary plat by a licensed engineer or surveyor in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006) 
Sec. 78-63. - Filing and preliminary fees. 
    Each preliminary plat shall comply with the plat application procedures set out in section 78-41 through section 78-48 of this article provided, however, that tax certificates required by section 78-44(a) are not to be filed with a preliminary plat but must be filed with the final plat. In addition, a deposit to cover the costs of the city's engineer and any professional consultant the city may contract to the plat will be made in accordance with section 78-76. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006) 
Sec. 78-64. - Reserved. 
Sec. 78-65. - Form and contents of preliminary plat. 
    The preliminary plat shall be drawn on sheets 18 inches wide and 24 inches long, with a binding margin of not less than two and one-half inches on the left side of the sheet and margins on the other three sides of not less than three-eighth inch. The plat shall be drawn to scale of 100 feet to one inch. When more than one sheet is necessary to accommodate the entire area, an index sheet showing the entire subdivision at an appropriate scale shall be attached to the plat. The plat shall show the following: 
(1)  Names and addresses of the subdivider, owners of record, and engineer or surveyor; 
(2)  Describe the subdivision by metes and bounds; 
(3)  Locate the subdivision with respect to a corner of the survey or tract or an original corner of the original survey or which it is a part; 
(4)  Proposed name of the subdivision, which shall not have the same spelling as, or be pronounced similar to the name of any other subdivision located within the city or within five miles of the city; 
(5)  Names and location of contiguous subdivisions and or indication of whether or not contiguous properties are platted; 
(6)  The total acreage and total number of lots in the proposed subdivision; 
(7)  Subdivision boundary lines, indicated by heavy lines, and the approximate acreage of the subdivision; 
(8)  Existing sites as follows: 
a.  The location, dimensions, name and description of all existing or recorded streets, alleys, reservations, easements, or other public rights-of-way within the subdivision, intersecting, or contiguous with its boundaries or forming such boundaries; 
b.  The location, dimensions, description and name of all existing or recorded residential lots, parks, public areas, and other sites within or contiguous with the subdivision; 
c.  The location and dimensions of all existing improvements on the property to be platted, including buildings, utilities and parking areas; 
d.  The location of the city limits and the outer boarder of the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction if either traverses the subdivision or is contiguous to a subdivision boundary; 
e.  The location of building setback lines, including front, rear, and side setback lines, shown by dashed lines on the plat; 
f.  The centerline of watercourses, creeks and existing drainage structures within and adjacent to the subdivision. Pertinent drainage data and the limits of areas subject to flooding shall be shown, delineating the 100-year flood limits if applicable; 
g.  The location and results of soil analysis tests shall be shown on each lot which is to utilize an on-site wastewater disposal systems. The name and address of the person performing such soil analyses shall be noted on the plat; 
h.  The location of any private water wells located on the property; 
i.  The location of any existing septic systems located within the property. 
(9)  The location, dimensions, description and name of all proposed streets, alleys, parks, public areas, reservations, easements or other right-of-way, blocks, lots and other sites within the subdivision; 
(10)  Date of preparation, scale of plat and north arrow; 
(11)  Topographical information shall include contour lines on a basis of five vertical feet in terrain with an average slope of five percent or more, and on a basis of two vertical feet in terrain with an average slope of less than five percent. Five-foot contour interval surveys tied to City Control Monuments or USGS Bench Marks; 
(12)  Certification from a surveyor that the property boundary closes as per minimum standards set forth by the Texas Board of Professional Land Survey Code, as amended, specifically sections 663.13-663.23 which include provisions requiring 1:10,000 + .010 feet precision for monuments found or set within the corporate limits of any city in Texas; 
(13)  A number or letter to identify each lot or site and each block. The number shall be coordinated, by the developer, with the clerk of the county to prevent duplication; 
(14)  Front building setback lines on all lots and sites. Side yard building setback lines at street intersections and crosswalk ways; and 
(15)  Location map at a scale of not more than 4,000 feet to an inch which shall show existing adjacent subdivisions and major streets. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006) 
Sec. 78-66. - Layout required when subdivision is unit of larger tract. 
    Where the proposed subdivision constitutes a unit of a larger tract owned by the subdivider which he or she intends to subsequently subdivide as additional units of the same subdivision, the subdivision plat shall be accompanied by a layout of the entire area showing the tentative layout of streets, blocks and drainage for such area. The overall layout, or master plan, if approved by the city shall be attached to and filed with a copy of the approved subdivision plat in the permanent files of the city. Thereafter, fractional plats of subsequent units of such subdivision must be submitted for preliminary plat approval, and shall conform to such approved overall layout on the plat. The subdivider may request that the original approved master plan be amended and reapproved. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006) 
Sec. 78-67. - Data accompanying preliminary plat. 
    When submitted, the preliminary plat shall be accompanied by: 
(1)  Proposed master plan of all of developer's property when subdivision is a part of a larger tract, as also set forth in section 78-66, which shall be prepared using the same scale as the preliminary plat showing: 
a.  Existing and proposed subdivisions, including streets, lots, parks and drainage easements and right-of-way. All drainage easements shall be labeled as "drainage and storm sewer" easements. 
b.  Location of city limits line, the outer border of the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, and zoning boundaries, if they lie within the vicinity map. 
c.  The general drainage plan, flow line of existing water courses, existing drainage structures, and ultimate destination of water, and floodplain boundaries. 
d.  Plat note stating: No obstructions, including but not limited to fencing or storage shall be permitted in any drainage easements shown hereon. 
e.  Plat note stating: A ten-foot PUE abutting and along the streetside property line is hereby dedicated for all streetside property lots shown hereon. 
(2)  A letter of authorization from the owner(s) of the land area to be platted, acknowledging that the plat request is being filed with the city and authorizing the engineer(s) and/or surveyor(s) to act in his or her behalf. 
(3)  A letter(s) from the owner or engineer/surveyor acting in his or her behalf requesting any and all variances from this article which might be proposed. 
(4)  Construction plans and cost estimates for any and all off-site improvements proposed and/or required as a condition for approval of the plat as set out in section 78-71. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006) 
Sec. 78-68. - Processing preliminary plat; conditional approval or disapproval. 
(a)  The filing date for a preliminary plat shall be determined in accordance with 78-47 and the plat shall be considered by the City of Helotes's Planning and Zoning Commission, for recommendation, and by the City of Helotes City Council for final approval in accordance with the approval procedures set out in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.008. 
(b)  Conditional approval of a preliminary plat by the city shall be deemed an expression of approval of the layout submitted on the preliminary plat in order to proceed with the design of streets, water, sewer and other required improvements and utilities and to the preparation of the final, or record, plat. Conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of the final plat, automatically or otherwise. 
(c)  Conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall be effective for one year unless reviewed by the city's engineer at the request of the city in the light of new or significant information which would necessitate a revision of the preliminary plat. If the city's engineer should deem changes in a preliminary plat as necessary, he or she shall so inform the city staff, who shall so inform the subdivider, in writing. 
(d)  If no development has occurred which would affect the proposed plat after one year of effective approval, the city may, upon the application of the subdivider, extend the approval six months. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006) 
Sec. 78-69. - Submission of final plat; approval procedure. 
    The final plat and the accompanying data shall be submitted to the city council, through the planning and zoning commission and city staff, for approval. City council will approve or disapprove such plat within 30 days after the date the final plat is approved by the planning and zoning commission or is considered approved by the inaction of the commission and has been determined by the city staff as being in substantial conformance with this article. A final plat shall be considered approved by the city council unless it is disapproved within the 30-day period. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006) 
Sec. 78-70. - Form and content of final plat. 
(a)  The final plat shall conform to the preliminary plat as conditionally approved by the city incorporating any and all changes, modifications, alterations, corrections and conditions recommended by the city's engineer. 
(b)  The final plat shall be on sheets 18 inches wide and 24 inches long and twon and one-half inches on the left side of the sheet, and margins of not less than three-eighth-inch on the other three sides. The plat shall be drawn at a scale of 100 feet to one inch. Where more than one sheet is necessary to accommodate the entire computed area, an index sheet showing the entire subdivision at an appropriate scale shall be attached to the plat. 
(c)  The final plat shall be submitted in 13 blue or black line copies, together with two mylars, and shall contain all of the features required for preliminary plats in section 78-65 above and shall also include the following: 
(1)  The exact location, dimensions, names and description of all existing or recorded streets, alleys, reservations, easements or other public rights-of way within the subdivision, intersecting or contiguous with its boundary or forming such boundary, with accurate dimensions, bearing or deflecting angles and radii, computed area, and central angle, tangent distance and length of all curves, where appropriate. 
(2)  The exact location, dimensions, description and name of all proposed streets, alleys, parks, other public areas, reservations, easements or other rights-of-way, blocks, lots, monuments, and other sites within the subdivision with accurate dimensions, bearing or deflecting angles and radii, area and central angles, tangent distance and length of all curves, where appropriate. All lot corners shall be marked with one-half-inch diameter by two-foot long iron pins. 
(3)  Owner's acknowledgement as set out in appendix A, section 1 of this article. 
(4)  Certification of the surveyor responsible for surveying the subdivision area, attesting to its accuracy as set out in appendix A, section 2 of this article. 
(5)  A certificate by the engineer responsible for the preparation of the final plat and supporting data, attesting to its accuracy as set out in appendix A, section 3(A) of this article. 
(6)  Certification by the city's engineer as set out in appendix A, section 3(B) of this article. 
(7)  Approval of the city council of the city as set out in appendix A, section 4 of this article. 
(8)  County clerk's recording acknowledgement as set out in appendix A, section 5 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006) 
Sec. 78-71. - Data accompanying final plat. 
    All plans and calculations shall bear the seal of an engineer and where applicable, all trenches in excess of five feet in depth at construction sites in the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction must be constructed and operated in accordance with OSHA standards. When filed, the final plat shall be accompanied by the following site improvement data: 
(1)  All letters and documents of certification required by section 78-44. 
(2)  A letter from the subdivider authorizing the city to file the plat for record. 
(3)  A performance agreement in a format as described in this chapter and which is sufficient to guarantee the subdivider will complete any and all required improvements within two years after approval of such plat. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006) 
Sec. 78-72. - Processing final plat. 
(a)  If desired by the subdivider and approved by the city's engineer and city council, the final plat may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which he proposes to record and develop. However, such portion shall conform to all the requirements of this article. 
(b)  As soon as practicable after the subdivider is notified of the approval of the preliminary plat, his or her engineer shall submit to the city staff the final plat of the subdivision or portion thereof. 
(c)  No final plat will be considered unless a preliminary plat has been submitted. However, if an approved plat has been duly recorded and the subdivider wishes to increase the size of the lots by combining two or more lots or by combining one lot with a portion of the adjacent lot in such manner that no portion of a lot remains smaller than the original lots, no preliminary plat will be necessary. 
(d)  A final plat of an approved preliminary plat or a portion thereof shall be submitted to the city for approval within 12 months of the date of approval of preliminary plat; otherwise, the approval of the city shall become null and void, unless an extension of time is applied for and granted by the city. 
(e)  If the final plat is disapproved, the city shall inform the subdivider in writing of the reasons at the time such action is taken if the subdivider requests the reasons in writing. 
(f)  After the final plat has been approved and the subdivider has filed a guarantee of performance as prescribed in section 78-102, the security and maintenance bond hereinafter provided, the council shall cause the final plat to be recorded with the county clerk. No plat shall be filed for record without written consent of the subdivider. If the subdivider fails to give such written consent, the council may cancel such approval. 
(g)  Payment of all platting fees is required by the city before final plat approval. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006) 
Sec. 78-73. - Vacating a plat. 
(a)  The force and effect of a recorded plat may be destroyed by properly executing and recording an instrument declaring such plat to be vacated. The instrument shall be substantially in the same form as the applicable vacating declaration (form A or B) set out as described in appendix C. The executed vacating declaration shall be filed with the city together with 12 copies of the plat to be vacated, and, following approval by the deed records of the county. 
(b)  If the vacating declaration is filed with the city prior to the sale of any lot on the plat being vacated, a declaration is substantially the same form as the declaration form A in appendix C must be signed and acknowledgment by the proprietors of the land covered by the plat being vacated. 
(c)  In cases where lots have been sold, the plat or any part thereof may be vacated upon the execution and recordation of a declaration in substantially the same form as the declaration form B in appendix C. Such declaration requires the signature and acknowledgment of all the owners of lots in the plat being vacated. 
(d)  Upon filing the vacating declaration (form A or B in appendix C) a filing fee shall be paid as established by ordinance, in addition to the required recordation fee. 
(e)  The resubdivision of the land that is covered by a plat that is vacated shall be platted in the same manner as is prescribed by these regulations for an original plat. 
(1)  A copy of the applicable vacating declaration (form A or B in appendix C) shall be submitted with the resubdivision plat. 
(2)  In addition, the resubdivision plat shall be annotated as follows: "The area being resubdivided in this plat had been previously platted on a plat which is recorded in Volume_______, Page_______, Bexar County Plat and Deed Records, and was vacated through a vacated declaration being recorded on the same date as this resubdivision plat." 
(f)  If the subdivider so desires the vacating declaration (form A or B in appendix C) and the resubdivision plat may be filed and processed simultaneously. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006) 
Sec. 78-74. - Replatting without vacating previous plat. 
(a)  Conditions. A subdivision or a portion thereof may be replatted without vacating the immediate previous plat of such subdivision under the following conditions: 
(1)  The replat must be signed and acknowledged by only the owners of the particular properties being replatted. 
(2)  The replat does not attempt to alter, amend, or remove any covenants or restrictions. 
(3)  The replat must be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by the city council after a public hearing in relation thereto at which interested parties and citizens shall have had an opportunity to be heard. 
(4)  If, during the five years preceding the replat, any of the area to be replatted was limited by an interim or permanent zoning classification to residential use for not more than two residential units per lot, or if any lot in the preceding plat was limited by deed restrictions to residential use for not more than two residential units per lot, then a replat without vacating the preceding plat must conform to the requirements of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.015. 
(b)  Procedures. 
(1)  The following procedures and specifications shall apply to a replat to which the conditions stated in subsection (a)(4) above do not apply: 
a.  A certificate substantially in the same form as the applicable certificate (Form C, D, or E of appendix C to this chapter) shall be affixed to the replat. 
b.  In addition, the replat shall be annotated generally as follows: "The area being replatted had been previously platted on a plat which is recorded in Volume_______, Page_______, Bexar County Deed and Plat Records." 
c.  When the replat is filed with the city, the city secretary shall set a date on which the city council will hold a public hearing pertaining to the replat. The city secretary will cause due notice of such public hearing to be given. 
d.  At the time the replat is filed with the city for processing, the subdivider shall pay to the city all applicable fees, as prescribed within the municipal fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006; Ord. No. 493, § 1, 01-24-2013) 
Sec. 78-75. - Amending a plat. 
(a)  A plat that has been approved by the city council may be amended (without benefit of notice, public hearing or approval of other lot owners) if the sole purpose for amending the plat is one or more of the following: 
(1)  To correct an error in a course or distance shown on the prior plat; 
(2)  To add any course or distance shown on the prior plat; 
(3)  To correct an error in the description of the real property shown on the prior plat; 
(4)  To indicate monuments set after death, disability, or retirement from practice of the engineer or surveyor charged with responsibilities for setting monuments; 
(5)  To show the proper location or character of any monument which has been changed in location or character or which originally was shown at the wrong location, or shown incorrectly as to its character on the prior plat; 
(6)  To correct any other type of clerical error or omission as previously approved by the city; such errors and omissions may include, but are not limited to: lot numbers, acreage, street names, and identification of adjacent recorded plats; 
(7)  To correct an error in courses and distances of lot lines between two adjacent lots where both lot owners join in the application for plat amendment and neither lot is abolished, provided that such amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions and does not have a material adverse affect on the property rights of the other owners of the plat; or 
(8)  To relocate a lot line in order to cure an inadvertent encroachment of a building or improvement on a lot line or on an easement. 
(b)  A subdivider wishing to amend an approved plat shall file with the city the amending plat, together with a copy of the plat being amended and a statement detailing the amendments being proposed. The city staff will determine the extent to which the amending plat will require review if necessary, the plat will be considered by the city. 
(c)  No changes, erasures, modifications or revisions shall be made on any plat of a subdivision after approval has been given by the city council unless such change, modifications or revisions are first submitted to and approved by the city council. 
(d)  A filing fee shall be paid to the city at the time the amending plat is filed with the city. If the plat being amended has been recorded, the additional necessary recordation fee shall also be deposited with the city. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006) 
Sec. 78-76. - Minor plat. 
(a)  A minor plat may be approved in any zoning district, except the Old Town Helotes Special District, in accordance with this section. A minor plat is any current or proposed plat for four or fewer lots fronting on an existing street and not requiring the creation of any new street (not including drive aisles) or the extension of municipal facilities. Any plat that requires a waiver from subdivision design and improvement standards, any utility dedication, or any dedication of land shall not be processed as a minor plat. 
(b)  The city engineer (or designee) shall review the application and approve or approve with conditions the application. 
(c)  The city engineer (or designee) shall not deny a minor plat application. A minor plat that does not meet the city's requirements shall be forwarded to the planning and zoning commission for review and recommendation to the city council and the city council for final action on the proposed minor plat. 
(d)  The minor plat shall not be recorded until it has been endorsed by the city engineer (or designee). 
(Ord. No. 547, § 1, 10-22-2014) 
Sec. 78-77. - Fee schedule. 
    All fees shall be paid at the time of plat filing. The fees for plats shall be as prescribed in the most recent adopted fee schedule passed and approved by the city council. The fees shall be non-refundable. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3 (App. A) 7-25-2006; Ord. No. 368, § 1, 9-11-2008; Ord. No. 394, § 8, 2-12-2009; Ord. No. 547, § 1, 10-22-2014) 
Secs. 78-78-78-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SITE IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 78-101. - Performance agreement. 
(a)  Instrument. When site improvements (other than gas and electric lines) are involved in a plat, an instrument to ensure construction of all site improvements required by these regulations shall be executed by the subdivider and filed with the city together with the plat. Such instrument shall be in substantially the same form as the instrument set out in appendix C. 
(b)  Time extensions. No extension to the time limitations set out in such instrument shall be granted by the city council unless and until the applicant shall have justified such request for extension in writing. The request for time extension must be submitted to the city at least 30 days prior to the time limit set out in the performance agreement. If the city finds that development constraints (excluding pecuniary hardship) justify such a request, a time extension may be granted by the city. 
(1)  Sidewalk improvements. A time extension of up to a maximum of three years for completion of sidewalks may be granted by the commission if a sidewalk plan indicating the uncompleted sidewalks and a time schedule for sidewalk completion is submitted. The sidewalk plan will be submitted for review and approval with the request. 
(2)  All other site improvements. A maximum one-year time extension for completion of site improvements other than sidewalks may be granted by the city if the applicant shows as evidence of good faith performance that the required site improvements are at least 75 percent completed at the time of request. 
(c)  Guarantee. A guarantee, in an amount sufficient to cover the cost of the remaining site improvements, shall be required if necessary in order for such extension to be granted. Such guarantee must be filed within 30 days of the granting of the extension or the extension shall become null and void. Should the granting of such extension require the filing of any instruments, the fees for recording such instruments shall be paid by the subdivider to the city. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006) 
Sec. 78-102. - Guarantee of performance. 
(a)  An approved plat may be filed for record before the required site improvements are completed if one of the following guarantees of performance is filed with the city within three years after the plat has been approved by the city: 
(1)  Performance bond. 
a.  A performance bond will be executed by a surety company licensed to do business in the state in an amount equal to the cost estimate, as approved by the city's engineer, of all uncompleted and unaccepted improvements required by these regulations (other than gas and electric lines), with the condition that the subdivider shall complete such improvements and have them accepted by the city's engineer within three years from the date of plat approval. 
b.  The mayor is authorized to sign the bond instrument on behalf of the city and the city's attorney shall approve the same as to form. 
(2)  Trust agreement. The subdivider shall cause to be placed in a trust account on deposit in a bank or trust company or with a qualified escrow agent selected by the subdivider and approved by the city's engineer a sum of money equal to the cost estimate, as approved by the city's engineer, of all uncompleted and unaccepted site improvements (other than gas and electric lines) required by these regulations. The trust account shall be established by agreement which shall be substantially in the same form as the trust agreement set out below. The city's engineer is authorized to sign the agreement on behalf of the city and the city's attorney shall approve same as to form. 
(3)  Letter of credit. The subdivider shall provide an irrevocable letter of credit in an amount equal to the cost estimate, as approved by the city's engineer, of all uncompleted and unaccepted site improvements (other than gas and electric lines) required by these regulations. The letter of credit, properly executed, shall be substantially in the same form as the letter of credit set out in appendix C. The city's engineer is authorized to sign the agreement on behalf of the city and the city attorney shall approve same as to form. 
(4)  Cash or cashier's check. The subdivider shall provide to the city cash or a cashier's check in an amount equal to the cost estimate as approved by the city's engineer, of all uncompleted and unacceptable site improvements (other than gas and electric lines) required by these regulations. Upon completion of the required site improvements and their acceptance by the city's engineer, the amount will be refunded to the subdivider by the city. 
(b)  When a subdivider has given security in any of the forms herein provided, and when 50 percent of the required site improvements have been completed and have been accepted by the city's engineer, or whenever any segment or segments of the required site improvements have been completed and accepted by the city's engineer, the subdivider may substitute for the original guarantee, a new guarantee in an amount equal to the cost of the remaining site improvements. The cost estimate shall be approved by the city's engineer. Such new guarantee need not be in the same form as the original guarantee so long as such guarantee is one that is listed in subsection (a)(1). However, in no event shall the substitution of one security for another in any way change or modify the terms and conditions of the performance agreement or the obligation of the subdivider as specified in the performance agreement. 
(c)  Supplementary guarantees may be required as follows: 
(1)  One year from the date of plat recordation and annually thereafter until the expiration of the three-year period from the date of plat approval, the city's engineer shall review the estimated cost of completing such site improvements as are not then completed and determine the adequacy of the existing performance guarantee. Should the engineer determine that the sum set out in the performance guarantee is inadequate to provide for the completion of the uncompleted site improvements at the then prevailing construction costs, he or she shall require a substitute guarantee to cover the newly estimated cost or a supplemental guarantee to cover the additional sum needed for completion. 
(2)  If a subdivider submits an original performance guarantee after a period of two years has elapsed from the date on which a plat was approved by the city, the actual cost estimate of completing the uncompleted site improvements shall be increased by an amount, based upon a locally recognized construction cost index as approved by the city's engineer, required to cover an estimated inflationary increase in the cost during the duration of the period covered by the performance guarantee. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006) 
Sec. 78-103. - Liability of the subdivider. 
(a)  A subdivider shall be held liable to the city for the completion of all site improvements required by these regulations until such time as the improvements shall have been actually completed and accepted by the city. 
(b)  If the construction of site improvements has been guaranteed by a form of security described in section 78-103(a)(1), and such improvements have not been completed and accepted by the city within the time period prescribed by these regulations, the city, after written notification has been given to the subdivider, shall take such action as may be required to cause payment to be made to the city of the amounts of money secured by a guarantee of performance. Such amounts of money shall be used by the city to finance the completion of the required improvements. 
(c)  In the event that the amounts of money referred to above are insufficient to finance the completion of the required improvements, the city shall so notify the subdivider in writing and shall require the subdivider either to complete the improvements without delay or to make available to the city the amount of money required to finance their completion. Should the subdivider fail to do either of the above and such failure is not due to strikes, riots, acts of God, acts of the public enemy, injunction or other court action, or any other cause similar to those enumerated beyond the subdivider's control, the city shall refer the matter to the city's attorney for such action as the city's attorney may deem appropriate to compel the subdivider to comply with the provisions of the performance agreement entered into by the subdivider as a condition precedent to the approval of the plat by the city, or to pursue any other remedy which may be available to the city. Further, until such time as the required site improvements have been completed and accepted by the city, the city shall refuse to accept from such subdivider a performance guarantee under any form which is related to the plat of a subdivision, subsequently filed with the city, in which such subdivider has a principal or subsidiary interest. Such a plat, once it has been approved by the city, may be recorded only in the manner prescribed in this article. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not apply if a subdivider is prevented from completing and having accepted such required site improvements within the prescribed time by reason of strikes, riots, acts of God, acts of the public enemy, injunction or other cause similar to those enumerated beyond the subdivider's reasonable control. The subdivider shall be entitled to an extension of time equal to the time of such delay which shall be fixed by written certificate made by the city. It is expressly declared that no such allowance of time will be made unless claimed by the subdivider and allowed and certified in writing by the city at the end of each period of such delay. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006) 
Sec. 78-104. - Responsibility for costs of in-place improvements. 
    The responsibility for all costs of the in-place improvements as required by this article shall be borne by the subdivider. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006) 
Secs. 78-105-78-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 78-131. - Provisions for future subdivisions. 
    If a tract is subdivided larger than minimal lot size such parcels shall be arranged to allow the opening of future streets and logical further subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006) 
Sec. 78-132. - Reserve strips prohibited. 
    There shall be no reserve strips controlling access to land dedicated or intended to be dedicated to public use. It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider/developer/owner of land being platted or replatted that there are no reserve strips controlling access to land dedicated or intended to be dedicated to public use. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006) 
Sec. 78-133. - Site improvements to conform. 
    Streets, alleys, sidewalks and other site improvements required under the provisions of this chapter to be installed in subdivisions by the subdivider shall conform to the specification of this article and to the then current policies and regulations of the city, or other approved utility districts or agencies involved with reference to payment for such installations, refunds, credits and other financial arrangements. Requirements for sidewalks and curbs are waived if individual lot size exceeds one acre or greater. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006) 
Sec. 78-134. - Neighborhood postal delivery and collection box units. 
(a)  The subdivider shall coordinate with the U.S. Postal Service for the location and placement of neighborhood delivery and collection box units by the postal service. 
(b)  The location of the neighborhood delivery and collection box units shall be shown on the utility layout and approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006) 
Sec. 78-135. - Blocks. 
(a)  Factors governing dimensions. The length, width, and shape of blocks shall be such as to: 
(1)  Provide adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated. 
(2)  Accommodate lots of the size and dimensions required by the zoning code, as amended. 
(3)  Provide for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic. 
(4)  Give due regard to the limitations and opportunities of topography. 
(b)  Length. Block lengths may not exceed 1,800 feet or be less than 500 feet. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006) 
Sec. 78-136. - Lots. 
(a)  Dimensions. The size, width, depth, shape, and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated. Unless the requirements of the zoning code are more stringent or unless a planned unit development or planned residential development is being platted as provided for hereafter, lot dimensions shall be as follows: 
(1)  Sewered lots. Where off-lot sewerage is provided, each lot shall have an area of at least 22,000 square feet and shall be at least 60 feet wide except in the case of a planned unit development or planned residential development. In the case of irregularly shaped lots, the minimum width shall be measured at the required front building setback line. 
(2)  Unsewered lots. Where off-lot sewerage is not required and is not provided, the lot size shall be determined in accordance with the requirements of the county commissioners' court order "Regulating and Licensing of Private Sewage Facilities," and shall be approved by the county public works department prior to approval by the city. Planned unit developments shall not be permitted with septic tank system installations unless approved by the director of the county public works department. The septic tank system, if approved, shall serve only one individual unit, and the septic tank system shall be located on the lot on which the unit is located. 
(b)  Increased dimensions. 
(1)  The city has the authority to increase minimum space requirements if the city finds that any or all of the following conditions exist and that in its judgment the adverse conditions will be averted. 
a.  Where lots conforming to the minimum requirements would disrupt the essential character of the neighborhood. 
b.  Where lots conforming to the minimum requirements, in relation to existing or planned adjacent properties conforming to a larger spacing, would be so small as to cause substantial injury to such adjacent properties by decreasing the market value thereof or otherwise. 
c.  Where lots conforming to the minimum requirements would be inconsistent with the city's master plan or good neighborhood planning. 
d.  Where lots widths or area as proposed would have adverse effects on health or welfare due to unusual topographic conditions or soil conditions relative to proper functioning of any planned septic tank or water system. 
(2)  If the city shall determine that any or all of the above conditions exist, it may increase the minimum requirements as to area or width so that in the judgment of the city the adverse conditions will be abated. 
(c)  Frontage. 
(1)  Except for planned unit developments or planned residential developments, all lots shall front on a public street and shall have a minimum frontage width as follows: 
FRONTAGE 
Minimum Lot Size Minimum Frontage Width 6,000 Business 60 feet 22,000 Residential (sewered) 60 feet 32,000 Residential (septic) 120 feet  
(2)  On lots of irregular shape, the width may be measured at the building line. 
(d)  Minimum setback lines. 
(1)  General provisions. Minimum front and side building setback lines at streets and crosswalks shall be shown on all plats and shall conform to the restrictions, if any, imposed on the subdivider, but in no event shall such setback lines be less than required by the zoning code. 
(2)  High pressure oil and gas lines. Building setback lines adjacent to high pressure oil and gas lines. No structure shall be located nearer than 25 feet to a high pressure oil, gas, or gasoline line. And further, adjacent to such high pressure lines, a 25-foot building setback line (measured at right angles from the center line of the fuel line) shall be shown on the final plat. 
(3)  Utility lines. Building setback lines adjacent to existing overhead utility lines shall be such as to ensure compliance with the provisions of appendix B. 
(e)  Corner lots. Corner lots shall have sufficient width to provide appropriate building setback from and orientation to both streets as required by the zoning code. Lots abutting on crosswalks shall be treated as corner lots. 
(f)  Extra depth and width in certain cases. Where a lot in a residential subdivision backs up to a railroad right-of-way, a high pressure gasoline or gas line, a major thoroughfare, an industrial area or other existing land use which has a depreciating effect on the residential use of the property, and where no marginal access street or other street is provided at the rear of such lot, additional depth shall be required, but in no case shall a depth in excess of 140 feet be required. Where a rear lot sides to any of the above, appropriate additional width shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006) 
Sec. 78-137. - Land suitability. 
(a)  Every lot shall contain a suitable building site. 
(b)  The city may disapprove a plat if the city finds the land to be unsuitable for development due to natural/environmental conditions which may pose a danger to health, safety, or property. Natural/environmental conditions which may render land unsuitable for development include, but are not limited to, flooding, steep slopes, unstable soils, or the presence of a sanitary landfill site. In disapproving a plat, the city shall incorporate its findings, together with the specific facts upon which the findings are based, into the official minutes of the meeting at which the plat is considered. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006) 
Sec. 78-138. - Drainage facilities. 
    Drainage facilities shall be provided and constructed as specified in appendix B included at the end of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006) 
Sec. 78-139. - Planned unit developments. 
(a)  Planned unit developments shall comply with the provisions contained in the zoning code; however, planned unit developments in the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction are exempt from the zoning procedures. 
(b)  The description "planned unit development" shall be prominently indicated on the subdivision plat. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006) 
Sec. 78-140. - Planned residential developments. 
(a)  Planned residential development subdivisions shall comply with the provisions contained in zoning code; however, planned residential developments in the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction are exempt from the zoning procedure. 
(b)  The description "planned residential development" shall be prominently indicated on the subdivision plat. 
(c)  For planned residential developments outside the city limits, the applicant shall provide two copies of deed restrictions limiting the density of each plat to the maximum allowed by the approved development plan. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006) 
Sec. 78-141. - Improvement of public easement on private land. 
(a)  This section applies only to improvements to be made by any party, other than a governmental entity, on a public easement located on land that a private individual, or individuals, other than the party seeking to make the improvement, have fee simple interest in. 
(b)  All such improvements must be approved by the city council prior to the approval of any plat associated with the proposed improvement or the initiation of any work on said easement. 
(c)  Any plat application, to which this section applies, shall require the approval of city council pursuant to the terms set out in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.009(b). 
(d)  Notification of the time and place the city council shall consider such matters, as set out in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, shall be provided to the fee owner or owners of land on which the easement is located and said notice shall be in writing and be delivered by mail or hand delivery no later than five days prior to the date of the meeting. 
(Ord. No. 301, § 1, 3-9-2006) 
Sec. 78-142. - Utilities. 
(a)  Applicability. This section shall apply to the application for platting, replatting, amending plat or building permit for any property within the city corporate limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city. 
(b)  Adequate utilities required. Adequate provision for all utilities shall be provided to the entire subdivision. 
(c)  Undergrounding required. All new distribution and service lines, both onsite and offsite, for electricity, television, telephone and other wire or fiber optic type utilities shall be underground. Transformers, amplifiers or similar devices associated with the underground lines shall be located upon the ground or below ground. Where the underground placement of such facilities is not a standard practice of the utility involved, the subdivider or developer shall make arrangements with the applicable utility for the payment of all costs associated with the non- standard installations. 
(d)  Definitions. "Underground" means not visible from the surface of the earth. 
(Ord. No. 322, § 2, 11-9-06) 
Secs. 78-143-78-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 78-161. - Authority of city's attorney. 
    On behalf of the city, the city's attorney shall, when directed by the city council, institute appropriate action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this article or the standards referred to herein with respect to any violation thereof which occurs within the city, within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, as determined under the Municipal Annexation Act, or within any area subject to all or a part of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006) 
Sec. 78-162. - Variances by council. 
    The city council may authorize a variance from these regulations when in its opinion, undue hardship will result from requiring strict compliance. In granting a variance, the council shall prescribe only conditions that it deems necessary to or desirable in the public interest. In making the findings herein below required, the council shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of the land involved, existing uses of land in the vicinity, the number of persons who will reside or work in the proposed subdivision, and the probable effect of such variance upon traffic conditions and upon the public health, safety, convenience and welfare in the vicinity. No variance shall be granted unless the council finds: 
(1)  That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the land involved such that the strict application of the provisions of this article would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of this land; 
(2)  That the variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant; 
(3)  That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or injurious to other property in the area; and 
(4)  That the granting of the variance will not have the effect of preventing the orderly subdivision of other land in the area in accordance with the provisions of this article. Such findings of the council, together with the specific facts upon which such findings are based, shall be incorporated into the official minutes of the council meeting at which such variance is granted. Variances may be granted only when in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this article so that the public health, safety and welfare may be secured and substantial justice done. Pecuniary hardship to the subdivider, standing alone, shall not be deemed to constitute undue hardship. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006) 
Sec. 78-163. - Authority of city's engineer. 
    The city's engineer is authorized and directed to promulgate rules, regulations standards and specifications for the construction, installation, design, location and arrangement of streets, curbs, street lights, street signs, alleys, utility layouts, utility easements, gates for utility easements, sidewalks, water supply and water distribution systems, fire hydrants, sewage disposal systems, septic tanks, water wells, monuments, criteria for drainage easement requirements, drainage facilities, and crosswalk ways. He or she shall recommend to the city council any changes to be made. No such rules, regulations, standards and specifications shall conflict with this article or any other ordinance of the city. All such improvements shall be constructed, installed, designed, located and arranged by the subdivider in accordance with such rules, regulations, standards and specifications. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006) 
Sec. 78-164. - Conflicting provisions; most restrictive to prevail. 
    If any other city ordinance, including but not limited to, the zoning code, are in conflict with this article, the most stringent or restrictive rules shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006) 
Sec. 78-165. - Prospective effect. 
    This article shall be prospective in its application and shall govern plats filed only after passage. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006) 
Sec. 78-166. - Injunction. 
    In addition to any other remedy provided by law, the city and its agents shall have the right to enjoin any violation of this article by injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006) 
Sec. 78-167. - Penalty. 
    Anyone violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined an amount not less than $25.00 nor more than $2,000.00, each day that such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense and be punishable as such. Prosecution or conviction under this section shall never be a bar to other remedies of relief for violations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3(App. A), 7-25-2006) 
APPENDIX A - PLAT CERTIFICATES 

Sec. 1. - Owner's acknowledgment. 
STATE OF TEXAS 
COUNTY OF BEXAR 
The Owner of the land shown on this plat, and whose name is subscribed hereto, and in person or through a duly authorized agent, dedicates to the City of Helotes, Texas, for the use of the public forever all streets (other than private streets), alleys, parks, watercourses, drains, easements, and the water and sewer lines in all of the aforesaid public places and all other public places there on shown for the purposes and consideration therein expressed. 
;l>___________ 
Owner 
STATE OF TEXAS 
COUNTY OF BEXAR 
BEFORE ME, the undersigned authority, on this day personally appeared___________known to me to be the person whose name is subscribed to the foregoing instrument, and acknowledge to me that he executed the same for the purposes and consideration therein expressed and in the capacity therein stated. Given under my hand and seal of office this_____day of_______, 20___. 
;l>___________ 
Notary Public, Bexar County, Texas 
(Ord. No. 50, app. A, 4-28-1988; Ord. No. 162, § 1, 6-14-2001) 
Sec. 2. - Certification of surveyor. 
STATE OF TEXAS 
COUNTY OF BEXAR 
I hereby certify that this plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the property made under my supervision on the ground. 
;l>___________ 
Registered Public Surveyor 
(Surveyor's Seal) 
Sworn to and subscribed before me this the_____day of_______, A.D. 20___. 
;l>___________ 
Notary Public, Bexar County, Texas 
(Ord. No. 50, app. A, 4-28-1988) 
Sec. 3. - Certificates of engineers. 
(A)  A certificate by the engineer responsible for the preparation of the final plat and supporting data, attesting to its accuracy: 
STATE OF TEXAS 
COUNTY OF BEXAR 
I hereby certify that proper engineering consideration has been given this plat to the matters of streets, lots, and drainage layout. 
;l>___________ 
Registered Professional Engineer 
(Engineer's Seal) 
Sworn to and subscribed before me this the_____day of_______, A.D. 20___. 
;l>___________ 
Notary Public, Bexar County, Texas 
(B)  Certification by city engineer: 
The City Engineer of the City of Helotes hereby certifies that this subdivision plat conforms to all requirements of the subdivision regulations of the City as to which his approval is required. 
;l>___________ 
City Engineer 
(Ord. No. 50, app. A, 4-28-1988) 
Sec. 4A. - Approval of planning and zoning commission. 
This plat of___________has been submitted to and considered by the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Helotes, Texas, and is hereby approved by such Planning and Zoning Commission. 
Dated this_____day of_______, 20___. 
;l>By: ___________ 
Chairperson of the Planning 
and Zoning Commission 
;l>By: ___________ 
Secretary of the Planning 
and Zoning Commission 
(Ord. No. 50C, § 1, 7-10-2003) 
Sec. 4B. - Approval of city council. 
This plat of___________has been submitted to and considered by the City Council of the City of Helotes, Texas, and is hereby approved by such City Council. 
Dated this_____day of___________, 20___. 
;l>By: ___________ 
Mayor 
;l>By: ___________ 
Secretary 
(Ord. No. 50C, § 1, 7-10-2003) 
Sec. 5. - County clerk's recording acknowledgment. 
STATE OF TEXAS 
COUNTY OF BEXAR 
I,___________, County Clerk of said County, do hereby certify that the foregoing instrument of writing with its certificate of authentication was filed for record in my office, on the_____day of_______, A.D. 20___, at_____.M. and duly recorded the_____day of_______, A.D. 20___, at_____.M. in the Records of Deeds and Plats of said county, in book Volume_______, on Page_______. 
In testimony whereof, witness my hand and official seal of office, this_____day of_______, A.D. 20___. 
;l>County Clerk, Bexar County, Texas 
___________ 
Deputy 
(Ord. No. 50, app. A, 4-28-1988) 
APPENDIX B - SPECIFICATIONS AND DESIGN STANDARDS FOR PUBLIC WORKS IMPROVEMENTS 
GENERAL PROVISIONS 

§ 1 - APPLICABILITY. 
All subdivisions shall comply with the specifications and design standards as outlined hereinafter. 
(Ord. 50, passed 4-28-88) 
§ 2 - CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS. 
All construction shall meet the requirements as set forth in the City of San Antonio's "Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction," dated January 1981, and the latest revisions thereof. Copies of the document are on file in the office of the City Secretary. 
(Ord. 50, passed 4-28-88) 
STREETS, ALLEYS, SIDEWALKS, CROSS WALKWAYS AND DRAINAGE STRUCTURES 

§ 35-A201 - STREET, ALLEY, AND CROSS WALKWAY PLANS. 
The plans and profiles for street, alley, cross walkway and drainage easement improvements fitted shall include the following information: 
(A)  Typical sections showing the proposed pavement width, type, thickness and crown; the proposed curb or curb and gutter type, location in relation to center line and exposure; the proposed parkway grading slopes; the proposed locations and type of wheelchair ramps; location of traffic signal conduit; and construction details of all drainage including dimensions, reinforcing and components such as grates and manhole covers. The information shall be given for each different type of streets and alleys in the subdivision. 
(B)  Alignment of each street, alley, cross walkway and drainage easement showing a beginning and ending station; each deflection angle of the center line and the station of the point of intersection; the station of the point of curvature and the point of tangency of each curve; the station and angle of intersection of each intersection with another street, alley or drainage easement; the station and radius of each curb return; the location of adjacent right-of-way lines; the location and limits of sidewalks and curbs of each street; the location of each drainage structure; the location and size of all storm sewers; and the length, width, and thickness of cement stabilized base. 
(C)  The top of curb grade at each curb end, each 50-foot station and each end of each curb return; the center line grade at each end and at each 50-foot station of alleys and drainage ditches; the gradient of each tangent grade and the location and length of each vertical curve; the direction of storm drainage flow at each intersection; the flow line elevations of each drainage structure; the flow line elevation of each storm sewer at each point of change of grade, each end, and the intervening gradients. The profiles of streets, alleys and drainage ditches shall show the natural ground at adjacent property lines and the proposed center line. 
(D)  Scale, north arrow, date and plat number of the associated plat. Plans and profiles shall be drawn to scales of one inch equals 50 feet horizontally and one inch equals five feet vertically, unless different scales are approved by the Director of Public Works. 
(E)  All street and alley plans and profiles shall bear the seal of a registered professional engineer. 
(Ord. 50, passed 4-28-88) 
§ 35-A202 - SIGHT DISTANCE. 
The following minimum sight distances shall be provided for safe stopping and intersection operations: 
(A)  Minimum stopping sight distance, level roadway conditions. 
TABLE I MINIMUM STOPPING SIGHT DISTANCE 
LEVEL ROADWAY CONDITIONS Street Classification Sight Distance Primary arterial 300 ft. Secondary arterial 300 ft. Collector street 250 ft.  
(B)  Minimum intersection sight distances. 
TABLE II MINIMUM INTERSECTION SIGHT DISTANCES Street Classification Sight Distance Primary arterial 450 ft. Secondary arterial 400 ft. Collector street 300 ft.  
(Ord. 50, passed 4-28-88) 
§ 35-A203 - VERTICAL CURVATURE. 
(A)  A gradual transition from one roadway grade to another shall be accomplished by means of a vertical parallel curve connecting two intersecting tangents. The minimum length of vertical curve shall be computed from the following formula and table: 
(1)  Minimum length of vertical curve formula. 
L = KA 
Where: L = the length of vertical curve in feet 
K = a constant related to sight distance and geometry of a parabolic curve (see Table III) 
A = the algebraic difference in grades in percent 
(2)  Design values for constant "K" vertical curve. 
TABLE III DESIGN VALUES FOR CONSTANT "K," VERTICAL CURVATURE Street Classification "K" 
Crest Curves "K" 
Sag Curves Primary arterial 70 60 Secondary arterial 70 60 Collector street 55 55  
(B)  For flat gradients, where sight distance is not a critical determinant of design, the minimum length of curve shall generally be three times the design speed in miles per hour. 
(Ord. 50, passed 4-28-88) 
§ 35-A204 - GRADE. 
(A)  Street and alley grades shall conform to the terrain and shall not exceed the following: 
TABLE IV STREET AND ALLEY GRADES AS DESIGNATED BY 
STATE DEPARTMENT OF HIGHWAYS AND PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION Street Classification Maximum Grade Primary arterial 5% Secondary arterial 5% Collector street 7% Local street 10% Marginal access street 10% Alley 10%  
(B)  No street or alley grade shall be less than 3/10 of one percent (0.003) unless otherwise specified by the Director of Public Works. 
(Ord. 50, passed 4-28-88) 
§ 35-A205 - HORIZONTAL CURVATURE. 
(A)  Horizontal curvature shall be provided by simple circular curves with a constant radius for the safety and comfort of motorists. The following minimum radii shall be used in designating horizontal curves. 
TABLE V HORIZONTAL CURVATURE DESIGNATED BY 
STATE DEPARTMENT OF HIGHWAYS AND PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION Street Classification Minimum Center Line 
Radius "R" Primary arterial 1200 ft. Secondary arterial 700 ft. Collector street 400 ft. Local street 100 ft. Marginal access street 150 ft.  
(B)  "Broken-back" or compound curves shall not be permitted unless approved by the Director of Public Works. Reverse curves may be used provided due consideration for safe sight distance has been shown. 
(C)  Transitional curves may be used where comfort and safety of the motorist will be enhanced. 
(D)  Superelevation may be used on primary and secondary arterials only and with the approval of the Director of Public Works. 
(E)  For local streets: 
(1)  An alternative design may be used in lieu of the l00-foot center line radius: a 50-foot center line radius with a 50-foot radius flair as shown below: 

(2)  The point of radius may be relocated along the lines indicated by letters on the figure below (lines AX, AY and AZ). The point of radius shall not exceed 15 feet from point A. The point of radius shall be shown on the plat. When the point of radius is shifted along the street center line (lines AX and AZ), a site plan detailing lot siting, driveway location and on-street parking considerations shall be submitted to the Director of Public Works who will make a recommendation to the Planning Commission regarding the safety of the proposed flair. 
(Ord. 50, passed 4-28-88) 
§ 35-A206 - COMBINATION OF CURVES. 
Combination of horizontal and vertical curves shall be permitted provided sufficient sight distance is available for safe operation. Generally, the horizontal curvature should be introduced on the upgrade of the vertical curve. 
(Ord. 50, passed 4-28-88) 
§ 35-A207 - PAVEMENT AND MEDIAN TRANSITION. 
(A)  Where cross section changes occur, appropriate pavement transition shall be provided. Transition shall be described as a ratio of lateral transition width to transition length in feet. The following formulas shall be used in computing transition: 
(1)  Local street to local street, local street to collector, collector to collector. 
L = 20W 
Where: L = transition length in feet measured along the center line of the street. 
W = transition width measured as the difference in pavement width from the center line to the pavement edge of the two cross sections. 
(2)  Arterial streets except freeways. 
L = DW 
Where: L = transition length in feet measured along the center line of the street 
D = speed of the particular street section as dete mined by the Director of Public Works. Design speed shall be used as a constant. 
W = transition width measured as the difference in pavement width from the center line to the pavement edge of the two cross sections. 
(B)  Median or center dividers will also be transitioned. Median transition shall generally parallel the pavement transition to a point where the median width is four feet at which point the median shall be rounded off with a two-foot radius. Median or divider transition shall be designed so that abrupt offsets are not created at intersections. 
(Ord. 50, passed 4-28-88) 
§ 35-A208 - PROPERTY LINE AND CURB RETURN. 
At each intersection the curb and the property line at each block corner shall be rounded with a radius, R, varying with the interior angle as specified in the following table: 
TABLE VI MINIMUM RADII FOR CURB RETURNS(CR)
AND PROPERTY LINE RETURNS (PLR)) Interior Angles 
in Degrees Street Intersections Two Locals Local and Collector Two Collectors Local/ 
collector with Arterial Two Arterials CR PLR CR PLR CR PLR CR PLR CR PLR 150-145 15 5 15 6 20 10 25 15 25 15 145-140 15 5 15 6 20 10 25 15 20 10 140-135 15 5 15 6 20 10 25 15 30 20 135-125 15 5 15 6 20 10 25 15 35 25 125-85 15 5 15 6 20 10 25 15 30 25 85-75 20 10 20 11 25 15 30 20 50 40 75-65 25 15 25 16 30 20 35 25 80 70 65-55 30 20 30 21 35 25 40 30 90 80 55-45 35 25 35 26 40 30 45 35 110 100 45-00 35 25 35 26 40 30 45 35 150 140  

(Ord. 50, passed 4-28-88) 
§ 35-A209 - MEDIANS. 
(A)  Openings. Medians shall be continuous. Openings in the median may be provided at all public streets provided the center line spacing between the public streets is at least 400 feet. If the spacing is less than 400 feet, the median shall be open for the street with the higher functional classification. All other openings shall be made in accordance with current standards of the Director of Public Works. When medians are open, safety bays and median radii shall be provided and curbed unless approved otherwise by the Director of Public Works. 
(B)  Special purpose medians. Dividers constructed for aesthetic purposes as entrances for subdivisions shall be permitted (see Figure XI). Such dividers shall normally be 14 feet in width. The divider shall maintain the full width for a minimum 25 feet after which an appropriate transition shall be provided in accordance with § 35-A207. The 25 feet shall be measured from the edge of pavement of the ultimate width of the intersecting roadway. The nose or rounded portion of the divider shall be placed two feet off the edge of the traveled roadway of the intersecting street unless the turning radius of vehicular traffic indicates other modifications to the median nose are required. 
(C)  Landscaping and signing. No signs, walls or fences shall be placed in the median area other than approved traffic-control devices unless approved by the Director of Public Works. No trees, shrubs or other ground cover shall be placed in the median which will obstruct the driver's sight distance (See Figure XIA). With the approval of the Director of Public Works, trees, shrubs and ground cover may be placed in the median and divider area provided the full grown tree or shrub trunk diameter does not exceed four inches. Such landscaping shall be in accordance with current design standards of the Director of Parks and Recreation. In addition appropriate maintenance agreements shall be made with the Director of Parks and Recreation. 
(D)  Where a median or traffic divider projects across sidewalks, the median (concrete or sod) shall be opened for five feet at the projection of the crosswalk. This five foot opening shall be paved to the grade of the listing surface to permit wheelchair and mobility impaired persons to utilize the crosswalk. 
(Ord. 50, passed 4-28-88) 
§ 35-A210 - WHEELCHAIR RAMPS. 
Wheelchair ramps shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the details in Figure XII. 
(Ord. 50, passed 4-28-88) 
§ 35-A211 - CROSS-SECTION STANDARDS. 
(A)  Standard cross sections. The subdivider shall develop the streets for the subdivision in accordance with the minimum standards detailed in Figures I through III. 
(B)  Pavement structure. The minimum thickness of the compacted base and the minimum rate of application of asphalt surface course shall be in accordance with details shown typical cross-sections and details of Figures I through III. 
(C)  Curb and gutter. Concrete curbs or monolithic curbs and gutters constructed in accordance with the details shown on Figure V shall be provided where indicated on the typical cross sections of Figures I, II, and III. 
(D)  Medians and dividers. Medians and dividers having curbs shall be constructed in accordance with the approved cross section according to the plans and to the lines and grades established by the Director of Public Works. Where divider strips on primary and secondary streets are constructed without curbs, they shall be graded to a slope of 1/4-inch per foot from the center of the divider strip to a point seven inches from above the edge of pavement and from that point to edge of pavement. 
(E)  Parkways. Parkway slopes are to be 1/4-inch per foot toward the street except in heavy cuts, where a maximum of one-inch per foot will be permitted. Landscaping, walls or fences placed in the parkway for aesthetic purposes shall not obstruct sight distance. Plans for such work shall be approved by the directors of Public Works and Parks and Recreation. 
(Ord. 50, passed 4-28-88) 
SANITARY SEWERS 

§ 35-A301 - DESIGN CRITERIA. 
The minimum size of lateral sewer mains shall be eight inches in diameter and all house connections in streets or alleys must be six inches in diameter. The minimum grades permitted shall be sufficient to produce a velocity of two feet per second. All outfall mains shall be of sufficient size to serve the maximum anticipated flow from all areas tributary to this line and must conform with sanitary sewer master plan recommendations on file in the office of the Director of Environmental Management. 
(Ord. 50, passed 4-28-88) 
§ 35-A302 - SEWER SYSTEMS. 
The following criteria shall be used in formulas for the design of sewer systems: 
(A)  Flow from contributing population. 
TABLE VII FLOW FROM CONTRIBUTING POPULATION IN GALLONS PER DAY PER PERSON Type of Residential Area Peak Contribution Average Daily Flow Middle income, new construction 240 156 Middle income, old construction 152 115 Low to middle income, old construction 198 128 Low income 111 72 Middle income, apartment 180 117 Low to middle income, apartment 152 99  
(B)  Infiltration. 
TABLE VIII INFILTRATION IN GALLONS PER DAY PER ACRE Source of Infiltration Amount of Infiltration Residential area, level to 7% land slope 700 Residential area, 7% to 15% land slope 500 Totally undeveloped areas 360 High water table, creek beds, lake areas 1450 Business and industrial areas 1000  
(Ord. 50, passed 4-28-88) 
§ 35-A303 - FEDERAL AND STATE APPROVAL. 
Sewer treatment plants and sewer systems outside the city limits but within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city must conform to the requirements of the State Department of Health and the State Water Commission. The developer shall provide written statements showing approval by the applicable state agencies prior to plat approval. The developer shall also provide written statements of approval from applicable federal agencies accompanied by plans approved by all applicable agencies prior to construction. 
(Ord. 50, passed 4-28-88) 
§ 35-A304 - SEWER LINES. 
(A)  Sewers shall be located in the center line of streets and four feet from the north or east lines in alleys or as otherwise approved. 
(B)  All sewer lines shall be placed to line and grade as directed by the Director of Environmental Management. 
(Ord. 50, passed 4-28-88) 
§ 35-A305 - MANHOLES. 
(A)  Manholes shall be placed at all deflections and intercept and terminating points on the public system and spaced not more than 400 feet apart. 
(B)  Manholes shall be provided at intersecting streets or alleys where there is a possibility of future extensions. 
(C)  Manholes shall be provided where required by the Director of Environmental Management. 
(Ord. 50, passed 4-28-88) 
§ 35-A306 - CONSTRUCTION OVER THE EDWARDS AQUIFER. 
For subdivisions constructed over awards and associated limestone formations, all construction shall meet the herein referenced city specifications and the latest revision of the Texas Administrative Code, 31 TAC 313.1-313.11. 
(Ord. 50, passed 4-28-88) 
STORM DRAINAGE 

§ 35-A401 - DESIGN CRITERIA. 
(A)  Method of computing runoff The basis of computing runoff shall be the rational formula or some other method provided it is acceptable to the Director of Public Works. 
(B)  Run off calculations. Run off rates shall be computed at not less than the following: 
TABLE IX AVERAGE RUNOFF PERCENTAGE Character of Area Slope Up to 1% Over 1% 
Up to 3% Over 3% 
Up to 5% Flow Over 5% Business or commercial areas (90% or more impervious) 95 96 97 97 Densely developed areas (80% to 90% impervious) 85 88 91 95 Closely built residential areas and school sites 75 77 80 84 Undeveloped areas 68 70 72 75 Average residential areas 65 67 69 72  
(C)  In all cases, wet antecedent conditions shall be assumed. Runoff rates shall be computed on the basis of ultimate development of the entire watershed to the proposed subdivision. For determination of time for concentration, times shall be figured on the basis that there shall be an improved drainage system upstream from the point under consideration. 
(D)  Street velocities may be approximated according to proposed slopes from Figure IX, Storm Drainage, Street Velocities and Capacities Flowing Curb Full. Rainfall intensities shall be obtained from Figure X. 
(Ord. 50, passed 4-28-88) 
§ 35-A402 - STREETS. 
(A)  Streets may be used for storm water drainage only if the calculated storm water flow does not exceed the flows outlined in Figure IX or the velocity does not exceed ten feet per second. Local streets shall be designed on a basis of a five-year frequency, all other streets on a ten-year frequency. Where streets are not capable of carrying storm waters as outlined above, drainage channels or storm sewers shall be provided. Street width shall not be widened beyond the width as determined by the street classification for drainage purposes. 
(B)  Where storm sewers are required, design shall be based on a 25-year frequency, and the entire 25-year discharge shall be picked up at the point where the street can no longer handle the runoff flowing curb full. No allowance shall be made for overruns or partial street flows combined with storm sewer flows at initial pickup point. Inlets and underground systems shall be designed on a 25-year frequency; street discharges, after initial pickup, may be based upon street classification for frequency required. 
(Ord. 50, passed 4-28-88) 
§ 35-A403 - CONCRETE LINED CHANNELS. 
(A)  The design of concrete lined channels shall be based on a 25-year frequency. The design is subject to the approval of the Director of Public Works and shall comply with the following general requirements: 
TABLE X DRAINAGE FREEBOARD FOR CONCRETE LINED EARTH CHANNELS Design Depth of Flow Required Freeboard 0 to 5 feet 0.05 foot 5 to 10 feet 10% of design depth 10 feet and over 1.0 foot  
(B)  From the top of the concrete lining to the top of the ditch, a side slope not steeper than two horizontal to one vertical shall be required; nor shall the slope be less than 12 to one. 
(C)  For normal conditions, the concrete lining shall be a minimum of four inches thick and reinforced with No. 3 round bars placed not more than 18 inches on center in both directions. Where surcharge, nature of ground, height and steepness of slope, and the like become critical, design shall be in accordance with latest structural standards. All concrete lining shall develop a minimum compressive strength of not less than 2,500 pounds per square inch in 28 days. 
(D)  Maximum concrete riprap side slopes shall be one to one, unless actual soils test data submitted by soils engineer shows steeper, special design is allowable. A minimum of 200 pounds per square foot surcharge shall be used. 
(E)  Vertical walls will be permissible in depth not to exceed two feet unless properly fenced or enclosed. 
(F)  Easements or rights-of-way for concrete lined channels shall extend a minimum of two feet on both sides of the extreme limits of the channel. EXTREME LIMITS of the channel shall mean the side slope intercept with the natural ground or proposed finished ground elevation. 
(G)  A minimum N value of roughness coefficient of 0.015 shall be used for a wood float type surface finish. This N value is as used in Manning's formula. 
(Ord. 50, passed 4-28-88) 
§ 35-A404 - EARTH CHANNELS. 
The design of earth channels shall be based on a 25-year frequency subject to the approval of the Director of Public Works, and shall comply with the following general specifications: 
(A)  The depth of the earth channel shall be for the design depth of the flow plus the required freeboard as specified in § 35-A403(a). 
(B)  The side slope shall not be steeper than three horizontal to one vertical. 
(C)  Easements or rights-of-way for earth channels shall extend a minimum of two feet on one side and 15 feet for an access road on the opposite side of the extreme limits of the channels when such channels do not parallel and adjoin an alley or roadway. When such channels do parallel and adjoin an alley or roadway, the easement or right-of-way shall extend a minimum of two feet on both sides of the extreme limits of the channel. Where utilities are installed in the access road of the drainage right-of-way, the right-of-way shall extend two feet on one side and 17 feet on the opposite side of the design limits of the channel. These 17 feet are to provide an access way along the channel with a maximum cross slope of 1/2 inch per foot toward the channel. 
(D)  The N value of roughness coefficient as used in Manning's formula shall be 0.035 for earth channels. 
(Ord. 50, passed 4-28-88) 
§ 35-A405 - VELOCITY CONTROL. 
(A)  The following velocity chart shall be used for scour protection and to determine the type of drain which shall be used. Concrete lined channels may also be used at velocities less than eight feet per second if so desired by the engineer. 
TABLE XI VELOCITY CONTROL Velocity Type Drain Required 1 to 6 fps Earth 6 to 8 fps Concrete retards required 8 fps and over Concrete lining or drop structure required  
(B)  Where velocities are in the supercritical range, allowance shall be made in the design for the proper handling of the water. For a suggested method of computing retard spacing, see §§ 35-A501 through 35-A504 of this appendix. 
(Ord. 50, passed 4-28-88) 
§ 35-A406 - CHANNEL BENDS AND TURNS. 
Allowance for extra freeboard shall be made wherever design conditions require it, see §§ 35-A501 through 35-A504 of this appendix. 
(Ord. 50, passed 4-28-88) 
§ 35-A407 - STORM SEWERS. 
(A)  Storm sewers shall be designed on a 25-year frequency and shall be subject to the approval of the Director of Public Works. For N values, see §§ 35-A501 through 35-A504 of this appendix. 
(B)  For all ordinary conditions, storm sewers shall be designed on the assumption that they will flow full under the design discharge; however, whenever the system is placed under a pressure head, or there are construction, turns, submerged or inadequate outfall, and the like, the hydraulic grade line shall be computed and plotted in profile. In all cases adequate outlets shall be provided and the system adequately designed. No storm sewers shall be less than 24 inches in diameter. 
(Ord. 50, passed 4-28-88) 
§ 35-A408 - ALLEYS. 
Alleys may be designed on a five-year frequency to carry storm water. 
(Ord. 50, passed 4-28-88) 
§ 35-A409 - ALL WEATHER CROSSINGS. 
All-weather crossings shall be required. Where a street crosses the Leon Creek and its tributaries, the San Antonio River, Salado Creek, San Pedro Creek, Martinez Creek, Apache Creek, Olmos Creek, or Alazan Creek, such all-weather crossing designs shall be based on a 100-year frequency as approved by the Director of Public Works. All other crossings shall be based on a 25-year frequency storm. All crossings, culverts and bridges shall be designed for an H-20-44 or H-20 S16-44 loading. 
(Ord. 50, passed 4-28-88) 
§ 35-A410 - INLETS AND OPENINGS. 
Drop curb openings, drop inlets, curb opening inlets shall be in accordance with §§ 35-A501 through 35-A504 of this appendix. 
(Ord. 50, passed 4-28-88) 
DRAINAGE SUPPLEMENT 

§ 35-A501 - METHOD OF COMPUTING RETARD SPACING. 
The following formula is acceptable for design of retard spacing, when using city standard retard section: 
L =  1.0 foot 
S 1 - S 2 
Where: L = distance required between retards in feet. 
S 1  = actual slope of channel in ft./ft. 
S 2  = slope of proposed channel for velocity of 6 fps in ft/ft, for example: 
S 2  =   (NV) 2   
1.486R 2/3 ) 2 
Where: V = 6 fps 
N = .035 
R = area/wetted perimeter 
(Ord. 50, passed 4-28-88) 
§ 35-A502 - METHOD OF COMPUTING FOR EXTRA FREEBOARD ON THE OUTSIDE PORTION OF CHANNEL BEND. 
(A)  Where sharp bends or high velocities are involved, the following formula is acceptable for computing the extra freeboard: 
d 2 - d 1  =  V 2 (T + B ) 
 2gR 
Where: d 1  = depth of flow at the inside of the bend in feet. 
d 2  = depth of flow at the outside of the bend in feet. 
B = bottom width of the channel in feet. 
V = the average approach velocity in the channel in feet per second. 
T = width of flow at the water surface in feet. 
g = 32.2 feet/second squared. 
R = the center line radius of the turn or bend in feet. 
(B)  The quantity d 2 - d 1 divided by 2 shall be added to the normal depth of flow before adding the required freeboard in calculating required right-of-way widths. 
(C)  Where sharp turns are used without curved sections, the depth required shall be large enough to provide for all head losses. Allowance shall be made for any backwater head that may result. 
(D)  For normal design conditions no extra freeboard is required. An accepted rule of thumb to follow is this: center line radius of channel should be at least three times the bottom width. 
(E)  The N value to be used in Manning's Formula shall conform to the following for design purposes: 
Earth channels - 0.035 
Concrete lined channels - 0.015 
Reinforced concrete pipe - 0.013 
Concrete box culverts - 0.013 
Corrugated metal pipe: 
Unpaved 1/2-inch corrugated - 0.024 
Unpaved 1-inch corrugated - 0.027 
(F)  Any other N value shall be subject to approval of the Director of Public Works. 
(Ord. 50, passed 4-28-88) 
§ 35-A503 - DROP CURB OPENINGS. 
(A)  Where drop curb openings are used to tab storm water off the streets and into drains, the length of the curb opening can be calculated from the weir formula using the coefficient of 3.807 in the following formula: 
L =   Q  
Ch 3/2 
Where: L = the length of drop curb openings required in feet. 
Q = amount of flow in cfs based on a 25-year design frequency. 
C = 3.087 
h = head of weir in feet. 
(B)  Gutter line depressions will be permitted where such depressions will not hamper the flow of traffic. For amount of curb exposure, conform to City of San Antonio Inlet Standards. 
(Ord. 50, passed 4-28-88) 
§ 35-A504 - DROP INLETS. 
(A)  Where drop inlets are used, the city standard inlets with adequate reinforcing steel may be used. All other types or designs shall be subject to the approval of the Director of Public Works. The following formulas for inlet capacity are based on drop inlets in sag points. Inlet capacities on grades will be considered less, the amount of which depends on street grades, deflections, cross slopes, depressions, and the like. 
(B)  Grate inlets. 
(1)  The flow of water through grate openings may be treated as the flow of water through a rectangular orifice. The following formula may be used for determining grate capacity: 
Q = CA (2gh) 1/2 
Where: Q = discharge in cubic feet per second. 
C = orifice coefficient of discharge (taken as 0.70). 
g = acceleration due to gravity (32.2 ft./sec. 2 ) 
h = head on the grate in feet. 
A = net area of the openings in the grate in square feet. 
(2)  This formula gives the theoretical capacity of the grate inlet. Since grate inlets are subject to considerable clogging, capacity of the grate inlet will be taken as 1/2 of the value given by this formula. 
(C)  Curb opening inlets. 
(1)  The capacity of curb opening inlets will depend on whether or not the opening is running partially full or submerged. If the depth of flow at the curb opening inlet is such as to cause a partially full opening, a weir effect will develop and the following formula will apply: 
Q = C w L(h) 3/2 
Where: Q = the discharge of capacity in cubic feet per second. 
C w  = the weir coefficient of discharge (3.087). 
L = the length of curb opening in feet. 
h = the head or depth of water at the opening in feet. 
(2)  If the depth of flow at the curb opening is such as to fully submerge the opening, the orifice effect will develop and the formula used shall be identical to that given under grate inlets with the exception that the head, h, on the curb opening orifice shall be taken as the depth from the top of the water surface to the center of orifice or opening; 100% efficiency will be allowed for curb opening inlets. 
(Ord. 50, passed 4-28-88) 
Standard Street Cross Sections (follows on next page) 


















APPENDIX C - FORMS 
1.  Form "A" (to be used prior to the sale of any lot). 
FORM-"A"
VACATING DECLARATION
STATE OF TEXAS       XX 
COUNTY OF BEXAR       XX 
VACATING DECLARATION FOR ___________ SUBDIVISION PLAT. 
    Know all men by these presents that I (we) the undersigned, acknowledge that I am (we are) the proprietor (s) of the land embraced by the plat known as _______ (a copy of which is attached hereto) approved by the City of Helotes City Council on _______, and recorded in Volume _____, Page _____, Bexar County Deed and Plat Records. 
    In accordance with Section 212.013, Local Government Code and Ordinance _____, Section 4, Article II, the undersigned hereby declare such plat known as ___________ to be vacated. It is the intent of the undersigned to nullify the force and affect of the recordation of the above referenced plat by filing this vacation instrument in the Bexar County Deed and Plat Records. It is understood by the undersigned that the filing of this instrument in the Bexar County Deed and plat Records shall cause the Bexar County Clerk to write the word "Vacated" in plain, legible, letters across the plat so vacated. 
    Executed this _____ day of _______, 20___ 
;l>BY: ___________ 
Owner's Duly Authorized Agent 
;l>TITLE: ___________ 
FORM "A" (page 2) 
STATE OF TEXAS       XX 
COUNTY OF BEXAR       XX 
    BEFORE ME, the undersigned authority, a Notary Public for the State of Texas, on this day personally appeared ___________,known to me to be the person whose name is subscribed to the foregoing instrument, and acknowledged to me that he executed the same for the purpose and consideration therein expressed. 
    GIVEN UNDER MY HAND AND SEAL AND SEAL OF OFFICE, this the _____ day of _______, 20___. 
;l>___________ 
Notary Public in and for the state of Texas 
;l>My commission expires: ________ 
    (There shall be a signature space for each proprietor; there shall be an acknowledgement for each signature; if there is more than one page, the pages shall be numbered page ___ of _____ (Vacating Declaration for ___________ Subdivision Plat)) 
    This Vacating Declaration for ___________ Subdivision Plat has been submitted to and considered by the City Council of the City of Helotes, Texas, and is hereby approved by such Council. 
    Dated this day _____ of _______, A.D., 20___. 
;l>BY: ___________ 
MAYOR 
;l>BY: ___________ 
City Secretary 
2.  Form "B" (to be used after to the sale of any lot). 
FORM-"B"
VACATING DECLARATION
STATE OF TEXAS       XX 
COUNTY OF BEXAR       XX 
VACATING DECLARATION FOR ___________ SUBDIVISION PLAT. 
    Know all men by these presents that I (we) the undersigned, acknowledge that I am (we are) the owners of the lots embraced by the plat known as ___________ (a copy of which is attached hereto) approved by the City of Helotes City Council on _______, and recorded in Volume ___, Page _____, Bexar County Deed and Plat Records. 
    In accordance with Section 212.013, Local Government Code and Section 4, Article II of the City of Helotes Subdivision Regulations, the undersigned hereby declare such plat known as ___________ to be vacated. 
    It is the intent of the undersigned to nullify the force and affect of the recordation of the above referenced plat by filing this vacation instrument in the Bexar County Deed and Plat Records. 
    It is understood by the undersigned that the filing of this instrument in the Bexar County Deed and Plat Records shall cause the Bexar County Clerk to write the word "Vacated" in plain, legible, letters across the plat so vacated. 
    Executed this _____ day of _______, 20___ 
;l>BY: ___________ 
TITLE 
(Owner or Owner's duly authorized representative) 
;l>LOT: ___________ 
;l>BY: ___________ 
TITLE 
(Owner or Owner's duly authorized representative) 
;l>LOT: ___________ 
FORM-"B" (page 2) 
STATE OF TEXAS       XX 
COUNTY OF BEXAR       XX 
    BEFORE ME, the undersigned authority, a Notary Public for the State of Texas, on this day personally appeared ___________,known to me to be the person whose name is subscribed to the foregoing instrument, and acknowledged to me that he executed the same for the purpose and consideration therein expressed. 
    GIVEN UNDER MY HAND AND SEAL OF OFFICE, this the _____ day of _______, 20___. 
;l>___________ 
Notary Public in and for the State of Texas 
;l>My commission expires: ________ 
    (There shall be a signature space for each lot owner; there shall be an acknowledgement for each signature; if there is more than one page, the pages shall be numbered page ___ of _____ (Vacating Declaration for ___________ Subdivision Plat)) 
    This Vacating Declaration for ___________ Subdivision Plat has been submitted to and considered by the City Council of the City of Helotes, Texas, and is hereby approved by such Council. 
    Dated this day _____ of _____, 20___. 
;l>BY: ___________ 
MAYOR 
;l>BY: ___________ 
City Secretary 
3.  Form "C" 
FORM-"C" 
STATE OF TEXAS       XX 
COUNTY OF BEXAR       XX 
    I, (we) the owner (s) of the land shown on this replat hereby certify that this replat does not alter, amend, or remove any covenants or restrictions. 
;l>___________ 
Owner 
;l>___________ 
Owner's Duly Authorized Agent 
    Sworn to and subscribed before me this the _____ day of _______, 20___. 
SEAL 
;l>___________ 
Notary Public in and for the State of Texas 
;l>My commission expires: ________ 
4.  Form "D" 
FORM-"D" 
STATE OF TEXAS       XX 
COUNTY OF BEXAR       XX 
    I, (we) the owner (s) of the land shown on this replat hereby certify that this replat does not alter, amend, or remove any covenants or restrictions; I (we) further certify that no portion of the proposed area to be replatted was limited within the immediate preceding five (5) years by any interim or permanent zoning classification to residential use for not more than two residential units per lot; I (we) further certify that no lot covered by ___________ plat, approved by the Helotes City Council on ___________, was limited by deed restriction to residential use for not more than two residential units per lot. 
;l>___________ 
Owner 
;l>___________ 
Owner's Duly Authorized Agent 
    Sworn to and subscribed before me this the _____ day of _______, 20___. 
SEAL 
;l>___________ 
Notary Public in and for the State of Texas 
;l>My commission expires: ________ 
5.  Form "E" 
FORM-"E" 
STATE OF TEXAS       XX 
COUNTY OF BEXAR       XX 
    I, (we) the owner (s) of the land shown on this replat hereby certify that this replat does not alter, amend, or remove any covenants or restrictions. I, (we) further certify that all of the proposed area sought to be replatted or resubdivided was designated or reserved for usage by notation on the last legally recorded plat or I the legally recorded restrictions applicable to such plat. . 
;l>___________ 
Owner 
;l>___________ 
Owner's Duly Authorized Agent 
    Sworn to and subscribed before me this the _____ day of _______, 20___. 
SEAL 
;l>___________ 
Notary Public in and for the State of Texas 
;l>My commission expires: ________ 
PERFORMANCE BOND FORM 
STATE OF TEXAS       XX 
COUNTY OF BEXAR       XX 
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS: 
That we, ___________, the undersigned sub-divider, as Principal, and ___________, as Surety, do hereby acknowledge ourselves to be held and firmly bound unto the City of Helotes, a municipal corporation of the County of Bexar and State of Texas, in the full and just sum of $_____, for the payment of which will and truly to be made, we hereby bind ourselves and our respective heirs, administrators, executors and assigns, jointly and severally, firmly by these presents. 
WHEREAS, the Principal has petitioned the City Council of the City of Helotes for permission to develop a subdivision within the jurisdiction of the City of Helotes more particularly described as follows to wit: 
_____
which is shown on a subdivision plat, entitled ___________ Subdivision, heretofore conditionally approved by the City Secretary of the City of Helotes on ___________ 20___; and 
WHEREAS, under the provisions of Ordinance Number 50, the City of Helotes Subdivision Regulations, the City Council of the City of Helotes requires, as a condition precedent to the granting of such petition, that the Principal furnish a guarantee that he will construct, or cause to be constructed, according to the requirements of such subdivision ordinance, the following site improvements within two (2) years after final approval of the plat of said subdivision. 
NOW, THEREFORE, the condition of this obligation is such that if the Principal shall, or on or before the _____ day of _______, 20___, construct, or cause to be constructed, the above mentioned improvements in accordance with the requirements of the City of Helotes subdivision ordinance, and the amendments thereto, if any, then this obligation shall be void; otherwise, the obligation made under this bond will remain in full force and effect. 
IN TESTIMONY WHEREOF, WITNESS OUR HANDS AND SEAL, this the _____ day of _______, 20___. 
;l>___________ 
Subdivider and Principal 
;l>Surety by: ___________ 
Attorney in Fact 
APPROVED AND ACCEPTED, this the _____ day of _______, 20___. 
;l>By: ___________ 
;l>Title: ___________ 
MAINTENANCE BOND 
STATE OF TEXAS       XX 
COUNTY OF BEXAR       XX 
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS: 
That we, ___________, the undersigned sub-divider, as Principal, and ___________, as Surety, do hereby acknowledge ourselves to be held and firmly bound unto the City of Helotes, a municipal corporation of the County of Bexar and State of Texas, in the full and just sum of $_______, (being 10% of the estimated cost of the hereinafter enumerated site improvements) for the payment of which will and truly to be made, we hereby bind ourselves and our respective heirs, administrators, executors and assigns, jointly and severally, firmly by these presents. 
WHEREAS, the Principal has petitioned the City Council of the City of Helotes for permission to develop a subdivision within the jurisdiction of the City of Helotes more particularly described as follows to wit: 
_____
_____
_____
which is shown on a subdivision plat, entitled ___________ Subdivision, heretofore conditionally approved by the City Secretary of the City of Helotes on _______, 20___; and 
WHEREAS, under the provisions of the City of Helotes Subdivision Regulations, the City Council of the City of Helotes require, as a condition precedent to the granting of such petition, that the Principal furnish a maintenance guarantee according to the requirements of such Subdivision Regulations, the listed site improvements will be maintained by and be the responsibility of said sub-divider until the date of final completion and acceptance by City of the required public and private improvements from and after the date of construction approval by the City's engineer: 
NOW, THEREFORE, the condition of this obligation is such that if the Principal shall maintain, and cause to be maintained, the above mentioned improvements in accordance with the requirements of the City of Helotes Subdivision Regulations, and the amendments thereto, if any, for the specified period of time after construction approval by the City's engineer until the final approval and acceptance of said engineer and the City Administrator at which time this surety obligation shall be void; otherwise, the obligations made under this bond shall be irrevocable and remain in full force and effect in the manner prescribed by law. 
IN TESTIMONY WHEREOF, WITNESS OUR HANDS AND SEAL, this the _____ day of _______, 20___. 
;l>___________ 
Subdivider and Principal 
;l>Surety by: ___________ 
Attorney in Fact 
APPROVED AND ACCEPTED, this the _____ day of _______, 20___. 
;l>By: ___________ 
;l>Title: ___________ 
(Ord. No. 561, § 1, 2-12-2015) 
IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT
IN LIEU OF PERFORMANCE BOND 
TO: CITY OF HELOTES 
HELOTES, TEXAS 
Gentlemen: 
We have established this date a commitment to lend sums to our customer, ___________ (Customer) to cover the entire cost of installing the subdivision improvements in ___________ subdivision. Said funds as estimated by the City's engineer are to be in the amount of: 
a. $ _____ for storm drainage improvements. b. $ _____ for approved domestic and fire protection water improvements. c. $ _____ for approved sanitary sewer improvements. d. $ _____ for sidewalks. e. $ _____ for street improvements and all other subdivision improvements. f. $ _____ TOTAL  
provided, however, that the sums stated above shall be subject to reductions as follows: 
1.  At such time as each construction contract in a form approved by the City is entered into for the construction of the Facilities, or any part thereof, the commitment evidenced hereby shall be reduced by the amount by which the City's estimated costs for the work to be done under such contract exceeds 110%. of the contract price for the work to be done under such contract. 
2.  During construction, the commitment evidenced hereby shall be reduced periodically, upon receipt by the City, no more often than monthly, of certified statements from us as to the amounts paid out for work done, by the amount of such payments; provided, however, that if the contract price under any construction contract for the construction of any part of the Facilities exceeds the City's estimated costs for the work to be done under such contract then no reduction shall be permitted until such time as 110%. of the remaining contract price for the work remaining to be done under such contract is less than the City's estimated costs for the work remaining to be done under such contract. 
3.  Regardless of anything contained herein to the contrary, the sum allocated for construction of these improvements shall not be reduced to less than twenty-five percent (25%) of the contract price until such time that: 
(a)  said facilities have been completed and approved by the City as being installed in accordance with plans and specifications, and 
(b)  a one (1) year warranty bond or substitute letter of credit has been filed with, and accepted by, the City in the amount of twenty-five percent (25%.) of actual contract price of the facilities. 
4.  At such time as all of the subdivision improvements in said Subdivision have been completed and accepted by the City for maintenance or either a warranty bond or substitute letter of credit has been filed as required above, the commitment evidenced hereby shall automatically terminate, and this letter of credit shall forthwith be returned to the issuer. 
This commitment is made with the understanding that the City can draw any part of the total amount stated herein above, subject to the terms and conditions hereof, if necessary to provide for any or all of the facilities or maintenance thereof, and that any part or all of the total amount of this credit may be applied by the City to any one or more, separately or jointly, of the Facilities, or maintenance thereof. 
We also understand and agree that the only requirement necessary for drawing any part or all of the total amount of this credit is receipt by us, at least ten (10) days in advance of the date on which funds are requested, of a letter request from the City of Helotes, signed by the Mayor, stating that one or more of the following conditions exists: 
(a)  All of the following have occurred: 
1)  two years have elapsed since the date of the City's approval of the subdivision plat; 
2)  the Facilities have not been completed, the failure to complete such Facilities is not due to weather, acts of God, strikes, or other reasons beyond the Customer's control, and due diligence is not then being used in efforts to complete; and 
3)  we have not, after receipt of written notice to us of our Customer's default, assumed in writing the obligation to complete such Facilities to the extent of the remaining balance of the letter of credit, or, having assumed such obligation, have not, within sixty (60) days thereafter, commenced efforts to complete such Facilities as provided hereinafter. 
or, 
(b)  All of the following have occurred: the City has given written notice, at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of this credit, to us and to our Customer, at our respective last-known mailing address, sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, that this credit is about to expire and that the Facilities have not been completed, and that the City intends to draw upon this credit and that the City considers such a drawing on this credit amount necessary in order to complete any part or all of the Facilities. No further substantiation of the necessity of the draw is required by this credit. At the option of the City, a substitute Letter of Credit, in this same form in an amount equal to the total sum stated herein above, subject to any reductions, if any, which have been made hereunder, may be substituted at least fifteen (15) days prior to the expiration date of this credit; 
In addition, if subparagraph (b) of paragraph 3 has not been complied with, the only requirement necessary for drawing any part or all of the total amount of the twenty-five percent (25%) retainage is receipt by us, at least ten (10) days in advance of the date on which funds are requested, of a letter request from the City of Helotes signed by the Mayor, stating that the following condition exists: 
(a)  the Facilities or portions thereof have failed within one (1) year of acceptance by the City for maintenance, due to a defect in materials or workman-ship as determined by the City. 
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, before requesting a draw of any part or all of this credit because of default by the customer, the City shall be required to give written notice to us of such default and sixty (60) days to assume the obligations of our Customer for completion or maintenance of the Facilities, to the extent of the remaining balance of this credit, and if we assume such obligations, to the extent of the remaining balance of this credit, in writing within sixty (60) days after receipt of such notice, then the City shall not be allowed to request a draw on this credit, unless we fail to commence within sixty (60) days thereafter efforts to complete or maintain the Facilities and to complete this work within a reasonable period of time thereafter but not to exceed six (6) months unless an emergency is declared by the City. Request for the draw of funds under this credit must be received prior to the expiration of two (2) years following the date of this credit, except that in the event subparagraph (b) of paragraph 3 have not been complied with, then this commitment shall remain open as to the twenty-five percent (25%) retainage of each Facility until one year has elapsed from the final acceptance of the Facilities by the City for maintenance. 
This letter of credit shall be subject to and construed in accordance with the laws of the State of Texas and particularly the Texas Business and Commerce Act. 
We further state that this credit is irrevocable prior to the expiration date unless all parties, including for all purposes the City of Helotes, consent to such revocation in writing. We further agree to provide written notification at least ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of this credit, to the City of Helotes, sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, that his credit is about to expire. 
;l>___________ 
Lender's Name 
;l>___________ 
Authorized Officer's Signature 
Attested By: 
___________ 
TRUST AGREEMENT
IN LIEU OF PERFORMANCE BOND 
This agreement is between ___________, subdivider, ___________, trustee, and the City of Helotes, Texas. 
Subdivider has deposited (or herewith deposits) subject to the ___________ (name and location of the bank, trust company or qualified escrow agent), Texas, the sum of $_______for the purpose of constructing site improvements in ___________ subdivision in Bexar County, Texas for the benefit of the public represented by the City of Helotes, more particularly described as follows: 
(TYPE OF SITE IMPROVEMENT) 
(water, gas and electric lines not included) 
Estimated Cost Streets $ ___________ Sidewalks  ___________ Alleys  ___________ Storm Drainage  ___________ Utility Easements  ___________ Other (Specify)  ___________ TOTAL: $ ___________  
Trustee agrees to authorize expenditures from such trust account, execute checks, drafts and other orders of withdrawal only for the purpose of paying for the cost of constructing such site improvements and such orders shall show thereon the purpose of the withdrawals, The expenditures for each type of site improvements within five (5) days of their authorization. 
Subdivider shall, within five (5) days after any single withdrawal of $1,000.00 or more, or a combination of withdrawals of $1,000.00 or more has been made, furnish an affidavit showing that the sums of money so withdrawn were expended by subdivider on prescribed site improvements completion and estimating the date of site-improvements completion. Said affidavit shall be submitted substantially in the following form: 
AFFIDAVIT 
STATE OF TEXAS       XX 
COUNTY OF BEXAR       XX 
Before me, the undersigned authority in and for the State and County aforesaid, on this day personally appeared ___________ who, being by me first duly sworn, upon his oath deposed and says: 
    "I,___________ subdivider of the ___________ subdivision under date(s) of _______ 20___ withdrew the sum(s) of $_______ from the trust account heretofore deposited with ___________, trustee, and created for such use and purpose, and expended said funds so withdrawn on prescribed site improvements to said ___________ subdivision as follows: 
Site Improvement Amount Percentage of Completion _______ _______ _______ _______ _______ _______ _______ _______ _______  
With the expenditure of these funds, it is estimated that the prescribed site improvements will be completed by ___________, 20___. 
;l>___________ 
Subdivider 
SWORN TO AND SUBSCRIBED BEFORE ME this _____ day of _______, 20___. 
;l>___________ 
Notary Public in and for the State of Texas 
Until this affidavit is accomplished, no further withdrawals shall be made from said trust account. The trustee shall be authorized to release further funds to the subdivider only after receipt of written notification therefor from the designated City Official so to do. 
Subdivider agrees to construct all site improvements within two (2) years from the date of final approval of the plat of said subdivision. Upon the failure of the subdivider to provide such site improvements in such subdivision. A resolution of the City Council of the City of Helotes declaring that such site improvements have not been completed as required by applicable subdivision regulations shall be final and conclusive on the parties to this agreement. Payment to the City shall be made on the order of the trustee without the necessity of joinder by the subdivider. 
A certificate that the sum required herein is on deposit in the above named bank, trust company or qualified escrow agent, subject to withdrawal only as provided herein, signed by and authorized official thereof, is attached hereto. 
A copy of this contract has been supplied to the bank, trust company or qualified escrow agent named by the undersigned trustee. 
;l>___________ 
Subdivider 
;l>___________ 
Trustee 
Date of Execution: ___________ 
;l>By: ___________ 
;l>Title: ___________ 
Date of Execution: ___________ 
APPENDIX D - MAJOR THOROUGHFARE PLAN 

Chapter 82 - TAXATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 82-1. - Authority of council to levy, assess and collect taxes. 
(a)  The city council has the power to levy, assess and collect such taxes as the council may determine for current expenses and for the purposes of constructing public buildings, waterworks, sewers, and other permanent improvements. 
(b)  Any such tax as provided for in subsection (a) of this section shall be in compliance with V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 26. 
(Ord. No. 13A, §§ 1, 2, 9-6-1990) 
Sec. 82-2. - Exemption of portion of assessed value of residence homestead for persons age 65 or over and disabled persons. 
(a)  From and after January 1, 2005, a person who has attained the age of 65 years on or before January 1st of the year for which the exemption is claimed is entitled to an exemption from taxation of $20,000.00 of the assessed value of his/her residence homestead. 
(b)  In addition, from and after January 1, 2005, a person who is disabled, as such term is defined in V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 11.13, is entitled to an exemption from taxation of $12,000.00 of the assessed value of his/her residence homestead. 
(c)  A person who is eligible for both the exemptions provided by subsection (a) and subsection (b) must elect to receive either the age 65 exemption or the disability exemption in conformance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 11.13. 
(d)  In order to secure the benefit of the exemptions herein provided for, the owner of such property shall, between January 1 and May 1 of the year in which the person qualifies for the exemption, file with the chief appraiser of Bexar County on a form furnished by the appraisal office, such evidence as is required by the Texas Property Tax Code to be furnished to the chief appraiser in order to establish eligibility. The chief appraiser may extend the deadline for filing an exemption for good cause shown by written order for a single period not to exceed 60 days in conformance with V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 11.13. 
(e)  If the chief appraiser discovers that an exemption that is not required to be claimed annually has been erroneously allowed in any one of the five preceding years, the chief appraiser shall add the property or appraised value that was erroneously exempted for each year to the appraisal roll as provided by V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 25.21 for other property that escapes taxation. If an exemption that was erroneously allowed did not apply to all taxing units in which the property was located, the chief appraiser shall note on the appraisal records, for each prior year, the taxing units that gave the exemption and are entitled to impose taxes on the property or value that escaped taxation. 
(f)  Where the ad valorem tax of any such person described in subsection (a) and subsection (b) has heretofore been pledged for the payment of any debt, the taxing officers of any taxing authority shall have the authority to continue to levy and collect the tax against the real and/or personal property of said person at the same rate as the tax so pledged until the debt is discharged, if the cessation of the levy would impair the obligation of the contract by which the debt was created. 
(Ord. No. 271, §§ 2-7, 12-2-2004; Ord. No. 272, §§ 2-7, 1-13-2005) 
Sec. 82-3. - Senior and disabled tax limitation. 
(a)  Tax limitation. Beginning after the tax year 2008, for a person who is disabled or is 65 years of age or older and receives a residence homestead exemption in the City of Helotes, Texas, the total amount of ad valorem taxes imposed on that homestead by the city may not be increased while it remains the residence homestead of that person or that person's spouse who is disabled or 65 years of age or older and receives a residence homestead exemption on the homestead. For any person entitled to the tax limitation provided by this section who dies in a year in which the person received a residence homestead exemption, the total amount of ad valorem taxes imposed on the homestead by the city may not be increased while it remains the residence homestead of that person's surviving spouse if the spouse is 55 years of age or older at the time of the person's death, subject to any exceptions provided by the general law. The tax amount levied by the city in tax year 2008 will be the cap that will be applied in future years for those who qualify for the tax limitation in tax year 2008. 
(b)  Improvements. If an individual entitled to the tax limitation provided by subsection (a) hereof, makes improvements to the individual's residence homestead, other than repairs and other than improvements required to comply with governmental requirements, the city may increase the amount of taxes on the homestead in the first year the value of the homestead is increased on the appraisal roll because of the enhancement of value by the improvements. The amount of the tax increase is determined by applying the current tax rate to the difference between the appraised value of the homestead with the improvements and the appraised value it would have had without the improvements. 
(c)  Duration. The governing body of the city may not repeal or rescind the tax limitation established under this section. (Authorized by Tex. Const. Art. VIII, § 1-b (h).) 
(Ord. No. 359, §§ 1-3, 7-10-2008) 
Sec. 82-4. - Hotel occupancy tax. 
(a)  Definitions The following words, terms, and phrases, where used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Consideration means the cost of the room, sleeping space, bed, or other facility in such hotel and services rendered to the occupant of such room not related to the cleaning and readying of such room, sleeping space, bed or other facility for occupancy. 
    Hotel means any building or buildings, trailer or other facility, in which the public may, for a consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations. The term "hotel" shall include hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses or courts, lodging houses, inns, rooming houses, or other buildings where rooms are furnished for a consideration. The term "hotel" shall not include hospitals, group homes for individuals with disabilities, sanitariums or nursing homes. 
    HOT means the municipal hotel occupancy tax imposed by section 82-4(b), as authorized by the Texas Tax Code. 
    Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room, sleeping space, bed or other facility in a hotel for any purpose. 
    Occupant means anyone who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has a right to use or possess any room, sleeping space, bed or other facility in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract or agreement. 
    Permanent resident means any occupant who has or shall have the right to occupancy of any room, sleeping space or other facility in a hotel for at least 30 consecutive days during the current calendar year or preceding year. 
    Person means any individual, company, corporation or association owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel. 
    Quarterly period means the regular calendar quarters of the year used by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) for the quarterly payment of estimated income taxes. 
(b)  Levy of tax; rate; exceptions. 
(1)  There is hereby levied a tax upon the cost of occupancy of any room or space furnished by any hotel within the city and its extra territorial jurisdiction (ETJ) where such cost of occupancy is at the rate of $2.00 or more per day, such tax to be equal to seven percent of the consideration paid by the occupant of such room to such hotel. 
(2)  No tax shall be imposed hereunder upon a permanent resident. 
(c)  Collection. Any person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel shall collect the tax imposed by section 82-4(b) hereof. 
(d)  HOT report/penalty and interest. 
(1)  Any person required to collect the tax imposed by section 82-4(b) shall file a HOT report with the city secretary detailing the consideration paid for all room occupancies in the preceding quarter, the amount of tax collected on such occupancies, and any other information the city may reasonably require. Such person shall pay over without delay the tax due on such occupancies at the time of filing the HOT report along with a copy of the tax report filed with the state comptroller's office in connection with the state hotel occupancy tax. 
(2)  Quarterly reports and payments shall be due on the following dates: 
a.  First Quarter - April 15. 
b.  Second Quarter - July 15. 
c.  Third Quarter - October 15. 
d.  Fourth Quarter - January 15. 
(3)  If the due date specified in subsection (2) hereof falls on a weekend or city holiday, the HOT report and payment shall be due on the next regular business day. 
(4)  Any person failing to file a required report or to pay the city the tax imposed by section 82-4(b) when due, will be assessed a five percent penalty on the amount of tax then due. If such report or tax is 30 days or more late, an additional five percent penalty will be imposed on the tax due for a maximum penalty of ten percent; provided, however, that the minimum penalty amount imposed under this section shall not be less than $25.00. If the penalty due under thus section is not paid, such penalty shall incur simple interest at six percent per annum beginning on the 60th day from the date the tax was due. 
(e)  Rules and regulations. The city shall have the power to make such rules and regulations as necessary to effectively collect the tax levied herein and shall upon reasonable notice have access to the books and records necessary to audit and determine the correctness of any report filed with the city and the amount of tax due. 
(f)  Penalty. Any person failing to comply with any reporting, collection, or payment obligation imposed herein including the payment of penalties and interest shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and fined in the municipal court by the imposition of a penalty of not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00 with each day of violation constituting a separate offense punishable by the imposition of a separate fine. In the prosecution of an offense under this section proof of a culpable mental state shall not be a necessary element of proof. 
(Ord. No. 509, § 1, 9-12-2013) 
Secs. 82-5-82-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAX ASSESSOR/COLLECTOR 

Sec. 82-11. - Office created. 
    The office of city tax assessor/collector is created for the purpose of levying and collecting taxes by general laws for public purposes only. 
(Ord. No. 008, § I, 2-4-1982) 
Sec. 82-12. - Duties. 
    The assessor and collector shall make up the assessment of all property taxed by the city, and make duplicate rolls of them to the city secretary. The city tax assessor/collector shall: 
(1)  Collect all the taxes due the city, and in the event of nonpayment of any taxes due the city, shall proceed to sell the property to raise the amount of taxes so due. 
(2)  Give a good bond in such amount and form as the city council may prescribe, and he shall perform no official act until bond is provided. 
(3)  At the end of every week, pay to the treasurer all money by him collected, and shall report to the city council at the first meeting in every month all money so collected and paid and perform all such other duties as the council may direct. 
(4)  Make out a list of all personal property which has not been given to him for assessment, and assess the same in the name of the owner, if he is known; if not, then it shall be assessed by description of the property and as unknown owner. The property may be sold as in other cases if the tax is not paid thereon. The value of such property shall be determined by the board of equalization. 
(5)  Assess all property in the city which has not been rendered for taxation in a supplement to the assessment rolls. 
(Ord. No. 008, § II, 2-4-1982) 
Secs. 82-13-82-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TAX ABATEMENT 

Sec. 82-21. - Old Town Helotes Special District Tax Abatement Program. 
(a)  Owners of real property located within the Old Town Helotes Special District (hereinafter referred to as "district") as defined and described in section 98-72 of the Helotes Code of Municipal Ordinances will be eligible to apply to the city council for tax abatement of municipal ad valorem taxes (hereinafter referred to as "abatement"). The district is designated as a reinvestment zone pursuant to Tex. Tax. Code Ann. § 312.202 for a period of five years from the effective date hereof. Such designation may be renewed for an additional five years as provided by law. 
(b)  An owner of real property that generates sales tax, or his or her agent may apply for up to a 50 percent real property tax abatement of municipal ad valorem taxes for real property improvements including the construction of new facilities and structures located within the district. All improvements must comply with Ordinance No. 339, The Old Town Helotes Plan, and section 98-72 of the Helotes Code of Municipal Ordinances in their entirety. Abatements are limited to ten years per approved project or until the amount received by the property owner through the abatement equals the eligible project costs, whichever occur first. Subject to subsection (f) hereof, a current or new owner may continue to receive the abatement until the ten-year period expires. After an existing ten-year period expires, a new project for a ten-year abatement period may be applied for. Abatement periods will not run concurrently. The city secretary shall keep records of all approved work and allotted time periods. All information will be forwarded to the Bexar County Appraisal District and the Bexar County Tax Assessor-Collector or their designees. 
(c)  Eligible projects must be $10,000.00 or more and may include the construction of new facilities and structures, or the expansion or modernization of existing facilities and structures. All construction shall be consistent with subsection (b) hereof. 
(1)  Existing structures. Interior improvements will be limited to framing (walls, floors, and ceilings), plumbing, electrical wiring, mechanical items (heating, cooling, and ventilation), and cabinetry and woodwork. Fixtures, decorative items, and personal property will not normally be eligible for consideration (see subsection (d) below). Costs for abatement projects on existing structures will include materials and labor necessary for repairing, replacing, or additions to the structure. Additions must be like the original or as close to the original as possible. The following types of construction will be considered for reimbursement: 
a.  Structural walls; 
b.  Structural subfloors; 
c.  Structural ceilings; 
d.  Exterior doors; 
e.  Exterior paint; 
f.  Mechanical equipment; 
g.  Windows; 
h.  Any exterior brick veneers or treatments; 
i.  All electrical wiring; 
j.  Roofing (arising from structural or integrity concerns); 
k.  Gutter or roof drainage systems; 
l.  Façade items; 
m.  Architectural and engineering services, construction demolition, and clean up services if the work is directly related to work contained in the certificate of appropriateness; 
n.  Foundations; 
o.  Termite damage or treatment; 
p.  Security or fire protection systems; 
q.  Interior cabinetry or woodwork. 
(2)  New facilities and structures. Eligible expenses include any item considered a reimbursable expense for the expansion or modernization of existing facilities & structures, as provided by subsection (c)(1)(a-q) hereof; and such other and additional items of new construction consistent with the Ordinance No. 399 and The Old Town Helotes Plan approved in a certificate of appropriateness. 
(d)  Documented replacement of historic fixtures will be considered eligible for abatement, as determined by the city council. 
(e)  Ineligible costs include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Overhead; 
(2)  Taxes; 
(3)  Postage; 
(4)  Administrative payroll; 
(5)  Equipment repairs; 
(6)  Tools; 
(7)  Portable restrooms; 
(8)  Lodging and meals; 
(9)  Items not directly related to the structural integrity or viability of a structure; 
(10)  Fixtures (except as provided by subsection (d) hereof). 
(f)  A property owner currently receiving abatement may apply for additional abatements for new projects. If approved, new project abatements will be credited to the property owner's abatement account. After a current project has received an abatement equal to the eligible costs, or the ten-year period has expired, a new abatement may commence for an approved project not to exceed a maximum of ten years. No more than one abatement may be operative during any one ten-year project period. 
(g)  Approved abatements may be assigned to subsequent owners with the approval of the city's city council after notice and public hearing. 
(h)  If an approved structure for which an abatement has been approved is totally or partially destroyed, or altered by the willful act or negligence of the owner or his or her representative, or if the owner fails to make the improvements required by the terms of the agreement providing for the abatement, the owner shall be required to repay all previously abated ad valorem taxes after notice and hearing before the city council. The city will to the extent permitted by law be entitled to a priority lien upon the previously abated real property to secure payment of the tax indebtedness, with such lien attaching immediately upon a declaration of indebtedness by the city council. 
(i)  An approved abatement will apply to subsequent increases in the rate of taxation or assessed valuation. 
(j)  Application and approval process. Prior to filing an application with the city secretary for an abatement, the prospective applicant shall: 
(1)  Provide a certificate of appropriateness from the city council approving the project. Certify that the subject property is within the district and confirm the project has been constructed in conformity with the certificate of appropriateness. 
(2)  Certify the project has been completed. If the project has not yet been completed, the applicant must return to the city council for approval. 
(3)  Application for abatement will be completed by the property owner, or the owner's agent on the form provided by the city secretary. Applications shall include all project cost receipts and an affidavit affirming the information contained in the application is correct. The city secretary must receive completed applications no later than 30 days prior to public hearing by the city council. 
(4)  Applications will be filed with the city secretary. Each application will be signed and sworn to by the owner of the property and shall: 
a.  State the legal description of the property proposed for certification; 
b.  Include a final and complete set of plans for the structure's restoration, rehabilitation, or construction; 
c.  Include a statement of costs for the restoration, rehabilitation, or construction; 
d.  Include a projection of the estimated construction, time and predicted completion date of the restoration, rehabilitation, or construction; 
e.  Include a detailed statement of the proposed use for the property; and 
f.  Provide any relevant information on the history of the structure, or access to the structure by the public. 
g.  Provide such other and additional information requested by the city to effectuate the purposes of this section. 
h.  Submit an application fee to the City of Helotes, Texas in the amount of $100.00. Abatement applications may not be considered without payment of the application fee. 
(k)  Prior to submission to the city council, the city administrator will prepare a report assessing the project, determining whether it was completed as approved in the certificate of appropriateness, and stating such other facts or information that may be useful to the city council. Before submission of the written report and the application to the city council, the city administrator will require the building inspector to inspect the property to ensure its compliance with all applicable codes. 
(l)  The city council shall hold a public hearing on all requests for abatement upon the receipt of the completed application and the building inspector's report. 
(m)  Public notice shall include the date, time, and place of the public hearing, legal description of the property, and a general description of the applicant's request for abatement. Notice shall be posted at city hall and published in the official newspaper. 
(n)  At the public hearing, the city council shall determine if the completed project is substantially in compliance with the certificate of appropriateness. If the council finds that additional information relative to the pending application is necessary for its review, the council may postpone public hearing and action on the application until such information is provided. 
(o)  The city council shall have the authority to approve, disapprove, or approve abatement with conditions the council deems necessary. The city council shall not approve requests for abatement where the project was completed prior to the adoption of this article, where the applicant has not obtained a certificate of appropriateness, or where the applicant has not substantially complied with the requirements of the certificate of appropriateness. 
(p)  Effective date. The city secretary shall, within ten days, notify the Bexar County Tax Assessor-Collector of all approvals and prepare and provide all documentation required by the county. The Bexar County Tax Assessor-Collector will abate taxes for the property in accordance with this section. Approved abatements shall take effect starting on January 1 of the year following approval and each year thereafter until the sum of abated taxes equals the eligible project costs, or until the expiration of the ten-year abatement period. 
(q)  Program discontinuance. Should the city council decide to discontinue the abatement program, currently approved abatements will be permitted to continue until expiration. Upon discontinuance the city secretary will not accept new abatement applications. 
(r)  The guidelines and criteria adopted under this section are effective for two years from the date of the adoption of this section. During this period, the guidelines and criteria may be amended or repealed only by a vote of three-fourths of the members of the city council. 
(s)  The adoption of the guidelines and criteria by the city council does not: 
(1)  Limit the discretion of the city council to decide whether to enter into a specific tax abatement agreement; or 
(2)  Limit the discretion of the city council to delegate to its employees the authority to determine whether or not the city council should consider a particular application or request for tax abatement; or 
(3)  Create any property, contract, or other right including vested rights in any natural person or other legally recognized entity to require the city council to consider or grant a specific application for abatement. 
(t)  Information provided to the city in connection with an application or request for tax abatement under this chapter that describes the specific processes or business activities to be conducted, or the equipment or other property to be located on the property for which tax abatement is sought, is confidential and not subject to public disclosure until the tax abatement agreement is executed. The information in the custody of a taxing unit after the agreement is executed is not confidential under this paragraph. 
(u)  The city administrator shall prepare appropriate forms for use with this section including certificates of appropriateness and abatement applications. 
(Ord. No. 355, § 1, 09-11-2008) 
Chapter 86 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 86-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in This chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alley means minor ways which are used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or the side or properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
    Ambulance means any privately owned vehicle equipped or used for transporting the wounded, injured or such. 
    Authorized emergency vehicle means vehicles of the fire department, police department, and such vehicles of municipal departments, public service corporations or other organizations which are designated or authorized as emergency vehicles by the chief of police. 
    Barricade means every barrier, obstruction or block placed upon or across any road, street or highway of this city by an authorized person for the purpose of preventing the passing of motor vehicles over such street, road or highway during a period of construction or repair to said street, road, or highway. 
    Commercial vehicle means every truck and every private vehicle with the name of the firm represented inscribed or painted on the front door on both sides in letters at least two inches high in contrasting colors to that of the vehicle which is maintained or used primarily for the transportation of property. 
    Controlled access highway means every highway, street, or roadway in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting property or lands and other persons have no legal right of access to or from the same, except at such points only and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over such highway, street, or roadway. 
    Crosswalk means that part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the highway measured from the curbs or in the absence of curbs from the edges of the traversable roadway. "Crosswalk" also includes within the meaning of This chapter any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface. 
    Driver means every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle. 
    Driveway means entrances to and exits from private premises where it is possible to park completely off the street, and which are not open for vehicular traffic except by permission of the owner of such private premises. 
    Intersection means: 
(1)  The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or the area which vehicles traveling upon different highways at any angle may come in conflict. 
(2)  Where a highway includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the event such intersecting highway also includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of two roadways on such highways shall be regarded as a separate intersection. 
(3)  The junction of an alley with a street or highway shall not constitute an intersection. 
    Laned roadway means a roadway which is divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic. 
    Motor vehicle means every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires but not operated upon rails. 
    Motorcycle means every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel with not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor. 
    Owner means a person who holds the legal title of a vehicle. In the event a vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease with an option to purchase, and with an immediate right of possession vested in the conditional vendor or lessee, such conditional vendor or lessee shall be deemed the owner for the purpose of This chapter. 
    Pedestrian means any person afoot. 
    Person means every natural person, firm, co-partnership, association, or corporation. 
    Pole trailer means every vehicle with or without motive power designed to be drawn by another vehicle and attached to the towing vehicle by means of a reach or pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle, and ordinarily used for transporting long or irregularly shaped loads such as poles, pipes, or structural members capable, generally, of sustaining themselves as beams between the supporting connections. 
    Police officer means every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrest for violations of traffic regulations. 
    Private road means every way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner but not by other persons. 
    Red flashing emergency light means any lamp mounted on an authorized emergency vehicle or ambulance which displays a red, flashing light, visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet from such vehicle. 
    Roadway means that portion of a street or highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways, the term "roadway" as used herein shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to all such roadways collectively. 
    School bus means every motor vehicle owned by any private, public, or governmental agency and operated for the transportation of children and with identification requirements set forth in the standards produced and sponsored by the National Committee on Safety Education of the National Education Association, Washington, D.C., but not including buses operated by common carriers. 
    School crossing zone means that portion of any street or public property or way within or without any school zone which the traffic engineer may designate for the crossing of those attending a school or other institution of learning. 
    School or other institution of learning means any private or public organization giving regular instruction and having an average daily attendance of 50 students or more. 
    School zone means each and every street and all public property or ways within 500 feet of the boundaries of any school or other institution of learning. 
    Semi-trailer means every vehicle with or without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle. 
    Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Street or highway means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purpose of vehicular traffic. 
    Through highway means every street or highway or portion thereof at entrances to which vehicular traffic from the intersecting streets or highways is required by law to either stop or yield the right-of-way before entering or crossing. 
    Traffic control device means any electric traffic control signals, stop signs, yield right-of-way signs and any other such device designed and used to control the movement of traffic. 
    Trailer means every vehicle with or without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle. 
    Truck means every motor vehicle, inclusive of any towed vehicle, designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property with a manufacturer rated carrying or towing capacity of 10,000 pounds or more. 
    Truck tractor means every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn. 
    Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
    Warning sign means every sign, signal, marking and device erected or placed upon any street, road, highway or barricade, or erected or placed upon any street, road or highway within the city which is under construction or being repaired, for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic or otherwise stating the conditions under which traffic by motor vehicle may be had upon such street, road or highway. A warning sign shall include, but shall not be limited, to a flagon placed upon any street, road or highway for the purpose of directing traffic around or upon such street, road or highway as is under construction or in the process of being repaired. 
(Ord. No. 258, § 2 (A), 8-12-2004; Ord. No. 538, § 1, 9-11-2014) 
Sec. 86-2. - Existing devices ratified. 
    All traffic control signs, signals, devices, and markings heretofore placed or erected by state, Bexar County, or municipal officials or employees and now in use for the purposes of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic are affirmed, ratified, and confirmed to be official traffic control devices; provided, however, that such traffic control devices are not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or This chapter. 
(Ord. No. 538, § 1,9-11-2014) 
Sec. 86-3. - Required obedience to traffic regulations. 
    It is unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or to fail to perform any act required by This chapter. Further, all persons and operators of any vehicles of any type must obey the instructions of any official traffic control device, sign, signal, or marking applicable thereto, placed in accordance with This chapter, unless otherwise directed by emergency services or public works personnel. 
(Ord. No. 538, § 1, 9-11-2014) 
Sec. 86-4. - Penalty. 
    Each violation of This chapter shall be punished by a penalty of a fine of not less than $25.00 and not to exceed the amount established by state law. 
(Ord. No. 258, § 3, 8-12-2004; Ord. No. 538, § 1, 9-11-2014) 
Sec. 86-5. - Authority of police officers, fire department officials, and public works personnel. 
(a)  Enforcement of traffic regulations; authority to direct traffic. 
(1)  It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department, or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police, to enforce all of the traffic provisions of this Code and all of the state vehicle and traffic laws applicable to street traffic in this city. 
(2)  In the event of a fire or other emergency, or to expedite traffic, or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department, or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police, are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with the provisions of the traffic laws. 
(3)  Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic there at or in the immediate vicinity. 
(4)  Public Works personnel, during right-of-way maintenance or construction, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic there at or in the immediate vicinity. 
(b)  Obedience to police officers, fire department officials, and public works personnel. no person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer, fire department official, or public works employee. 
(Ord. No. 258, § 2(B), 8-12-2004; Ord. No. 538, § 1, 9-11-2014) 
Sec. 86-6. - Trucks depositing materials on streets; through truck traffic. 
(a)  Trucks depositing materials on streets. It shall be unlawful for any person operating a truck of any kind within the city on or over any of its public streets, roads, or other rights-of-way to cause or permit any substance loaded thereon or therein, such as gravel, dirt, rock, cement, ash, brush, grass, hay, garbage, trash, lumber, scrap, or debris of any kind, to be deposited on such public street, road or right-of-way from such truck, or to drop such material therefrom, for any reason whatever. 
(b)  No through truck traffic. Through truck traffic is defined for the purposes of This chapter as the driving or entry of a truck onto any street (except State Highway 16, Leslie Road, and FM 1560) at any point, the proceeding of such truck upon and along any street and the leaving of any street by such truck at any point, unless the person driving or operating such truck has occasion to and does bring such truck for the purpose of rendering a service at such point, place or location in connection with the business for which said truck is used. 
(Ord. No. 258, § 2 (O), 8-12-2004; Ord. No. 538, § 1, 9-11-2014) 
Sec. 86-7. - Restrictions as to tire equipment. 
(a)  Every solid rubber tire on a vehicle shall have rubber on its entire traction surface extending above the edge of the flange of the entire periphery. 
(b)  No person shall operate or move on any highway any motor vehicle, trailer, or semi-trailer having any metal tire in contact with the roadway. 
(c)  No tire on a vehicle moved on a highway shall have on its periphery any block, stud, flange, cleat, or spike or any other protuberance of any material other than rubber which projects beyond the tread of the traction surface of the tire, except that it shall be permissible to use tires having protuberances which will not injure the highway, and except also that it shall be permissible to use tire chains of reasonable proportions upon any vehicle when required for safety because snow, ice, or other conditions tending to cause a vehicle to skid. 
(d)  The city may in its discretion issue a special permit authorizing the operation upon a city street of traction engines or tractors having movable tracks with transverse corrugations upon the periphery of such movable tracks or farm tractors or other farm machinery, the operation of which upon a city street would otherwise be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 258, § 2 (P), 8-12-2004; Ord. No. 538, § 1, 9-11-2014) 
Secs. 86-8-86-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - VEHICLE OPERATION 

Sec. 86-11. - Speed limits on streets and highways. 
(a)  General maximum speed limits for city streets. Unless expressly designated otherwise by this Code, within all intersections and on all public streets within the city, 30 miles per hour shall be the prima facie maximum speed limit, and any speed in excess thereof shall be prima facie evidence that such speed is not reasonable or prudent and that it is unlawful. 
(b)  Speed limits for alleys and easements. Within any alley, utility easement, or other public easement within the city, fifteen (15) miles per hour shall be the prima facie maximum speed limit, and any speed in excess thereof shall be prima facie evidence that such speed is not reasonable or prudent and that it is unlawful. 
(c)  Speed limit-20 miles per hour. On the hereinafter designated streets, or portions thereof, 20 miles per hour shall be the prima facie maximum speed limit, and any speed in excess thereof shall be prima facie evidence that such speed is not reasonable or prudent and that it is unlawful. Such streets, or portions thereof, being more particularly described: 
Street Extent Bricewood Cove both sides, entire length Bricewood Gate both sides, entire length Bricewood Oak both sides, entire length Bricewood Park both sides, entire length Bricewood Pass both sides, entire length Bricewood Post both sides, entire length Bricewood Tip both sides, entire length Bricewood Tree both sides, entire length Burnt Sienna both sides, entire length Burnt Umber both sides, entire length Drought Pass both sides, entire length Ghost Bridge both sides, entire length Mill Berger both sides, entire length Paynes Gray both sides, from its intersection with Burnt Sienna to approximately 475 feet past its intersection with Raw Sienna Peach Crossing both sides, entire length Raw Sienna both sides, entire length Shotgun Way both sides, entire length Viridian Place both sides, entire length Wasp Creek both sides, entire length  
(d)  Speed limit-25 miles per hour. On the hereinafter designated streets, or portions thereof, 25 miles per hour shall be the prima facie maximum speed limit, and any speed in excess thereof shall be prima facie evidence that such speed is not reasonable or prudent and that it is unlawful. Such streets, or portions thereof, being more particularly described: 
Street Extent Antonio Drive both sides, 600 feet from the intersection with Old Bandera Road Ashwell both sides, entire length Bitterroot both sides, entire length Canyon River both sides, entire length Five Brooks both sides, entire length Floore Drive both sides, entire length between Old Bandera Road and State Highway 16 (Bandera Road) Flying Horse both sides, entire length Iron Spring both sides, entire length Mystic Saddle both sides, entire length Old Bandera Road both sides, entire length between its north and sound end intersections with State Highway 16 (Bandera Road) Rainbow View both sides, entire length Red Tail both sides, entire length Riggs Road both sides, 2,000 linear feet from its intersection with Old Bandera Road and south bound direction toward F.M. 1560 Ribbon Ridge both sides, entire length Scenic Loop both sides, between Old Bandera Road and State Highway 16 (Bandera Road) Spirit Horse both sides, entire length Spotted Horse both sides, entire length Spring Run both sides, entire length Walking Horse both sides, entire length Wildheart both sides, entire length Wind Ridge both sides, entire length Wind Walker both sides, entire length  
(e)  Speed limit-35 miles per hour. On the hereinafter designated streets, or portions thereof, 35 miles per hour shall be the prima facie maximum speed limit, and any speed in excess thereof shall be prima facie evidence that such speed is not reasonable or prudent and that it is unlawful. Such streets, or portions thereof, being more particularly described: 
Street Extent Iron Horse Way both sides, Antonio Drive to the intersection with Walking Horse Paynes Gray both sides, from F.M. 1560 to approximately 475 feet before its intersection with Raw Sienna.  
(f)  Speed limit-40 miles per hour. On the hereinafter designated streets, or portions thereof, 40 miles per hour shall be the prima facie maximum speed limit, and any speed in excess thereof shall be prima facie evidence that such speed is not reasonable or prudent and that it is unlawful. Such streets, or portions thereof, being more particularly described: 
Street Extent Braun Road both sides, approximately 7,717 feet from its intersection with F.M. 1560 to its intersection with Leslie Road. F.M. 1560 both sides, from State Highway (SH) 16 to approximately 300 feet south of Parrigin Road. (M.P. 3.372 to M.P. 2.589) F.M. 1560 both sides, from State Highway (SH) 16 to the Helotes north corporate (Hausman Road) city limits. Galm Road both sides, approximately 5,370 feet west from its intersection with F.M. 1560 to its intersection with Silver Bells Road. Scenic Loop Road both sides, from State Highway (SH) 16 to Whip O Will, the Helotes corporate city Shaenfield Road both sides, approximately 7,416 feet from its intersection with F.M. 1560 to the northwest line of the City of San Antonio corporate limits.  
(g)  Speed limit-45 miles per hour. On the hereinafter designated streets, or portions thereof, 45 miles per hour shall be the prima facie maximum speed limit, and any speed in excess thereof shall be prima facie evidence that such speed is not reasonable or prudent and that it is unlawful. Such streets, or portions thereof, being more particularly described: 
Street Extent F.M. 1560 both sides, from approximately 300 feet south of Parrigin Road to the south City of Helotes corporate limits at the intersection of F.M. 1560 and Shaenfield and Galm Roads. S. H. 16 north side, from approximately 4,303 feet north of F.M. 1560 (Hausman Rd.) to approximately 2,365 feet south of Hausman Rd. (south Helotes corporate city limits). S. H. 16 south side, from approximately 4,303 feet north of Leslie Rd. to approximately 2,365 feet south of Leslie Rd. (south Helotes corporate city limits).  
(h)  Speed limit-55 miles per hour. On the hereinafter designated streets, or portions thereof, 55 miles per hour shall be the prima facie maximum speed limit, and any speed in excess thereof shall be prima facie evidence that such speed is not reasonable or prudent and that it is unlawful. Such streets, or portions thereof, being more particularly described: 
Street Extent S. H. 16 north side, from approximately 4,303 feet north of F.M. 1560 (Hausman Rd.) 1,647 feet south of Huron Peak. S. H. 16 south side, from approximately 4,303 feet north of Leslie Rd. to 1,647 feet south of Huron Peak.  
(i)  Speed limit-65 miles per hour. On the hereinafter designated streets, or portions thereof, 65 miles per hour shall be the prima facie maximum speed limit, and any speed in excess thereof shall be prima facie evidence that such speed is not reasonable or prudent and that it is unlawful. Such streets, or portions thereof, being more particularly described: 
Street Extent S. H. 16 north side, from the north corporate city limits to 1,647 feet south of Huron Peak. S. H. 16 south side, from the north corporate city limits to 1,647 feet south of Huron Peak.  
(Ord. No. 91B, § 1, 9-28-1995; Ord. No. 258, § 2(C), 8-12-2004; Ord. No. 356, § 2, 04-24-2008; Ord. No. 358, § 2, 06-12-2008, Ord. No. 366, § 2, 9-11-2008; Ord. No. 389, § 1, 1-8-2009; Ord. No. 395, § 1, 2-26-2009; Ord. No. 412, § 2, 8-27-2009; Ord. No. 413, § 1, 9-24-2009; Ord. No. 515. § 1, 01-23-2014; Ord. No. 538, § 2, 9-11-2014; Ord. No. 583, § 1, 1-14-2016; Ord. No. 601, § 1, 12-8-2016) 
Sec. 86-12. - Prima facie maximum speed limit-School zones; school crossing zones; duties of driver approaching stopped school bus. 
(a)  The prima facie maximum speed limit for operation of motor vehicles in school zones as defined herein shall be 20 miles per hour, and any speed in excess thereof shall be prima facie evidence that such speed is not reasonable or prudent and that it is unlawful. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, "school zone" shall be defined to mean any of the hereinafter designated areas on all official school days between the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. when so designated. The designation of the effective time will be shown by use of flashing amber lights or supplemental signs with the effective time periods posted. At all other times, the otherwise established prima facie maximum speed limits will be applicable. Designated areas for the purpose of this section shall mean: 
Street Extent Designated Times Leslie Road S.H. 16 (Bandera Road) to 1,000 feet past the intersection 2:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m. with O'Connor HS Drive. 7:00 a.m. to 9:30 a.m. and 
2:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m. Riggs Road 13700 block and 13800 block 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 
2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Shaenfield Road Canter Horse to Cavern Hill, approximately 1,687 feet 7:00 a.m. to 9:30 a.m. and 
2:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m.  
(c)  School crossing zones. 
(1)  Definition. School crossing zones are that portion of any street or public way within or without a school zone in the city which the police department, based upon a traffic and engineering survey, has so designated and so marked by painted lines, as prescribed by the state highway department. 
(2)  Driving in school crossing zone. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate a motor vehicle or other vehicle into or through any school crossing zone at a time when there is a pedestrian or pedestrians within the same on any school day (regular, special, or summer) between the hours stated above in this section. 
(d)  Authority of school crossing guards. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any motor vehicle or other vehicle to fail to stop when ordered to do so by a school crossing guard on duty on a school day between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. School crossing guards shall have no powers to arrest but shall take the license number of any motorist who shall fail to obey their signals to stop or start their vehicles in or near any school crossing zone at the times set out above and report same to the police department. 
(e)  Duties of driver approaching stopped school bus. The driver of a vehicle upon any street, highway, or public way anywhere within the city, upon meeting or overtaking from either direction any school bus which has stopped on said street or highway for the purpose of receiving or discharging any school children with its visual signals in operation, as required by state law, shall stop the vehicle before reaching such school bus and said driver shall not proceed until such school bus resumes motion or is signaled by the school bus driver to proceed or the visual signals are no longer activated. 
(Ord. No. 258, § 2(D), 8-12-2004; Ord. No. 389, § 1, 1-8-2009; Ord. No. 538, § 3, 9-11-2014) 
Sec. 86-13. - No passing zones. 
    It shall be unlawful for any motorist to overtake any other vehicle or drive to the left of the center of any roadway on all residential streets. 
(Ord. No. 258, § 2(E), 8-12-2004; Ord. No. 389, § 1, 1-8-2009) 
Sec. 86-14. - Negligent collision. 
(a)  Offense defined. If any person driving or operating or in charge of any motor vehicle shall by negligence cause or suffer or permit the same to come in collision with any other vehicle of any nature whatever, or with any animal, person, street sign, street posts, water plug, mail box, or any other obstacle or object whatever in or on any public street, avenue, highway or any public place whatever in the city, such person shall be deemed guilty of the offense of negligent collision. 
(b)  Definitions. As used in this section: 
    Negligence means the want of such care and caution as a person of ordinary prudence would use under like circumstances. 
    Public means where people are assembled or to which people commonly resort for the purpose of business, amusement, recreation or other lawful purpose. 
(Ord. No. 258, § 2 (F), 8-12-2004; Ord. No. 389, § 1, 1-8-2009) 
Sec. 86-15. - Avoiding traffic control signal; U-turns. 
(a)  Avoiding traffic control signal. At the intersection of any streets at which vehicular traffic is controlled by an authorized traffic control device, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle across the sidewalk area or across private property at such intersection to avoid complying with such traffic control device. 
(b)  Turns. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right- or left- or U-turn is permitted, no motor vehicle operator shall disobey the direction of any such sign 
(c)  Emergency vehicles are excluded from the provisions and requirements of section 86-15. 
(Ord. No. 258, § 2(G), 8-12-2004; Ord. No. 389, § 1, 1-8-2009; Ord. No. 487, § 1, 10-25-2012, Ord. No. 538, § 4, 9-11-2014) 
Sec. 86-16. - Stop signs. 
(a)  Offense defined. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any of the streets hereinafter designated as "stop sign streets," and onto or across the intersection of any such street and any street hereinafter designated as a "through street" without first bringing such vehicle to a full stop upon such stop sign street within ten feet of the near curb line before entering such through street. Thereafter, such driver shall proceed in a cautious manner, yielding the right-of-way to vehicles not so obligated to stop which are within the intersection or are approaching so closely thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard, and then may proceed. 
(b)  Full stop locations. The following streets are designated as through streets at the intersection mentioned or referred to, and all streets designated as stop sign streets where posted: 
Through Street Stop Sign Street Antonio Drive Marin Hollow Road (applies to both intersections) Aqua Valley Lupine Meadow Aqua Valley Tascate Bar X Trail Double Spur Trail Bar X Trail Rocking M Trail Bar X Trail Laurel Leaf Trail Bar X Trail Bar D Trail Bar X Trail Rafter S Trail Baxtershire Malibu Baxtershire Moorway Beverly Hills Doheny (applies to both intersections) Beverly Hills Malibu (applies to both intersections) Bitter Root Five Brooks Black Horse Ashwell Black Horse Bitter Root Black Horse Five Brooks (applies to both intersections) Bricewood Cove Bricewood Tip Bricewood Oak Bricewood Gate (eastbound) Bricewood Oak Bricewood Gate (westbound) Bricewood Park Bricewood Gate (eastbound) Bricewood Park Bricewood Gate (westbound) Bricewood Park Bricewood Tip (eastbound) Bricewood Park Bricewood Tip (westbound) Bricewood Pass Bricewood Oak Bricewood Post Bricewood Gate (westbound) Bricewood Post Bricewood Oak Bricewood Tree Bricewood Gate Burnt Sienna Burnt Umber Camino Venado Oak Hollow Canyon River Lost Horse Canyon River Mystic Saddle (applies to both intersections) Canyon River Red Tail Cedar Point Amber Dawn Cedar Point Bridge Cedar Cedar Point Green Cedar Cedar Point Llano Verde (applies to both intersections) Cedar Point Majestic Cedar Cedar Point New Cedar Cedar Point Paintbrush Cedar Point Perfect Cedar Cedar Point Red Clay Cedar Point Straight Cedar Cedar Point Strong Cedar Cedar Trail Grand Cedar Cedar Trail Camino Venado Cedar Trail Wasp Creek Circle A Trail Bar X Trail Circle A Trail Double Spur Trail Circle A Trail Circle C Trail Circle A Trail Circle E Trail Circle A Trail Flying W Trail Circle A Trail Lazy F Trail Circle A Trail Lazy J Trail Circle A Trail Rafter O Trail Circle A Trail Rocking M Trail Circle N Drive East Circle S Drive Circle N Drive West Circle S Drive Diamond K Trail Bar X Trail Doheny Sunset Blvd Doheny Baxtershire Double Spur Trail Star Cross Trail Drought Pass Peach Crossing Five Brooks Wild Heart F.M. 1560 Alta Loma F.M. 1560 Antonio Drive F.M. 1560 Beverly Hills F.M. 1560 Circle N Drive East F.M. 1560 Circle N Drive West F.M. 1560 Doheny F.M. 1560 Hunters Way F.M. 1560 Old F.M. 1560 F.M. 1560 Parrigin Road F.M. 1560 Paynes Gray F.M. 1560 Riggs F.M. 1560 Saltillo Flats F.M. 1560 Wynstone Place Galm Road Bricewood Park Grand Cedar Happy Cedar Grand Cedar Holly Cedar Hollow Ridge Hunters Oak Hunters Way Hunters Break Iron Horse Way Black Horse Iron Horse Way Flying Horse Iron Horse Way Lost Horse Iron Horse Way Panther Valley Iron Horse Way Spirit Horse Iron Horse Way Spotted Horse Iron Horse Way Walking Horse Iron Spring Spring Run Lazy J Trail Circle J Trail Leslie Road Business Parkway Marnoch Cash Mountain Road Moorway Wickwilde Old Bandera Road Scenic Loop Old Bandera Road Floore Drive Old Bandera Road Antonio Drive Old Bandera Road Crossover to SH 16 Old Bandera Road Old F.M. 1560 Municipal Way Paloma Drive Baxtershire Paloma Drive Beverly Hills Paloma Drive Sunset Boulevard Paloma Drive Sunset Ranch Paloma Drive Wickwilde Parrigin Road Stagecoach Parrigin Road Mesquite Flat Parrigin Road Indian Trail Paynes Gray Raw Sienna Rafter S Trail Seven L Trail Rafter S Trail Star Cross Rafter S Trail Cross XD Trail Rafter S Trail Circle A Trail Rafter S Trail Marnoch Raw Sienna Burnt Umber S.H. 16 (Bandera Rd.) Municipal Way Scenic Loop Crossover to SH 16 Scenic Loop Road Scenic Loop Road Marnoch Scenic Loop Road Old Scenic Loop Road Scenic Loop Road Tower View Seven L Trail Lazy J Trail Spirit Horse Ribbon Ridge Spotted Horse Rainbow View Spotted Horse Wind Walker State Highway 16 Diamond K Trail State Highway 16 (North) Floore Drive State Highway 16 (South) Floore Drive Sunset Boulevard Malibu (applies to both intersections) Sunset Boulevard Paloma Drive Viridian Place Sunset Woods Rd. Wasp Creek Peach Crossing Wind Ridge Flying Horse  
Three-way intersections (both directions of the intersection are stop intersections): 
Street and Intersecting Street Drought Pass Ghost Bridge F.M. 1560 Iron Horse Way Shotgun Way Ghost Bridge  
Four-way intersections (both directions of the intersection are stop intersections): 
Street and Intersecting Street Aqua Verde Aqua Valley Cedar Point Cedar Trail Cedar Point Gray Sage Cedar Point Paint Brush Cedar Trail Camino Venado (9300 Blk) Iron Horse Way Antonio Drive Leslie Road Rainbow Ridge Road Peach Crossing Ghost Bridge Spring Run Walking Horse  
(Ord. No. 258, § 2(H), 8-12-2004; Ord. No. 258A, § 1&2, 04-27-2006; Ord. No. 389, § 1, 1-8-2009; Ord. No. 426, § 1, 03-11-2010; Ord. No. 473, § 1, 7-26-2012; Ord. No. 496, § 1, 02-28-2013; Ord. No. 583, 1-14-2016; Ord. No. 601, § 1, 12-8-2016; Ord. No. 18-23 , § 3, 9-27-2018; Ord. No. 18-29 , § 1, 11-8-2018) 
Sec. 86-17. - Yield signs. 
(a)  Offense defined. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any of the streets hereinafter designated as a "yield sign street" and onto or across the intersection of any such street, and any street hereafter designated as a "through street," without first slowing down and yielding the right-of-way to traffic on such through street. Thereafter, such driver shall proceed in a cautious manner, yielding the right-of-way to vehicles not so obliged to yield which are within the intersection or approaching so closely thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard, and then may proceed. 
(b)  Yield streets designated. The following streets designated as through streets at the intersections mentioned or referred to, or form a junction with streets that are designated as yield sign streets: 
Through Streets Yield Sign Streets F.M. 1560 Iron Horse Way F.M. 1560 Old F.M. 1560 Parrigin Road Javalin Trail Stagecoach Lane Mesquite Flat State Highway 16 Old Bandera Road  
(c)  Yield signs on State Highway 16 median. All median crossovers on State Highway 16 within the city limits are hereby designated as "yield sign streets" and both the northbound and southbound lanes of State Highway 16 are hereby designated as "through streets," as such terms are defined in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 258, § 2(I), 8-12-2004; Ord. 258A, § 3, 04-28-2006; Ord. No. 389, § 1, 1-8-2009; Ord. No. 426 § 1, 03-11-2010; Ord. No. 18-27 , § 1, 10-11-2018; Ord. No. 18-30 , § 1, 11-8-2018) 
Sec. 86-18. - Short-cutting across public or private property; driving on certain public property prohibited. 
(a)  Short-cutting. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle or automobile, motor scooter, motorcycle, motor truck, carriage, wagon, bicycle or vehicle whatever to cut across or drive across or traverse any private or public property, sidewalk, driveway, median, parkway, or easement whatever (other than a public street, road, alley or other public vehicular right-of-way) in order to short-cut an intersection or side street or in order to proceed across such private property or public property from one public street, road or vehicular way, to the same public street, road, or vehicular way, or to another. 
(b)  Driving on certain public property prohibited. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle, automobile, motorcycle, motor scooter, motor truck, or motorized conveyance whatever to drive across or on any part of any public park, bicycle trail, pathway, hiking trail or the like. Motorists and operators of such motor vehicles of any kind may only drive same into public parks or other public lands provided with streets or other rights-of-way improved for motor traffic use and may drive such vehicles only on such streets. 
(Ord. No. 258, § 2 (J), 8-12-2004; Ord. No. 389, § 1, 1-8-2009) 
Sec. 86-19. - One-way streets. 
(a)  Offense defined. Upon those streets and parts of streets enumerated below, vehicular traffic shall move only in the direction indicated where signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection. 
Street Extent Direction State Highway 16 Northbound Lane Southern boundary of city limits to Northern boundary of city limits Northbound State Highway 16 Southbound Lane Northern boundary of city limits to Southern boundary of city limits Southbound  
(b)  "One-way" signs adopted. All one-way traffic control devices situated at each intersection designated above, bearing or including the word "one-way" along the street upon which a sign is situated, are hereby established as and declared to be and adopted as lawful and official traffic control devices requiring and giving notice to the drivers of all vehicles to conform to the provisions of This chapter. 
(Ord. No. 258, § 2 (K), 8-12-2004; Ord. No. 389, § 1, 1-8-2009) 
Sec. 86-20. - Use of hand-held communication devices prohibited in school zones. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the following definitions apply: 
(1)  Engaging in a call shall mean talking into, dialing, or listening on a hand-held mobile telephone, and entering or reading text messages. 
(2)  Hands-free mobile telephone shall mean a mobile telephone that has an internal feature or function, or that is equipped with an attachment or addition, whether or not permanently part of such mobile telephone, by which a user engages in a call without the use of either hand (or prosthetic device or aid in the case of a physically disabled person), whether or not the use of either hand (or prosthetic device) is necessary to activate, deactivate, or initiate a function of such telephone. 
(3)  Hand-held communications device shall mean a mobile telephone, personal digital assistant (PDA), pager, or other device by which the user communicates to another, or receives communications from another, by means of aural (voice) communications, text entry, text receipt, or any other means of electronically transferred data. 
(4)  Hand-held mobile telephone shall mean a mobile telephone with which a user engages in a call using at least one hand (or prosthetic device or aid in the case of a physically disabled person). 
(5)  Immediate proximity shall mean that distance as permits the operator of a mobile telephone to hear telecommunications transmitted over such mobile telephone, but shall not require physical contact with such operator's ear. 
(6)  Mobile telephone shall mean the device used by subscribers and other users of wireless telephone service to access such service and shall include personal digital assistants. 
(7)  Personal digital assistant shall mean a device operated using a wireless telecommunications service that provides for data communication other than by voice. 
(8)  Wireless telephone service shall mean two-way, real time voice telecommunications service that is interconnected to a public switched telephone network and commonly referred to as cellular service or personal communication service. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided below, it shall be unlawful for a person to drive or operate a moving motor vehicle in a school zone on days when school is in session, during the hours when school zones are in effect, when school zone signs and signs prohibiting hand-held communications device use are posted, and while using a hand-held communications device to engage in a call or to create, send, or read messages. 
(c)  An operator of a motor vehicle who holds a hand-held communications device to, or in the immediate proximity of his or her ear while such vehicle is in motion is presumed to be engaging in a call within the meaning of this section. 
(d)  Subsection (b) shall not apply to: 
(1)  The use of any communications device for the sole purpose of communicating with any of the following regarding an emergency situation: an emergency response operator; a hospital; a physician's office or health clinic; the city's police or fire department. 
(2)  Any law enforcement, public safety or police officer; emergency service officials; first aid, emergency medical technicians, and personnel; or any fire safety officials in performance of duties arising out of an in the course of their employment as such. 
(3)  The use of a hands-free mobile telephone when being used in a hands-free manner. 
(e)  A violation of this order is a strict liability offense. 
(Ord. No. 374, § 2, 9-25-2008; Ord. No. 389, § 1, 1-8-2009) 
Sec. 86-21. - Use of certain wireless communication devices while driving prohibited. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section: 
(1)  Electronic message means a self-contained piece of digital communication that is designed or intended to be transmitted to or from a wireless communication device. An electronic message includes, but is not limited to, a text-based communication, such as electronic mail, a text message, or an instant message, or a command or request to access an internet site, or other data that uses a commonly recognized electronic communication protocol. 
(2)  Wireless communication device means a device that uses a commercial mobile service, as defined by 47 U.S.C. § 332. 
(3)  Terms not expressly defined in this Section shall have the meaning ascribed by section 86-20(a)(1-8) as necessary for interpretation and the application hereof. 
(b)  Offense. A person commits an offense if the person drives or operates a motor vehicle in the city while using a wireless communication device to view, send, or compose an electronic message. 
(c)  Affirmative defenses. Except where the wireless communication device is used in a school zone in the manner prohibited by Section 86-20 (b) of This chapter, it is an affirmative defense to prosecution of the conduct prohibited by subsection (b) hereof if: 
(1)  The person is using the wireless communication device strictly to engage in a telephone conversation, including dialing or deactivating a phone call; 
(2)  The person is an authorized government vehicle and is using the wireless communication device to respond to an emergency while acting in an official capacity; 
(3)  The person is using the wireless communication device while stopped or standing at a position parallel to and as close as possible to the right-hand edge or curb of a roadway or within a designated parking facility where parking, standing, or stopping in a nonemergency situation is not otherwise prohibited; or 
(4)  The person is using the wireless communication device to: 
a.  Obtain emergency assistance to report a traffic accident, medical emergency, serious traffic hazard, fire or other hazardous response service; 
b.  Communicate with the reasonable belief that a person's life, safety, or property is in immediate danger; or 
c.  Operate a device that is permanently installed inside the vehicle that is used solely in a voice-activated or other hands-free mode. 
(5)  A violation of this section is a strict liability offense. 
(d)  Conflicting regulations. To the extent that any clause, phrase, provision, sentence, or part of this section conflicts with V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.424 regarding the use of wireless communication devices while operating a motor vehicle by minors; or V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.425 regarding the use of wireless communication devices in school crossing zones, the Transportation Code Section shall apply to the extent of such conflict. 
(Ord. No. 443, § 3, 02-10-2011; Ord. No. 465, 04-12-2012) 
Sec. 86-22. - Vulnerable road users. 
(a)  In this Section, a Vulnerable Road User means: 
(1)  A pedestrian, including a runner, physically disabled person, child, skater, highway construction or maintenance worker, tow truck operator, utility worker, other worker with legitimate business in or near the road or right-of-way, or stranded motorist or passenger; 
(2)  A person on horseback; 
(3)  A person operating equipment other than a motor vehicle, including, but not limited to, a bicycle, handcycle, horse-driven conveyance, or unprotected farm equipment; or 
(4)  A person operating a motorcycle, moped, motor-driven cycle, or motor-assisted scooter. 
(b)  An operator of a motor vehicle passing a vulnerable road user operating on a highway or street shall: 
(1)  Vacate the lane in which the vulnerable road user is located if the highway has two or more marked lanes running in the same direction; or 
(2)  Pass the vulnerable road user at a safe distance. 
(c)  For the purposes of subsection (b)(ii), when road conditions allow, safe distance is at least: 
(1)  Three feet if the operator's vehicle is a passenger car or light truck; or 
(2)  Six feet if the operator's vehicle is a truck, other than a light truck, or a commercial motor vehicle, as defined by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 522.003. 
(d)  An operator of a motor vehicle that is making a left turn at an intersection, including an intersection with an alley or private road or driveway, shall yield the right-of-way to a vulnerable road user who is approaching from the opposite direction and is in the intersection, or is in such proximity to the intersection as to be an immediate hazard. 
(e)  An operator of a motor vehicle may not overtake a vulnerable road user traveling in the same direction and subsequently make a right-hand turn in front of the vulnerable road user unless the operator is safely clear of the vulnerable road user, taking into account the speed at which the vulnerable road user is traveling and the braking requirements of the motor vehicle making the right-hand turn. 
(f)  An operator of a motor vehicle may not maneuver the vehicle in a manner that: 
(1)  Is intended to cause intimidation or harassment to a vulnerable road user; or 
(2)  That threatens a vulnerable road user. 
(g)  An operator of a motor vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any vulnerable road user on a roadway or in an intersection of roadways. 
(h)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this Section that, at the time of the offense, the vulnerable road user was acting in violation of the law. 
(Ord. No. 420, § 2, 11-09-2009; Ord. No. 443, § 2, 02-10-2011) 
Sec. 86-23. - Street names. 
(a)  On the hereinafter designated street, or portion thereof, the city council of the city renames such streets to: 
Existing Street Name New Designation Antonio Road Antonio Drive, from its northern intersection with Iron Horse Way to its southern intersection with F.M. 1560 Antonio Drive Iron Horse Way, from its western intersection with Iron Horse Way and Antonio Drive to its eastern intersection with F.M. 1560 Unnamed Old F.M. 1560, from the southeast right-of-way of F.M. 1560 opposite Riggs Rd. southeast to its termination at the Helotes Municipal Complex, 12951 Bandera Rd. Unnamed Municipal Way, a segment of road between, generally, the Helotes Public Works Building, 12614 F.M. 1560, and its intersection with S.H. 16 (Bandera Rd.).  
Note: See attached TxDOT minute order, including Exhibits A and B. 
(Ord. No. 426 § 1, 03-11-2010; Ord. No. 443, § 2, 02-10-2011; Ord. No. 18-23 , § 2, 9-27-2018) 
Sec. 86-24. - Operation of golf carts. 
(a)  Definitions. The terms "golf cart" and "public highway" shall have the meanings assigned to them within Texas Transportation Code, Title Seven Vehicles and Traffic, Subtitle A Certificates of Title and Registration of Vehicles, Chapter 502 Registration of Vehicles, Subchapter A General Provisions. 
(b)  Operation within the city. The operation of a golf cart is expressly authorized on all public highways and municipal streets located within the Old Town Helotes Special District, including portions of Old Bandera Road, Riggs Road, Floore Drive, Scenic Loop Road, and Antonio Drive within the district. The operation of a golf cart is expressly authorized on all public or private streets located within single-family residential (R-1) districts within the city. An operator of a golf cart shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicular traffic. 
(c)  Required equipment. A golf cart operated within the city must have the following equipment installed on the golf cart: 
(1)  Headlamps; 
(2)  Tail lamps; 
(3)  Reflectors; 
(4)  Parking brake; and 
(5)  Rearview mirrors. 
(d)  Insurance. All golf carts operating within the city shall be insured for bodily injury and property damage liability in the following minimum amounts: $25,000.00 per person/$50,000.00 per occurrence/$15,000.00 property damage. All golf carts shall carry evidence of required insurance which shall be presented upon demand to law enforcement personnel. 
(e)  Driver's License. Any person operating a golf cart within the city shall have a valid Texas driver's license or a driver's license issued by their state of residence. 
(Ord. No. 452, § 1, 8-11-2011; Ord. No. 467, 04-12-2012) 
Secs. 86-25-86-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARKING 

Sec. 86-31. - Prohibited parking generally. 
(a)  Wrecked, damaged or junked vehicles. No wrecked, damaged, junked or broken down automobile vehicle of any kind shall ever be parked, placed or left in any street, alley, or public right-of-way within the city at any time. 
(b)  Parking for more than 24 hours; parking for certain purposes prohibited; parking of certain vehicles prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to park unused vehicles of any kind in any street or public place for more than 24 hours, or at any time for the purpose of storage, washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle (except repairs necessitated by emergency), sale, or display of advertising signs or posters fixed to such vehicle, or any trailer, semi-trailer, horse trailer, boat trailer, not attached to a tractor or towing vehicle, or any autobus, motor home or camper. 
(c)  Blocking driveway. No automotive vehicle shall be parked in any manner which will block or impede free vehicular ingress and egress to all public and private driveways opening into any street, alley, or public right-of-way in the city. 
(d)  Towing of illegally parked vehicles. The city may have any vehicle illegally parked under This chapter for a period of more than 24 hours towed away and/or impounded and keep same until the owner, or his agent, pays all towing and storage charges and all fines and court costs adjudged against said owner (or his agent) in connection with such parking offense. 
(e)  Parking near fire hydrant. No parking is permitted within 15 feet in any direction of a fire hydrant. 
(f)  Parking in fire lane. No parking permitted in designated fire lanes, including any area appurtenant to entrances and exits of a building deemed necessary by the fire marshal or designee to remain free and clear of parked vehicles for access to such building in case of fire or other emergency. Fire lanes shall be conspicuously marked and identified, as set out in the Texas Occupations Code § 2308.251(c). 
(g)  Parking in handicap areas. Parking in handicap designated areas prohibited without proper designation, as indicated in Texas Transportation Code 504 and 681. 
(Ord. No. 258, § 2(L(1)), 8-12-2004; Ord. No. 18-28 , § 1, 11-8-2018) 
Sec. 86-32. - Manner of parking; "no parking" signs adopted. 
(a)  No person shall stand or park a motor vehicle of any kind in a street or thoroughfare within the city where standing and parking are permitted other than parallel with the edge of the roadway, headed in the lane and direction of lawful traffic movement. Off roadway parking only will be permitted in residential areas. Head-in parking will be permitted in areas that are designated as such (Old Bandera Road, Riggs Road at the Catholic Church and school). 
(b)  All traffic control devices situated on the streets and thoroughfares bearing or including the words "No Parking," in lettering plainly visible for a distance of 100 feet, set along the street upon which such signs are situated, are hereby adopted as official traffic control devices. 
(Ord. No. 258, § 2(L(2)), 8-12-2004) 
Sec. 86-33. - Prima facie case defined. 
    When any person is charged with having parked or left standing a vehicle on any street in the city at a place on said street where parking of vehicles is prohibited or with parking such vehicle on said street in a manner which violated the manner of parking of a vehicle as designated or with parking such vehicle for a length of time in excess of that allowed in the space where said vehicle was parked, proof that said vehicle was, at the date of the offense alleged, owned by the person charged with the offense, shall constitute prima facie evidence that said vehicle was parked or left standing at the place charged by said owner, but the owner shall have the right to introduce evidence to show that said vehicle was not parked by him as charged in the complaint. 
(Ord. No. 258, § 2(L(3)), 8-12-2004) 
Sec. 86-34. - No parking zones. 
    The following locations are designated as "no parking zones." All traffic control devices shall bear or include the words "No Parking" as set out in section 86-32. 
(1)  [ Designated streets at indicated times. ] It is unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle on the following designated streets for the indicated time period: 
Riggs Road (east side) in the 13800 block, during the posted hours are 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m., school days only; 
Riggs Road (west side) in the 13800 block, during the posted hours are 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m., school days only. 
(2)  Fire lanes. In accordance with Code of Ordinances Chapter 38 Fire Prevention and Protection, the following areas are designated as fire lanes: 
Bricewood Cove, entire length, west curb line; 
Bricewood Oak, entire length, south curb line; 
Bricewood Oak, entire length, west curb line; 
Bricewood Park, entire length, east and west curb lines; 
Bricewood Pass, north curb line from its intersection with Bricewood Oak to Bricewood Post; 
Bricewood Post, entire length, east curb line; 
Bricewood Tip, entire length, south curb line; 
Bricewood Tip, north curb line from its intersection with Bricewood Park to Bricewood Cove; 
Bricewood Tree, entire length, west curb line. 
(Ord. No. 258, § 2(L(4)), 8-12-2004; Ord. No. 601, § 2, 12-8-2016) 
Sec. 86-35. - Oversized vehicles. 
(a)  Definitions. For purposes of this section: 
    Municipal street means the entire width of a way held by the city in fee or by easement or dedication that has a part open for public use for vehicular travel. The term does not include a designated state or federal highway or road or a designated county road. (Reference V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 316.001.) 
    Oversize vehicle means a motor vehicle, trailer, or boat which, by itself or together with other structure(s) or vehicle(s) attached to it, exceeds 24 feet in length, eight feet in width, or eight feet in height, exclusive of apparatus such as antennas, luggage racks, and mirrors. 
(b)  On-street parking prohibited in certain districts. It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having control of any oversized vehicle as defined in subsection (a) of this section to park the same upon any municipal street within the PD pre-development district, R-1 single-family residential district, R-2 two-family residential district, or R-3 mobile home residential district at any time. Provided, this section shall not apply to the parking of such vehicles for such time as actually necessary to load or unload passengers, freight or merchandise. 
(c)  Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall upon conviction be subject to a fine of not less than $35.00 and not more than $200.00. Each day that a violation occurs constitutes a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 227, §§ 1-3, 1-23-2003) 
Secs. 86-36-86-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HOUSE MOVING 

Sec. 86-41. - General regulations. 
    Business or residence structures, either new or old, that are originally constructed on the site of the premises upon which the same are to be located shall not be moved into or within the limits of the city except as hereinafter permitted. 
(1)  To move any such structure into or within the city shall require the following: 
a.  A preliminary inspection fee shall be paid to the city and the building inspector shall then inspect the structure to be moved and determine whether or not the structure and its intended location and use thereon fully comply with the provisions of all applicable Code provisions. The fee for said permit shall be as prescribed in the most recent adopted fee schedule passed and approved by the city council. The fee shall be non-refundable. 
b.  If thus approved, a final permit fee shall be paid within 60 days after the granting of such preliminary approval, and security shall be posted as hereinafter provided. The fee for said permit shall be as prescribed in the most recent adopted fee schedule passed and approved by the city council. The fee shall be non-refundable. 
c.  Before such permit may be issued, the applicant shall furnish security in the amount of $1,000.00 conditioned upon completion of all work necessary to the construction of a foundation and the moving and installation thereon of such structure within 90 days of issuance of final permit, such security to be filed with the city. 
d.  Such surety may be either in the form of a deposit in cash or of United States "bearer" bonds or a surety bond payable to the city. If a surety bond is submitted, it shall be in form approved by the city attorney, issued by a company authorized to do such business in Texas, and shall name an agent in Bexar County to receive notices and upon whom service may be had. Such security shall be furnished conditioned upon completion of all work upon such relocated building necessary to bring it into compliance with the applicable codes and ordinances of the city within 90 days of issuance of the permit described in subsections b. and c. 
e.  The amount of said security is the minimum liquidated damages payable to the city for failure to comply with this section, it being recognized that the damages to the city and public occasioned by such failure will be difficult of determination and that the sum named has been agreed to as the minimum amount of such damages. The building inspector shall have periodic inspections made of the relocated building to determine whether the building has been brought into compliance with applicable codes and ordinances. When completed, the officer shall notify the city to release the security required hereby. If such work is not completed within 90 days after the permit was issued, the city shall notify the city attorney whenever any person shall have failed to perform the work, performance of which is the condition of the security required herein above. Thereupon the city attorney shall prepare an appropriate ordinance or resolution for submission to the city council declaring forfeited the security furnished pursuant thereto. 
f.  If the requirements of subsections a., b., c. above are met within 60 days from the date of original application, then the city shall issue to applicant a permit to move the structure into or within the limits of the city. Such moving permit shall only be issued upon the condition that the improvements sought to be moved shall be placed upon the designated premises and completed for occupancy, with final inspection and certificate of occupancy finished all within 90 days of the date of said permit. This time may only be extended by majority vote of the council upon showing of good cause existing for such extension and after a public hearing. 
(2)  Upon the issuance of moving permit, the city shall issue a building permit to the applicant to commence the foundation for the structure, and the further work on said premises shall continue in the same manner as provided for all structures under the building code. 
(3)  In the event that applicant fails to complete said improvements within the 90-day period, or extension thereof, as provided above, or fails to comply with any other provision herein, then such failure shall constitute a violation of This article, punishable by fine. Each day such violation continues is hereby declared to be a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 258, § 2 (M(1)), 8-12-2004; Ord. No. 368, § 1 (Exhibit A) 9-11-2008; Ord. No. 394, § 9, 2-12-2009) 
Sec. 86-42. - Small structures. 
(a)  The provisions contained in section 86-41 shall not apply to structures of 100 square feet or less in size. 
(b)  Structures of 100 square feet or less shall not be moved into the city limits and relocated therein except upon compliance with the following regulations: 
(1)  A permit will be obtained prior to the time the structure is moved into the city limits or the foundation is built to cover: 
a.  Inspection of the site and foundation for relocation; 
b.  Issuance of a permit (if approved); and 
c.  Inspection of the building and site after relocation. 
(2)  If such structure is approved for any use other than dry storage, or the like, a building permit shall also be taken out in addition, as otherwise prescribed in this Code, and such additional fees shall be paid and such additional inspections made as thus required. 
(3)  After said permit is initially obtained, such structure shall be moved into the city, the foundation built, and installation completed in 90 days of the date thereof, or the same shall become null and void and a new permit and fee shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 258, § 2 (M(2)), 8-12-2004) 
Secs. 86-43-86-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PARADES AND PUBLIC GATHERINGS 

Sec. 86-51. - Definitions. 
    City means the City of Helotes, Texas. 
    Extreme sporting event means any sporting event perceived as having a high level of inherent danger. Such events typically involve a high level of speed, height, physical exertion, highly specialized gear, or spectacular stunts. The definition of an extreme sporting event is not exact; however, an extreme sporting event shall include, but not be limited to, bull riding, motocross, vehicular racing, et cetera. 
    Parade means any parade, event, demonstration, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, assemblage, extreme sporting event, pageant or procession of any kind, or any similar display in or upon any public street, public park, or other public place or public way in the city or gatherings of 25 or more people on private property in the city for any like or similar activity, either of which may reasonably require and necessitate special traffic control and/or rerouting, special police protection, and/or crowd control or other prior planning and which is organized for a common purpose, theme, or cause. The term "parade" shall also include any event on public or private property with an estimated attendance of 300 persons or more. 
    Parade permit means a permit required by This article. 
    Person means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
    Public nuisance means any unauthorized parade or gathering for which a permit is required and has not been obtained. 
    Road closure means closing a highway or street or portion of a highway or street to all vehicular traffic, except for parade participants, for the duration of a parade. 
(Ord. No. 258, § 2(N(1)), 8-12-2004; Ord. No. 369, § 1, 9-25-2008; Ord. No. 448, § 1, 6-23-2011) 
Sec. 86-52. - Permit required; exceptions. 
    No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade, unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the city, with the approval of the chief of police, fire chief, mayor, and city administrator. Unauthorized parades are declared by the city to be a public nuisance and a threat to the health, safety, and welfare of the public. All unauthorized parades will be disbursed or abated by the municipal police department. This article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Funeral processions; 
(2)  Students going to and from school, classes, or participating in educational and other extracurricular activities, providing such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the authorized and proper school authorities; 
(3)  A governmental agency or a political subdivision of the state acting within the scope of its functions; 
(4)  A private music venue that is operating within the scope of its normal business activities and in compliance with all local, state, and Federal laws; and 
(5)  A private church or religious organization that is operating within the scope of its normal business activities and in compliance with all local, state, and Federal laws. 
(Ord. No. 258, § 2(N(2)), 8-12-2004; Ord. No. 369, § 1, 9-25-2008; Ord. No. 448, § 1, 6-23-2011) 
Sec. 86-53. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Filing. A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with the city not less than 15 days, nor more than 120 days, before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade. 
(b)  Contents. The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct the parade. 
(2)  If the parade is proposed to be conducted for or on behalf of an organization, the name, address, and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization and of the authorized and responsible person who will be the parade chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct. 
(3)  The date when the parade is to be conducted. 
(4)  The location of the parade or the route, if applicable, to be traveled, including the starting point and the termination point. 
(5)  The approximate number of persons who, and the animals and vehicles which, will constitute such parade, including daily attendees; the type of animals and description of the vehicles. 
(6)  The hours when such parade will start and terminate. 
(7)  A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed, any public right-of-way, and whether road closures are required. 
(8)  If the parade is designed to be held on behalf of or for any person other than the applicant, the applicant shall file a statement in writing from the person authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf. 
(9)  Medical and evacuation plans, as prescribed and in a format approved by the fire chief or designee, must be submitted with the application. 
(10)  A security plan, as prescribed and in a format approved by the chief of police or designee, must be submitted with the application. 
(11)  For extreme sporting events, a contract with a state licensed transport provider in compliance with the V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 773, and the Texas EMS Act for, at a minimum, one on-site ALS ambulance responsible for medical treatment and transport for event participants for the duration of the extreme sporting event must be submitted with the application. 
(12)  Any additional information the city shall find reasonably necessary for a fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued. 
(c)  Fee. A fee shall be paid at the time of filing the application for a parade permit. The fee for said permit shall be as prescribed in the most recent adopted fee schedule passed and approved by the city council. The fee shall be non-refundable. 
(Ord. No. 258, § 2(N(3)), 8-12-2004; Ord. No. 448, §, 6-23-2011) 
Sec. 86-54. - Standards for issuance of permit. 
    The city shall issue a permit, as provided for hereunder, upon the approval of the chief of police, fire chief, mayor, and city administrator when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be required and obtained, city staff finds that: 
(1)  The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route or site. 
(2)  The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of emergency services personnel or resources of the city to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal emergency service protection to the city. 
(3)  The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed parade and areas contiguous thereto. 
(4)  The concentration of persons, animals, and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas. 
(5)  The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of emergency vehicles responding to emergencies. 
(6)  The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, provoke disorderly conduct, or create a disturbance. 
(7)  The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route. 
(8)  The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising or sale of any product, goods, or services. 
(Ord. No. 258, § 2(N(4)), 8-12-2004; Ord. No. 448, § 1, 6-23-2011) 
Sec. 86-55. - Decision on permit; notice of disapproval of permit. 
    City staff shall act upon the application for a parade permit within 5 days after the filing thereof. City staff will forward the application to the mayor for final action. If the city disapproves the application, it shall mail to the applicant, within ten business days after the date upon which the application was filed, a notice of such action, stating the reasons for the denial of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 258, § 2(N(5)), 8-12-2004; Ord. No. 448, § 1, 6-23-2011) 
Sec. 86-56. - Appeal of denial of permit. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade permit to the city council. 
(b)  The appeal must be submitted within ten business days after notice of denial. The city council shall act upon the appeal within 30 days after receipt. 
(Ord. No. 258, § 2(N(6)), 8-12-2004; Ord. No. 448, § 1, 6-23-2011) 
Sec. 86-57. - Alternate permit. 
    The city, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time, or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within ten business days after notice of the action of the city, file a written notice of acceptance of the alternate permit with the city secretary. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of and shall have the effect of a parade permit under This article. 
(Ord. No. 258, § 2(N(7)), 8-12-2004; Ord. No. 448, § 1, 6-23-2011) 
Sec. 86-58. - Notice to city officials of issuance of permit. 
    Immediately upon the issuance of a parade permit, the city shall send a copy thereof to the following: 
(1)  The police department. 
(2)  The fire department. 
(3)  The mayor and each councilperson. 
(4)  The city administrator. 
(Ord. No. 258, § 2(N(8)), 8-12-2004; Ord. No. 448, § 1, 6-23-2011) 
Sec. 86-59. - Contents of permit. 
    Each parade permit shall state the following information: 
(1)  Starting and ending dates and times. 
(2)  Minimum and maximum speeds, if applicable. 
(3)  Maximum interval of space, if applicable, to be maintained between the units of the parade. 
(4)  The portions of the streets or public right-of-way to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade. 
(5)  The maximum length of the parade in miles or factions thereof, if applicable. 
(6)  Such other information as the city shall find necessary for the enforcement of This article. 
(Ord. No. 258, § 2(N(9)), 8-12-2004; Ord. No. 448, § 1, 6-23-2011) 
Sec. 86-60. - Duties of permittee; possession of permit. 
    A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. The parade chairman or other person heading or leading such activity shall carry the parade permit upon his person during the conduct of the parade. 
(Ord. No. 258, § 2(N(10)), 8-12-2004; Ord. No. 448, § 1, 6-23-2011) 
Sec. 86-61. - Public conduct during parades. 
(a)  No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede or interfere with any parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade. 
(b)  If applicable, no driver of any vehicle whatsoever shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade. 
(Ord. No. 258, § 2(N(11)), 8-12-2004; Ord. No. 448, § 1, 6-23-2011) 
Sec. 86-62. - Parking on parade route. 
    The city shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a street or highway or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade or event location. The city shall post signs to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on a street in violation of this Section where prohibited or restricted parking is not visibly posted. 
(Ord. No. 258, § 2(N(12)), 8-12-2004; Ord. No. 448, § 1, 6-23-2011) 
Sec. 86-63. - Revocation of permit. 
    The mayor shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued hereunder upon a declaration of public emergency involving a serious threat to the health, safety, and welfare of the public; or upon a finding of a material change in circumstances in the standards for issuance of the permit as set forth in section 86-54. Revocation of a parade permit may be appealed in the manner provided by section 86-56. 
(Ord. No. 258, § 2(N(13)), 8-12-2004; Ord. No. 369, § 1, 9-25-2008; Ord. No. 448, § 1, 6-23-2011) 
Secs. 86-64-86-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 86-100. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in This article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Currently operable condition means presently capable of being lawfully operated on the streets and highways of this state; being currently registered with proper license plates displayed; having a current safety inspection; and being in running condition without the necessity of first being repaired such as, but not limited to, the inflating of tires or charging of the battery. 
    Hook-up shall mean the completed connection of chain hooks or the tie-down of wheels to a wheel lift, completing the connection of the tow truck to the vehicle to be towed, not to include the actual lifting of the vehicle to be towed. 
    Place maintained by any governmental entity means and includes, but is not limited to, a street, alley, highway, park or public parking area including the grounds of a public school. 
    State of good repair means the absence of such items as broken glass, substantial body damage (including, but not limited to, crushed or missing fenders, body panels, doors, hoods, or trunk deck) or missing parts otherwise necessary for operable condition. 
    Tow service shall mean a person engaged in the business of a wrecker or towing service, whereby motor vehicles are towed or otherwise removed at the direction of officers of the city police department by the use of a wrecker or motor vehicle designed for that purpose. 
    Vehicle means and includes a motor vehicle, trailer, wagon, boat or other similar item. 
    Vehicle storage facility means the city's designated vehicle impoundment lot. 
    Wrecked motor vehicle shall mean a motor vehicle not capable of, or safe for, self-propulsion. 
(Ord. No. 397, §§ 1-7, 3-12-2009; Ord. No. 555, § 1, 1-22-2015) 
Sec. 86-101. - Authority to impound vehicles. 
(a)  Any vehicle in violation of this article or the laws of the State of Texas may be towed to the city's impound lot. 
(b)  Vehicles constituting a public nuisance. The police chief or any Helotes police officer employed or contracted by the city may take into custody and impound any vehicle constituting a public nuisance. 
(c)  A motor vehicle may be impounded, with or without citation, without giving notice to its owner under the following circumstances: 
(1)  When the vehicle is impeding, or is likely to impede, the normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic; 
(2)  When, in the police officer's judgment, the vehicle poses an immediate danger to the public safety; 
(3)  When a Helotes police officer or other agent authorized by the city has probable cause to believe that the vehicle constitutes evidence of a crime or contains evidence of a crime, if impoundment is reasonably necessary to obtain or preserve such evidence; 
(4)  When the person driving, operating, or in physical control of the vehicle is taken into custody and the vehicle is impounded for safe keeping; 
(5)  When the vehicle is parked in a handicap zone when said vehicle does not properly display a handicapped parking permit; 
(6)  When the vehicle is parked in the right-of-way of the public roadways of the city, when such rights-of-way have signs posted in accordance with applicable state law stating that parking is prohibited in such rights-of-way; and 
(7)  When the vehicle is obstructing municipal emergency equipment. 
(8)  When the vehicle is stopped by a police officer for an alleged violation of a city or state traffic law or other law applicable to the operation of a vehicle on the roadway and the vehicle's owner or operator fails to show evidence of financial responsibility, as required under Chapter 601 of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended. 
(d)  Unattended vehicles in public places. No person shall allow a vehicle to remain unattended in any place maintained by any governmental entity for a period of time in excess of 48 hours. A peace officer or other city official designated to enforce parking laws and regulations may take into custody any vehicle found to be in violation of this subsection. Prior to taking a violating vehicle into custody, a notice of violation shall be securely attached to the vehicle for a minimum of forty-eight hours, specifying the violation, the date, the approximate time, and the location of the violation. 
(e)  No person shall park or allow a vehicle to remain in any place maintained by any governmental entity unless such vehicle is currently in operable condition or in a state of good repair. A peace officer or other city official designated to enforce parking laws and regulations may take into custody any vehicle found in violation of this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 397, §§ 1-7, 3-12-2009; Ord. No. 555, § 1, 1-22-2015) 
Sec. 86-102. - Notice of impoundment. 
    Within five business days after a vehicle has been impounded, the chief of police shall send written notice to the owner of the impounded vehicle at his or her last known address, as shown by the records of the department of public safety. If the owner is unknown to the chief of police or an address cannot be found, the chief of police shall publish, at least once in the city's official newspaper, notice of the impoundment, the license number of the vehicle, the motor vehicle number of the impounded vehicle, and the name and type of vehicle impounded. 
(Ord. No. 397, §§ 1-7, 3-12-2009; Ord. No. 555, § 1, 1-22-2015) 
Sec. 86-103. - Release of impounded vehicle. 
    Any motor vehicle towed and impounded may be claimed or recovered after payment to the city of all impound fees. 
(a)  Release to owner. Impounded motor vehicles shall be released by the police department or the operator of the police department's vehicle storage facility, after payment is made of any towing or storage charges or fees, and only upon receipt of one of the following: 
(1)  Submission of certificate of title or other satisfactory proof that the person applying for the release is the owner of the vehicle. 
(2)  Submission of the certificate of title and of a current power of attorney duly executed by the owner requesting release to the person named therein and presenting same. 
(b)  Release of impounded vehicle to lienholder. A motor vehicle which has not been claimed by the owner after ten days of impoundment (including the day the vehicle arrived at the storage facility) and after the mortgage note is 30 days delinquent, shall be released to the claimant identifying himself as lienholder or agent of the lienholder named on the certificate of title upon the submission of a surety bond from a city licensed corporate surety firm which shall indemnify, save and hold harmless the city from all damage, liability, costs, attorney's fees, expenses, actions, judgments and special proceedings that may arise, accrue or be brought against the city by reason of releasing the vehicle to the bonded vehicle claimant, up to the amount of the bond, and upon payment of towing charges and storage fees. 
(c)  The terms "motor vehicle," "lien," "owner," "mortgagee," "mortgagor," and "certificate of title" used herein shall have the same meanings as defined in Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6687-1. 
(d)  Nothing herein shall prevent the release of any motor vehicle by any person upon the service of an order or judgment directing such release by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 397, §§ 1-7, 3-12-2009; Ord. No. 555, § 1, 1-22-2015) 
Sec. 86-104. - Sale of vehicle. 
    If, after the expiration of 60 days after mailing or publishing required notices, the vehicle is not redeemed by the owner or the owner's agent, the city shall proceed to sell the impounded vehicle at public auction after first giving at least 20 days' notice of such sale by publication in the city's official newspaper of the time and place of the sale. The notice shall describe the vehicle to be sold, with reasonable certainty, by manufacturer's trade name or make, motor vehicle number, license number, and any other identifying information, and the notice shall state to whom, if anyone, the records of the department of public safety show the car belongs and, if the name of the owner is unknown, that fact shall be stated in the notice. If the name of the owner is known, the city shall send that person a copy of the published notice immediately after publication of the notice. The city shall credit any money it receives after the sale to the city's general fund. At any time within one year after the sale, if the former owner of the vehicle which has been sold appears, upon application to the city council and presentation of satisfactory proof that the person was the owner of the vehicle sold, that person shall be paid the proceeds of such sale, less the necessary expenses thereof, and less applicable towing, impounding, and storage charges. 
(Ord. No. 397, §§ 1-7, 3-12-2009; Ord. No. 555, § 1, 1-22-2015) 
Sec. 86-105. - Fees. 
    All fees shall be paid at the time the vehicle is released. The fees shall be as prescribed in the most recent adopted fee schedule, Section K, impound fees, as amended by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 397, §§ 1-7, 3-12-2009; Ord. No. 555, § 1, 1-22-2015) 
Sec. 86-106. - Towing company. 
    The city may remove, or contract with one or more towing companies to remove, a vehicle in accordance with This article. The city, its agents, and its employees shall not be responsible for any damage to the vehicle during towing and impoundment under This article or state law. 
(Ord. No. 397, §§ 1-7, 3-12-2009; Ord. No. 555, § 1, 1-22-2015) 
Secs. 86-107-86-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII - MOTOR-ASSISTED SCOOTERS 

Sec. 86-121. - Definitions. 
(a)  For purposes of this article, the term motor-assisted scooter shall mean the following, which is defined in Section 551.351 of the Texas Transportation Code (TTC) and is sometimes referred to as dock-less scooters or dock-less vehicles: 
a.  Motor-assisted scooter means a self-propelled device provided by persons or companies as rental units for compensation for use by a rider or consumer of services with at least two wheels in contact with the ground during operation that has: 
i.  A braking system capable of stopping the device under typical operating conditions; 
ii.  A gas or electric motor not exceeding 40 cubic centimeters; 
iii.  A deck designed to allow a person to stand or sit while operating the device; and 
iv.  The ability to be propelled by human power alone. 
b.  Privately owned motor-assisted scooter vehicles shall be exempt from section 86-122. 
( Ord. No. 19-06, § 1, 4-11-2019 ) 
Sec. 86-122. - Operation on roadways and sidewalks prohibited. 
    In accordance with Section 551.352 (b) of the Texas Transportation Code, the city council has determined that the operation of motor-assisted scooters on any sidewalk, street, or highway within the city limits shall be prohibited in the interest of safety. Any person who violates this section shall be subject to the penalty provisions contained within this article. 
( Ord. No. 19-06, § 1, 4-11-2019 ) 
Sec. 86-123. - Conflicts. 
    To the extent that any part of this article conflicts with Transportation Code Chapter 551, the Transportation Code shall apply to the extent of such conflict. 
( Ord. No. 19-06, § 1, 4-11-2019 ) 
Sec. 86-124. - Penalty. 
    A person convicted of an offense that is a class C misdemeanor under this article for which another penalty is not provided shall be punished by a fine of not less than $1.00 or more than $200.00. A person convicted for multiple violations of this article may be punished by a fine not less than $100.00 or more than $500.00. 
( Ord. No. 19-06, § 1, 4-11-2019 ) 
Chapter 90 - UTILITIES 
ARTICLE I. - WATER CONSERVATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Historical note- Ord. No. 312, § 2 (App. A), adopted August 10, 2006, repealed the former Art. I, §§ 90-31-90-33, and enacted a new Art. I as set out herein. The former Art. I pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 62A, §§ 1-3, adopted July 17, 1990. 

Sec. 90-1. - Water conservation plan adopted. 
    The city council hereby adopts a water conservation plan. 
(Ord. No. 312, § 2(App. A), 8-10-2006; Ord. No. 454, § 2, 8-25-2011) 
Sec. 90-2. - Violations; penalty. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, individual, corporation, or partnership to intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or negligently use water or allow or cause the use of water in violation of any provisions of the water conservation plan. Any person, individual, corporation, or partnership who shall violate any provision of this article shall be deemed upon conviction to be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $2,000.00, and each day such violation continues shall be a separate offense and punishable as such. 
(Ord. No. 312, § 2(App. A), 8-10-2006; Ord. No. 454, § 2, 8-25-2011) 
Sec. 90-3. - Mandatory conservation measures. 
(a)  The following conservation measures are mandatory year-round for all properties located within the City of Helotes when no aquifer management stage has been declared by the Edwards Aquifer Authority (the "authority") or the Trinity Glen Rose Groundwater Conservation district (the "district"). Properties serviced by San Antonio Water System ("SAWS") or by private or public wells within the authority shall be subject to aquifer management stages declared by the authority. Properties serviced by a public utility other than SAWS or private or public wells within the district shall be subject to aquifer management stages declared by the district. 
(1)  Year-round. 
a.  Water waste is prohibited at all times. Allowing water to run off into a gutter, ditch, or drain or failing to repair a controllable leak is considered water waste. 
b.  Residential, commercial, industrial, and agricultural Aquifer or district water users should use common sense and best practices to avoid water waste. 
c.  Landscape watering with an irrigation system or sprinkler is permitted any day of the week between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. 
d.  Hand watering with a hand-held hose, drip irrigation system, watering can, or bucket is permitted any time and any day. 
e.  Washing impervious cover, such as parking lots, driveways, streets or sidewalks is permitted, but should be done responsibly to avoid excessive runoff. 
f.  Non-commercial washing of vehicles and mobile equipment (e.g. washing vehicles at a residence) is permitted any time. Use of an automatic shut-off nozzle or bucket of five gallons or less is recommended to prevent water waste. 
g.  The use of commercial vehicle wash facilities is permitted any day. 
h.  Vehicle wash fundraisers shall be conducted at a vehicle wash facility with recycling capability using such facility's equipment. 
i.  Newly installed irrigation systems using pop-up spray or rotor technology shall not be used in landscape areas which have both: 
1.  dimensions less than five feet in length and/or width; and 
2.  impervious pedestrian or vehicular traffic surfaces along two or more perimeters. Where pop-up sprays and rotor heads are allowed in newly installed irrigation systems, they: 
(i)  must direct flow away from any adjacent impervious surface; and 
(ii)  shall not be placed within four inches of an impervious surface. 
j.  Newly installed ice machines shall not be single pass water-cooled. 
k.  Commercial dining facilities shall: 
1.  Utilize positive shut offs for hand-held dish-rinsing wands; and 
2.  Utilize water flow restrictors for all garbage disposals. 
l.  Vehicle wash facilities commencing operation or replacing wash technology and: 
1.  Using a conveyorized, touchless, and/or rollover in-bay technology shall reuse a minimum of 50 percent of water from previous vehicle rinses in subsequent washes; and/or 
2.  Using reverse osmosis to produce water rinse with lower mineral content, shall incorporate the unused concentrate in subsequent vehicle washes. 
m.  Regardless of the dates of operation commencement, self-service spray wands used shall emit no more than three gallons of water per minute. 
n.  Rain sensors shall be installed and maintained on all irrigation systems equipped with automatic irrigation controllers. 
o.  All in-ground irrigation systems shall be zonal irrigation systems. 
p.  All turfgrass installed during or associated with new construction: 
1.  Shall have summer dormancy capabilities; 
2.  Shall have a minimum of four inches of soil under the turfgrass; and 
3.  Drainage projects, utility projects, water and power utility projects, public property maintenance or repair and those governmental activities necessary to attain National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)/Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (TPDES) compliance with federal or state rules and regulations implementing the Clean Water Act shall not be deemed new construction for purposes of this subsection. 
q.  The use of treated wastewater or recycled water is a defense to prosecution under these rules. 
r.  Year-round restrictions continue until there is an announcement by the authority or district that Stage I is in effect for respective properties. 
(b)  The following conservation measures will become mandatory for all properties located within the City of Helotes at each aquifer management stage declared by the authority or district for respective properties located within the authority or district and in the manner identified within section 90-3(a) above. 
(1)  Stage I. 
a.  Water waste is prohibited at all times. Water waste includes allowing water to run off into a gutter, ditch, or drain or failing to repair a controllable leak. 
b.  Reduce water consumption by any means available. 
c.  All swimming pools and hot tubs must have a minimum of 25 percent of the surface area covered with evaporation screens when not in use. 
d.  Watering with a hand-held hose, soaker hose, drip irrigation system, bucket, or watering can is permitted any time and any day. 
e.  Watering with an irrigation system or sprinkler is allowed only once a week before 10:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m. on your designated watering day as determined by the last digit of your street address: 
0 or 1: Monday 
2 or 3: Tuesday 
4 or 5: Wednesday 
6 or 7: Thursday 
8 or 9: Friday 
No watering on weekends 
f.  Washing impervious cover, such as parking lots, driveways, streets or sidewalks is prohibited. Health and safety exceptions to this rule may be requested in writing from the City of Helotes City Administrator for consideration. 
g.  Residential washing of vehicles or other equipment is allowed only on assigned watering days and times. A hose with an automatic shut-off nozzle or bucket of five gallons or less may be used. Water should not be allowed to run into the street. 
h.  The use of commercial car wash facilities with water recycling capability is allowed any day. 
i.  Landscaped areas on golf courses, driving ranges, athletic fields, and/or parks not directly "in play" are required to follow one-day-per-week watering based on address, as indicated in subsection (b)(1)e of this section, unless otherwise instructed by the City of Helotes City Administrator. "In play" areas may be watered Monday thru Friday between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. 
j.  Newly-planted landscapes may qualify for a three-week exemption from the one-day-per-week watering rules. Property owners must mail, fax or e-mail their request 30 days prior to installation to the City of Helotes along with their name, address of the landscape, and date of installation. If your request is approved by the city administrator, you will receive a confirmation letter stating the duration of the permit. Over-seeding existing turf or other landscape is not considered new landscape and will not be given an exemption. 
k.  No water use restrictions are imposed on political subdivisions, public utilities, and essential uses, such as firefighting, medical uses, and healthcare facilities. Water for firefighting training is strongly discouraged. 
l.  Stage I restrictions continue until there is an announcement by the authority or district that Stage I has been canceled or that Stage II is in effect for respective properties. 
m.  The use of treated wastewater or recycled water is a defense to prosecution under these rules. 
(2)  Stage II. 
a.  All restrictions from Stage I. 
b.  Watering with a soaker hose, drip irrigation system, bucket, or watering can is permitted during the hours of 3:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m. any day. 
c.  Watering with a hand held hose is permitted any time and any day. 
d.  Watering with an irrigation system or sprinkler is allowed only once a week during the hours of 3:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m. on your designated watering day as determined by the last digit of your street address: 
0 or 1: Monday 
2 or 3: Tuesday 
4 or 5: Wednesday 
6 or 7: Thursday 
8 or 9: Friday 
No watering on weekends 
e.  Filling of new and existing swimming pools and hot tubs is prohibited unless at least 30 percent of the water is obtained from a source other than Aquifer or district. In addition, refilling is permitted only if the pool has been drained for repairs. 
f.  Landscaped areas on golf courses, driving ranges, athletic fields, and/or parks not directly "in play" are required to follow one-day-per-week watering based on address, as indicated in subsection (b)(2)d of this section, unless otherwise instructed by the City of Helotes. "In play" areas may be watered Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. 
g.  Residential washing of vehicles at a residence is permitted only on the assigned residential landscape watering day and time, as indicated in subsection (b)(2)d of this section. Use of commercial car washes is permitted any time and any day. 
h.  Stage II restrictions continue until there is an announcement by the authority or district that Stage II has been canceled or that Stage III is in effect for respective properties. 
i.  No water use restrictions are imposed on political subdivisions, public utilities, and essential uses, such as firefighting, medical uses, and healthcare facilities. Water for firefighting training is strongly discouraged. 
j.  The use of treated wastewater or recycled water is a defense to prosecution under these rules. 
(3)  Stage III. 
a.  All restrictions from Stage II. 
b.  Watering with a soaker hose, drip irrigation system, bucket, or watering can is permitted Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays during the hours of 3:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
c.  Watering with a hand held hose is permitted any time and any day. 
d  Watering with an irrigation system or sprinkler is allowed only once every other week beginning on the second Monday after Stage III has been declared by the authority or district for respective properties during the hours of 3:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m. on your designated watering day as determined by the last digit of your street address: 
0 or 1: Monday 
2 or 3: Tuesday 
4 or 5: Wednesday 
6 or 7: Thursday 
8 or 9: Friday 
No watering on weekends 
e.  Watering newly planted landscapes allowed only with a variance from the City of Helotes City Administrator. 
f.  Landscaped areas on golf courses, driving ranges, athletic fields, and/or parks not directly "in play" are allowed to water only once every other week beginning on the second Monday after Stage III has been declared by the authority or district for respective properties during the hours of 3:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m. on your designated watering day as determined by the last digit of your street address: 
0 or 1: Monday 
2 or 3: Tuesday 
4 or 5: Wednesday 
6 or 7: Thursday 
8 or 9: Friday 
No watering on weekends 
"In play" areas may be watered Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays between the hours of 3:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
g.  Residential washing of vehicles at a residence is permitted only on the assigned residential landscape watering day and time, as indicated in subsection (b)(3)d of this section. Use of commercial car washes is permitted any time and any day. 
h.  Water runoff onto streets is prohibited. 
i.  No water use restrictions are imposed on political subdivisions, public utilities, and essential uses, such as firefighting, medical uses, and healthcare facilities. Water for firefighting training is strongly discouraged. 
j.  Stage III restrictions continue until there is an announcement by the authority or district that Stage III has been cancelled or that Stage I or II is in effect for respective properties. 
k.  Stage III restrictions continue if there is an announcement by the authority or district that Stage IV is in effect for respective properties. 
l.  The use of treated wastewater or recycled water is a defense to prosecution under these rules. 
(Ord. No. 312, § 2(App. A), 8-10-2006; Ord. No. 454, § 2, 8-25-2011) 
Historical note- Ord. No. 312, § 2 (App. A), adopted August 10, 2006, repealed the former Art. I, §§ 90-31-90-33, and enacted a new Art. I as set out herein. The former Art. I pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 62A, §§ 1-3, adopted July 17, 1990. 
Chapter 94 - VEGETATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Historical note- Ord. No. 376 adopted Oct. 9, 2008 amended ch. 94 in its entirety. Ord. No. 275, adopted Feb. 10, 2005, amended ch. 94 in its entirety. Formerly such provisions derived from Ord. No. 237, adopted May 22, 2003; and Ord. No. 268, adopted Oct. 14, 2004. 

ARTICLE I. - COMMERCIAL AND RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION TREE PRESERVATION 

Sec. 94-1. - Purpose. 
(a)  This article implements the following provisions of the Helotes Master Plan: 
(1)  Preserves the neighborhood character of Helotes; 
(2)  Improves the quality of living for Helotes citizens; 
(3)  Preserves and enhances the rural atmosphere of Helotes; 
(4)  Responsibly protects the natural environmental resources of Helotes; 
(5)  Preserves the rugged beauty and natural environment that defines the Hill Country character of Helotes and makes it a unique and desirable community; and 
(6)  Prevents the clear-cutting of land. 
(Ord. No. 376, § 1, 10-9-2008) 
Sec. 94-2. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following phrases, terms, words, and their derivation shall have the meanings given in this section. 
    Caliper. The diameter of a tree four feet above the natural grade, measured with a tree caliper instrument or a flexible tape. If a tape is used, the circumference of the tree should be measured and the result divided by 3.14 to determine the diameter. 
    Categories of tree preservation. The designations "large tree species," "small tree species," and "heritage" are established for the purposes of applying the requirements of this chapter. See Table 1.0 for tree preservation categories and preservation rates. 
    City administrator. The person appointed by the city council to administer city ordinances related to land development. The city administrator is expected to consult with experts, as necessary, to carry out the provisions of this chapter. 
    City arborist. The person(s) appointed by the city council to implement and enforce provisions of this chapter as requested by the city administrator. A professional arborist certified and/or degreed in horticulture, forestry or a closely related field with expertise in forestry, landscape design, and tree preservation. reviews, implements, and enforces this chapter, landscaping requirements, tree surveys, landscaping plans, irrigation plans, and tree preservation plans. Inspects, on behalf of the city, parcels to determine compliance with city requirements. 
    Commercial development. All commercial (industrial, office, multifamily, institutional, and retail) property to be developed or redeveloped, including additions and alterations to the structure or outdoor areas, such as parking lots or driveways. 
    Covered species. Any existing living tree of any species or type, as defined in Table 1.0 "Protected Tree Preservation Categories and Preservation Rates." 
    Dripline. The area of ground surrounding the trunk of a tree considered essential to protecting the root structure of a tree. For the purposes of this chapter, the dripline shall be calculated at one foot for every one inch of caliper width measured at four feet above natural grade level. Construction may encroach into the dripline area of a tree, provided that alternative construction methods for protecting a tree are approved by the city arborist. 
    Multi-trunk tree. A tree having two or more trunks arising from the root collar or main trunk. 
    Preservation rate. The amount of total inches or area-if using the tree stand delineation method-to be preserved onsite and shall be calculated for each category and not as a whole. 
Example: Total protected "Large Tree Species" inches onsite = 10,000; Preservation rate = 40%; 10,000 × 40% = 4,000 inches shall be preserved. 
Example: Total protected "Small Tree Species" inches onsite = 1,000; Preservation rate = 40%; 1,000 × 40% = 400 inches shall be preserved. 
Example: Total "Heritage" inches onsite = 1,000; Preservation rate = 60%; 1,000 × 60% = 600 inches shall be preserved. 
    Protected tree. Trees that, by virtue of their size or species, are protected by this chapter. 
(1)  Large tree species. Trees of a covered species. See Table 1.0. 
(2)  Small tree species. Trees of designated small tree species. See Table 1.0. 
(3)  Heritage tree. Any protected large tree species that is greater than a 24-inch caliper trunk and any protected small tree species that is greater than an eight-inch caliper trunk. See Table 1.0. 
(4)  Non-protected tree. Any living tree that the city arborist certifies in writing is injured, dying, diseased, or infested with harmful insects; that is in danger of falling, interferes with utility service, or creates unsafe vision clearance; or, in any manner, creates a hazardous or dangerous condition so as to endanger the public health, welfare, or safety, is not a Protected Tree. 
    Residential subdivision development project. Any and all real property meeting the definition of subdivision as set forth in Code section 78-34 which has been platted for single-family home construction. 
    Root protection zone (RPZ). The area around the base of a tree in which limited construction may take place. 
    Tree stand delineation. An alternative to the standards tree survey methodology. This option can be used in lieu of an "on-the-ground" tree survey required for the tree preservation and removal permit. This methodology uses a current aerial photograph and overlays the proposed development onto a photograph to determine the tree preservation rate, as described in Table 1.0. Heritage trees shall be shown on the plan only if they fall within the proposed development. 
TABLE 1.0 
PROTECTED TREE PRESERVATION CATEGORIES AND PRESERVATION RATES Covered Species "Large Tree Species" are any existing living tree of any species or type, excluding the following: "Small Tree Species" are as follows: Preservation Requirement Ashe Juniper (Cedar), smaller than 10" caliper 
Athel Tamarisk 
Brazilian Peppertree 
Chinaberry 
Chinese Elm 
Chinese Tallow 
Cottonwood 
Desert Willows 
Five Stamen Tamarisk 
French Tamarisk 
Hackberry, smaller than 10" caliper 
Japanese Ligustrum 
Salt Cedar Tamarisk 
Siberian Elm 
Tallowtree 
Tree of Heaven 
Willow Species other than Desert Willows Condalia 
Mexican Redbud 
Mountain Laurel 
Possomhaw 
Texas Crab Apple/ 
Downy Hawthorn 
Texas Persimmon 
Texas Redbud N/A Protected Category Large Tree Species (other than Ashe Juniper or Hackberry) that are: 
6" to 24" caliper Small Tree Species that are: 
5" to 8" caliper 40% of the total protected inches or area, if alternative tree stand option used Ashe Juniper and Hackberry: 
10" caliper or greater Heritage Category Large Tree Species that are: 
Greater than 24" caliper Any Small Tree Species that are: 
Greater than 8" caliper 60% of the total protected inches or area, if alternative tree stand option used 100 Year Floodplain Category All Protected and Heritage Category Trees All Protected and Heritage Category Trees 80% of the total protected inches or area, if alternative tree delineation stand option used  
(Ord. No. 376, § 1, 10-9-2008; Ord. No. 553, § 1, 1-8-2015) 
Sec. 94-3. - Applicability. 
(a)  Commercial and residential subdivision developments within the city's corporate limits and its extraterritorial jurisdiction are subject to the tree removal, preservation, and/or pruning restrictions and permitting requirements established within this ordinance. 
(b)  Oak wilt restrictions and permit requirements contained within section 94-6, tree pruning restrictions, shall apply to all real property within the city's corporate limits and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(c)  All professional tree care or landscaping companies shall obtain a permit from the city prior to any tree trimming, de-mossing, or tree removal within the city's corporate limits and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 376, § 1, 10-9-2008) 
Sec. 94-4. - Exceptions. 
    The following authorized exceptions from the terms and provisions of this article shall apply: 
(1)  In the event that any protected or heritage tree is determined by the city arborist to be in a hazardous or dangerous condition so as to endanger the public health, welfare, or safety, written authorization for removal may be given by the city arborist and such Protected or heritage tree may then be removed. 
(2)  During the period of an emergency, such as a tornado, storm, flood, or other act of God, the requirements of this article may be waived by the city council for the affected area or areas. 
(3)  All licensed plant or tree nurseries shall be exempt from the terms and provisions of this article only in relation to those trees planted and growing on the premises of said licensee, that are so planted and growing for the sale or intended sale to the general public in the ordinary course of said licensed business. 
(4)  Utility companies franchised or otherwise authorized to provide utility service may prune or remove protected or heritage trees that endanger public health, safety, and welfare by interfering with utility service, provided that the removal is the minimum necessary for the utilities to function properly and no other alternative is available. 
(5)  The mowing, clearing, and grubbing of brush located within or under the drip lines of protected or heritage trees shall be allowed, provided such mowing, clearing, or grubbing is not implemented by use the of bulldozers, loaders, or other construction or earth moving equipment. 
(6)  Areas contained within public and private rights-of-way or utility or drainage easements, provided that the applicant demonstrates that the removal is necessary for the rights-of-way and easements to function properly. 
(7)  All municipal functions and activities of the City of Helotes are exempt from the application, terms, and provisions of this chapter. 
(8)  Exempt from such restrictions and permit requirements are: 
a.  Non-contiguous established single-family, owner- or lessee-occupied housing, three acres or less, platted or unplatted, located within a district zoned residential; 
b.  Non-contiguous vacant single-family residential lots, three acres or less, platted or unplatted, located within a district zoned residential; 
c.  Items 94-4(8)(a) or (b) greater than three acres, platted or unplatted, within a subdivision regulated by deed restrictions prohibiting subdivision of real property. 
(Ord. No. 376, § 1, 10-9-2008) 
Sec. 94-5. - Permit for tree preservation and removal. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to provide a review process to preserve the existing natural environment, whenever possible, and to encourage the preservation of trees throughout construction and/or development. Commercial and residential subdivision developments within the city's corporate limits and its extraterritorial jurisdiction are subject to the tree removal, preservation, and/or pruning restrictions and permit requirements established within this article. 
(b)  Permit information. The information required for a tree preservation and removal permit is located on the tree preservation and removal permit application. 
(c)  Original tree survey. The tree survey submitted with the original application for a tree preservation and removal permit shall be the reference by which all subsequent tree removal permits for the tract(s) or portions of the tract(s) are reviewed. An applicant shall not circumvent the minimum preservation requirements set forth in this article through the filing of multiple tree removal applications. 
(Ord. No. 376, § 1, 10-9-2008) 
Sec. 94-6. - Tree pruning restrictions. 
(a)  Applicability. Tree pruning restrictions shall apply to all real property within the city's corporate limits and it's extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(b)  Required pruning. The city shall have the right to prune overhanging trees which interfere with the visibility of any traffic control device, sign, or roadway, as necessary, to preserve the public safety. 
(c)  Tree topping. It shall be unlawful for any commercial or residential subdivision development or utility company to severely cut back limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree without the city arborist's approval. 
(d)  Branch/root pruning and wounded trees. All broken branches and exposed roots one-half-inch in diameter or greater of any protected, heritage, or replacement tree shall be cut cleanly. In the case of oak species susceptible to oak wilt, wounds must be painted with an acceptable wound dressing within 30 minutes from the time of cutting. 
(e)  Oak wilt. Trimming or cutting of any oak tree susceptible to oak wilt is prohibited within the corporate limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Helotes from the first day of February to the last day of May. Permission, however, may be granted to any entity wishing to trim or cut an oak tree susceptible to oak wilt during the prohibited months, provided that the entity contracts with a licensed professional tree care or landscaping company. The professional tree care or landscaping company shall obtain a permit from the city prior to any tree trimming, de-mossing, or removal in the city. In the case of oak species susceptible to oak wilt, wounds must be painted with an acceptable wound dressing within 30 minutes from the time of cutting. All trimming tools shall be cleaned with a disinfectant after each use to prevent spreading of the disease. 
(Ord. No. 376, § 1, 10-9-2008) 
Sec. 94-7. - Protected and heritage trees: removal, replacement, relocation, and penalties. 
(a)  Removal of protected and heritage trees. No commercial or residential subdivision development, directly or indirectly, shall cut down, destroy, remove, or effectively destroy through damaging, any protected or heritage tree within the City of Helotes or extraterritorial jurisdiction without first obtaining a tree preservation and removal permit. 
(b)  Replacement Trees. Should the required tree preservation percentage fall below the required percentage threshold, it shall be the responsibility of any person obtaining a tree preservation and removal permit for a protected tree to provide replacement tree(s) having a total caliper width equal to that of the trees to be removed. Further, it shall be the responsibility of any person obtaining a tree preservation and removal permit for a heritage tree to provide replacement tree(s) having a total caliper width equal to three times that of the trees to be removed. In considering a mitigation method, the city arborist shall weigh the value of established smaller trees, clumps of trees, and natural vegetation that could be retained to meet the requirements of this article and landscape regulations so that the addition of replacement trees may not be required. 
(1)  Such replacement trees shall: 
a.  Have a minimum caliper width of two inches; and 
b.  Have a minimum height of at least eight feet when planted. 
(2)  No more than 35 percent of replacement trees may be of the same species. 
(3)  A replacement tree that dies within one year of the date it was planted must be replaced by another tree , and a new one year warranty period shall start for that tree. 
(c)  Mitigation in lieu of replacement. Mitigation may be paid to the City of Helotes instead of providing replacement trees required by this article. 
(1)  This provision is limited to 50 percent of the required protected and heritage tree replacement. 
(2)  Any such payments shall be deposited to the tree mitigation and replacement fund. 
(3)  The per-caliper-inch cash value for replacement trees and planting is $150.00 per caliper inch. 
(d)  Penalties for unauthorized removal of protected and heritage trees. If any protected or heritage trees are removed or injured by a commercial or residential subdivision development and such removal or injury constitutes a violation of this article, the city shall have the authority to enact the following administrative and civil penalties on the property owner: 
(1)  A monetary penalty of $500.00 per caliper inch of each protected or heritage tree removed or injured. Fines paid to the City of Helotes as penalties shall be deposited into the tree mitigation and replacement fund. 
(2)  Replacement with tree(s) having a total tree caliper equal to five times that of the illegally removed or injured tree(s). Such replacement trees shall each have a minimum caliper width of four inches and a minimum height of at least nine feet. 
(e)  Replanting of protected and heritage trees. No commercial or residential subdivision development, directly or indirectly, shall move any protected or heritage tree on or from any real property within the City of Helotes without first obtaining a tree preservation and removal permit. 
(f)  Replanting standards. Only those trees meeting the applicable Texas Association of Nurserymen Grades and Standards, as reviewed and approved by the city arborist, shall satisfy the tree replanting requirements contained herein. 
(Ord. No. 376, § 1, 10-9-2008) 
Sec. 94-8. - Tree protection measures. 
    The following tree protection measures shall be required: 
(a)  Prior to commercial or residential subdivision development, property owners shall establish and maintain a root protection zone and install four-foot high plastic (or equivalent) safety fencing outside the drip line of protected and heritage trees for the duration of construction and development. Trees shall not be pruned to reduce the root protection zone. 
(b)  During construction or development of commercial or residential subdivision developments, the property owner shall prohibit the cleaning of equipment or materials and/or the disposal of any waste material, including, but not limited to, paint, oil, solvents, asphalt, concrete, mortar, etc. under the canopy or within the drip line of any protected or heritage tree. 
(c)  No attachments or wires of any kind, other than those of a protective nature, shall be attached to any tree during construction or development of commercial or residential subdivision developments. 
(d)  With major grade changes of six inches or greater resulting from placement of fill material, a retaining wall or tree well of rock, brick, landscape timbers, or other approved materials shall be constructed around the tree no closer than six feet from the trunk of protected or heritage trees during construction or development of commercial or residential subdivision developments. The top of the retaining wall or tree well shall be at the new finished grade. 
(e)  Unless otherwise approved by the city arborist, no commercial or residential subdivision development construction or construction-related activity shall occur within the drip line of any protected or heritage tree. 
(f)  Any trees removed during commercial or residential subdivision development shall be chipped or hauled off-site within 30 days of the time the trees were removed. 
(Ord. No. 376, § 1, 10-9-2008) 
Sec. 94-9. - Penalty upon failure to comply. 
(a)  In addition to any penalties specified elsewhere in this article, any person violating or failing to comply with any provision or requirement of this article shall be fined a minimum of $250.00 and a maximum of the replacement cost of the tree, as determined by the municipal court. Each tree illegally removed or damaged shall constitute a separate offense. If the precise caliper of a tree cannot be determined, the cost of replacement shall be established by the city arborist based upon his or her estimate of the total caliper inches of the removed or damaged tree(s). 
(b)  Failure of any party to follow the procedures of this article shall constitute grounds for withholding or revoking site plan approval, building permits, occupancy permits, or any other appropriate approvals necessary to continue development. Such sanctions, however, may be instituted immediately at the direction of the city administrator after consultation with the city attorney. The city administrator shall inform the mayor of all actions taken pursuant to this subsection and present the matter to the city council without delay. In the case of emergency to prevent the unauthorized removal of trees, the mayor may direct the city attorney to petition a court of competent jurisdiction for injunctive relief directing compliance with this subsection. 
(c)  In addition to any other remedies or penalties contained herein, the city may enforce the provisions of this article pursuant to the applicable provisions of Chapter 54 of the Texas Local Government Code, which chapter provides for the enforcement of municipal ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 376, § 1, 10-9-2008) 
Sec. 94-10. - Jurisdiction. 
(a)  To ensure compatibility with the master plan and this article, the city arborist shall have the authority to review and act on all tree preservation and removal permits for commercial and residential subdivision developments within the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ). Plans shall be approved, approved with conditions, or denied. The city arborist shall provide comments to the property owner or designated representative as to the disposition of each tree preservation and removal permit application. 
(b)  Appeal to city council. Any applicant or party aggrieved by a decision of the city arborist, city administrator, or municipal employee may appeal such decision to the city council. Such notice of appeal must be filed with the city administrator within ten working days of the decision in question. Such appeal shall stay the issuance of a building permit and shall be placed on the agenda for the next regular or special city council meeting. The board of adjustment shall be without jurisdiction to hear or decide any appeal authorized by this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 376, § 1, 10-9-2008) 
Sec. 94-11. - Enforcement. 
    The city arborist, city administrator, and code compliance officer are hereby charged with the responsibility for the enforcement of this article and may serve notice to any person in violation thereof or institute legal proceedings, as may be required. The city attorney is hereby authorized to institute appropriate proceedings to that end. 
(Ord. No. 376, § 1, 10-9-2008) 
Sec. 94-12. - Variances. 
(a)  Variances to any decision of the city arborist, city administrator, code compliance officer, municipal employee, or to the terms of this article may be granted by the city council where a literal enforcement of the provisions of this article will result in unnecessary hardship. A variance request must be submitted to the city administrator in writing setting out the basis for the request. No variance shall be granted unless: 
(1)  Such variance will not be contrary to public interest; 
(2)  Such variance will be in harmony with the spirit and purposes of this article; 
(3)  The plight of the owner of the property for which the variance is sought is due to unique circumstances existing on the property, and the unique circumstances were not created by the owner of the property and are not merely financial; and 
(4)  The variance will not substantially weaken the general purposes of this article. 
(b)  After review of the variance request, the city council may: 
(1)  Approve the variance; or 
(2)  Deny the variance; or 
(3)  Grant the variance with such conditions as may be necessary for the furtherance of the purposes of municipal tree preservation in keeping with the spirit and intent of the ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 376, § 1, 10-9-2008) 
Sec. 94-13. - Liability. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to impose any liability for damages or a duty of care and maintenance upon the city or upon any of its officers or employees. The person in possession of public property or the owner of any private property shall have a duty to keep the trees and landscaping upon the property and under their control in a safe, healthy condition. Any person who feels a tree located on property possessed, owned, or controlled by them is a danger to the safety of themselves, others, or structural improvements on-site or off-site shall have an obligation to secure the area around the tree or support the tree, as appropriate to safeguard both persons and improvements from harm. 
(Ord. No. 376, § 1, 10-9-2008) 
Secs. 94-14-94-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COMMERCIAL AND RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 94-21. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide requirements and standards for the installation and maintenance of landscaping elements and site improvements; to provide visual buffering and enhance the beautification of the City of Helotes; to safeguard and enhance property values and to protect public and private investment; to preserve and protect the unique identity and environment of the City of Helotes and preserve the economic base attracted to the City of Helotes by such factors; and to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 376, § 1, 10-9-2008) 
Sec. 94-22. - Applicability. 
(a)  Commercial and residential subdivision developments within the city's corporate limits and its extraterritorial jurisdiction are subject to the landscaping and irrigation requirements established within this article. 
(b)  A common commercial or residential subdivision development that includes more than one lot shall be treated as one lot for the purposes of satisfying the landscaping requirements of this article. Split ownership, planning in phases, construction in stages, and/or multiple building permits for a project (i.e. apartments) shall not prevent it from being a common development, as referred to above. Each phase of a project shall comply with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 376, § 1, 10-9-2008) 
Sec. 94-23. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following phrases, terms, words, and their derivation shall have the meanings given in this section: 
    Berm. An earthen mound designed to provide visual interest, screen undesirable views, and/or decrease noise levels. 
    Buffering. The use of landscaping in conjunction with berms, walls, or decorative fences that, at least partially and periodically, obstruct the view from the street in a continuous manner of vehicular use areas, parking lots, their parked cars, and detention ponds. 
    Caliper. The diameter of a tree four foot above the natural grade, measured with a tree caliper instrument or a flexible tape. If a tape is used, the circumference of the tree should be measured and the result divided by 3.14 to determine the diameter. 
    Commercial development. All commercial (industrial, office, multifamily, institutional, retail) property to be developed or redeveloped, including additions and alterations to the structure or outdoor areas, such as parking lots or driveways. 
    Drip-line. The area of ground surrounding the trunk of a tree considered essential to protecting the root structure of a tree. For the purposes of this chapter, the dripline shall be calculated at one foot for every one inch of caliper width measured at four feet above natural grade level. Construction may encroach into the dripline area of a tree, provided that alternative construction methods for protecting a tree are approved by the city arborist. 
    Irrigation. An in-ground irrigation system consisting of water lines, water emitters, and a controller that is professionally designed by an irrigator licensed by the State of Texas to meet the requirements of the plant material installed. (Project may require a separate meter service if San Antonio Water System is the water purveyor). 
    Landscaping. Any live plant material, such as trees, shrubs, ground cover, and grass, used in spaces void of any impervious material, building structure, or areas left in their natural state. 
    Loading area, service area, outdoor storage area. Area which is used for trash or garbage collection, vehicular loading and unloading, outdoor storage or repair, or for covered storage where the structure has no walls to screen views. 
    Owner. The person who holds legal title to a property or a lessee, agent, employee, or other person acting on behalf of the titleholder with authorization to develop the lot or property in question. 
    Pervious. The ability of a substance or material to allow the passage of water through the substance or material. Pervious pavers shall be considered pervious cover. 
    Plant material. Living trees, shrubs, vines, ground covers, sod, and/or flowering annuals, biennials, and perennials. 
    Residential subdivision development project. Any and all real property meeting the definition of Subdivision as set forth in Code chapter 78 which has been platted for single-family home construction. 
    Root protection zone (RPZ). The area around the base of a tree in which limited construction may take place. 
    Street. The public right-of-way that provides primary vehicular access to adjacent land or areas. 
    Wall or fence. An artificially constructed barrier of posts connected by boards, rails, panels, or wire and erected for the purpose of enclosing space to separate parcels of land or to screen or enclose areas of land. 
(Ord. No. 376, § 1, 10-9-2008) 
Sec. 94-24. - General requirements. 
(a)  Installation . All landscape materials shall be healthy nursery stock installed according to American Association of Nurserymen (AAN) standards. Irrigation systems shall comply with the requirements of 30 TAC Chapter 344, §§ 344.72-344.77 and specific requirements set forth in this article. 
(b)  Requirements for commercial and residential subdivision developments and standalone parking lots. 
(1)  Minimum planting requirements. 
a.  Parking lot shading. To reduce the thermal impact of un-shaded parking lots, trees shall be planted throughout parking lots so that no portion of the lot is more than 50 feet away from the trunk of a tree, unless otherwise approved by the city arborist. Planting areas shall be a minimum of nine feet by 18 feet. The use of existing trees to meet this requirement is encouraged. 
b.  Perimeter shading. Plant material shall consist of a minimum of one tree for every ten parking spaces. Trees shall be a minimum of two-inch caliper and eight feet tall at the time of planting. Planted areas along the front lot lines shall be a minimum of eight feet wide, of which two feet may be located in the right of way if it does not interfere with sidewalks or the placement of utilities. The use of existing trees to meet this requirement is always encouraged. 
c.  Screening of parking lot. Minimum planting shall consist of: 
1.  A compact hedge of five-gallon size plants having a minimum mature height of three feet and planted in a density of one plant for every 20 square feet; or 
2.  A continuous three-foot-high wall set back from the sidewalk. The area between the sidewalk and wall shall be planted with shrubs, grasses, or other continuous vegetative groundcover. 
d.  Buffering. Any commercial project abutting a residentially zoned property shall install a buffer which adequately protects future or existing tenants/home owners. The buffer shall consist of: 
1.  a buffer zone of an opaque fence with a minimum height of eight feet lined with Large Species Trees spaced at a minimum of twenty feet apart. Trees shall be a minimum of two-inch caliper and eight feet in height at time of planting. Trees shall be planted in planting areas of at least four feet in width along the entire length of the property. 
2.  A buffer zone of 100 feet; or 
3.  A buffer zone of a street plus 40 feet. 
e.  Pervious surfaces. Areas of the site that are not occupied by buildings, impervious parking surfaces, or accessory structures must have ground cover. Ground cover includes low growing, living plant materials, such as perennials, grass, ivy, and similar plants. 
f.  Streetscape. Construction and renovation plans for commercial sites must include street tree plantings planted no greater than 15 foot on center or spacing otherwise established by the city for the street on which the plantings will be made. Trees shall be a minimum of two-inch caliper and eight feet in height at time of planting. 
(2)  Minimum construction requirements. 
a.  Adequate aeration inserts shall be provided where paving will extend over expanding root systems within the maximum anticipated drip line. 
b.  All planting beds containing shrubs or ground cover shall be top dressed with a two-inch minimum layer of mulch for water conservation. 
c.  Vehicles may not overhang the minimum required planting areas. 
d.  All solid waste storage facilities shall be enclosed on three sides by a sight-obscuring fence or wall and by a sight-obscuring gate on the remaining side. 
e.  Any permitted outside storage of merchandise shall be enclosed by a sight obscuring fence, wall, or gate. 
f.  Screening around all loading, service, and/or outdoor storage areas that will be visible from a public right-of-way shall be required in all districts other than a rural or residential district. The screening may be located anywhere on the property, subject to other provisions of this article. 
g.  Irrigation systems shall be required for all new commercial and residential subdivision developments. Landscaped areas shall be irrigated with a system that is suitable for the type of plantings installed. Irrigation plans shall be submitted with landscaping plans for approval by the city arborist prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(Ord. No. 376, § 1, 10-9-2008) 
Sec. 94-25. - Alternative landscape plans/methods. 
(a)  Alternative landscaping plans, plant materials, or planting methods may be used where unreasonable or impractical situations would result from the literal application of landscaping requirements or where necessary to protect existing vegetation. These landscaping requirements may be reduced if existing trees or other types of existing vegetation are preserved. Alternative plans, materials, or methods may be justified using natural conditions, such as streams, natural rock formations, topography, physical conditions related to the site, lot configuration, or utility easements. 
(b)  The city arborist shall consider alternative landscape plans, materials, or methods to determine whether proposed plans meet the intent of this article, and he/she shall have the authority to approve alternatives. 
(Ord. No. 376, § 1, 10-9-2008) 
Sec. 94-26. - Landscape/irrigation requirements at time of building permit application. 
(a)  Application review. Upon receipt of a complete landscaping and irrigation application, the city arborist shall review the application for compliance with the provisions of this article. Said review may include a field inspection of the site by the city arborist prior to the issuance of a permit. Following review and inspection, the permit application shall be approved, disapproved, or approved with conditions by the city arborist in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Permit. No building permit shall be issued until the city arborist has reviewed and approved the landscaping and irrigation plan(s). 
(c)  Inspection. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the project, the city arborist may inspect the landscape and irrigation system and certify that the site meets the requirements of this article and conforms to the approved site plan and/or landscape and irrigation plans. The property owner must have the approved plan(s) on site for inspection. 
(Ord. No. 376, § 1, 10-9-2008) 
Sec. 94-27. - Maintenance requirements. 
    Replacement. All landscaping and/or new or replacement trees shall be maintained for the life of the project. Should a tree die or be removed for which credit was obtained pursuant to the terms of this article, such landscaping and trees shall be replaced. Dead or damaged landscaping and trees shall be replaced with new, live plants within one month after notification by the city or during the next planting season if not possible at the time of notification. If plants are not replaced within the specified time limit, the owner shall be in violation of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 376, § 1, 10-9-2008) 
Sec. 94-28. - Violation. 
    It shall be a violation of this article for any person to intentionally or knowingly perform any regulated activity in a manner that does not conform to the requirements of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 376, § 1, 10-9-2008) 
Sec. 94-29. - Jurisdiction. 
(a)  To ensure compatibility with this article, the city arborist shall have the authority to review and act on all landscaping plans for commercial and residential subdivision developments in the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ). When plans are approved, approved with conditions, or denied, the city arborist shall issue a letter of compliance for each application. 
(b)  Appeal to city council. Any applicant or party aggrieved by a decision of the city arborist, city administrator, or municipal employee may appeal such decision to the city council. Such notice of appeal must be filed with the city administrator within ten working days of the decision in question. Such appeal shall stay the issuance of a building permit and shall be placed on the agenda for the next regular or special city council meeting. 
(Ord. No. 376, § 1, 10-9-2008) 
Sec. 94-30. - Enforcement. 
    The city arborist, city administrator, and code compliance officer are hereby charged with the responsibility for the enforcement of this article and may serve notice to any person in violation thereof or institute legal proceedings as may be required. The city attorney is hereby authorized to institute appropriate proceedings to that end. 
(Ord. No. 376, § 1, 10-9-2008) 
Sec. 94-31. - Variances. 
(a)  Variances to any decision of the city arborist, city administrator, code compliance officer, or municipal employee to the terms of this article may be granted by the city council where a literal enforcement of the provisions of this article will result in unnecessary hardship. A variance request must be submitted to the city administrator in writing setting out the basis for the request. No variance can be granted unless: 
(1)  Such variance will not be contrary to public interest; 
(2)  Such variance will be in harmony with the spirit and purposes of this article; 
(3)  The plight of the owner of the property for which the variance is sought is due to unique circumstances existing on the property, and the unique circumstances were not created by the owner of the property and are not merely financial; and 
(4)  The variance will not substantially weaken the general purposes of this article. 
(b)  After review of the variance request, the city council may: 
(1)  Approve the variance; or 
(2)  Deny the variance; or 
(3)  Grant the variance with such conditions as may be necessary for the furtherance of the purposes of landscape preservation in keeping with the spirit and intent of the ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 376, § 1, 10-9-2008) 
Chapter 98 - ZONING 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 98-1. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as "The City of Helotes, Texas, Zoning Code." 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. I, § 1), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-2. - Enacting clause. 
    This chapter amends in their entirety Ordinance No. 14, passed and approved July 8, 1982, and any subsequent amendments, Ordinance No. 150, passed and approved April 26, 2001, and Ordinance No. 238, passed and approved June 12, 2003, and any subsequent amendments, also known as former chapter 152 of the City of Helotes Code of Ordinances, through the date this chapter is enacted. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. I, § 2), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-3. - Purpose. 
    The zoning regulations and districts as herein established have been made in accordance with a comprehensive plan for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, and general welfare of the city. They have been designed to lessen the congestion in the streets; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; and to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks, and other public requirements. They have been made with reasonable consideration, among other things, for the character of the district and its peculiar suitability for the particular uses specified, and with a view to conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the city consistent with a comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. I, § 3), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-4. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Definitions not expressly prescribed herein are to be constFor the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Definitions not expressly prescribed herein are to be construed in accordance with customary usage in municipal planning and engineering practices. 
    Abutting property. Property abutting upon a street shall be understood as also abutting property on the other side of the street. 
    Accessory building means a subordinate building with or without separate utilities, the use of which is incidental to and used only in conjunction with the main building. An accessory building shall not be used for habitation or for commercial purposes. An accessory building shall be subject to the Total Lot Coverage Maximum Permitted definition established herein. 
When an accessory building is detached from the main building, but connected to the building by a covered breezeway constructed solely for aesthetic attachment purposes, the breezeway shall not be considered part of the detached accessory building. An accessory building, including a covered breezeway, must be architecturally compatible with the main building on the property. 
    Agent means a person authorized by another to act for him; one entrusted with another's business. 
    Alley means a minor public right-of-way not intended to provide the primary means of access to abutting lots, which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or sides of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
    Alteration , as applied to a building or structure, means a change or rearrangement in the structural parts or an enlargement, whether by extending on a side or by increasing in height, or the moving from one location or position to another. 
    Architecturally Compatible means that the building and/or structure is constructed of similar exterior building materials and in the same style as the main building/structure, so as to provide an image of continuity in the buildings on a single piece of property. 
    Associated Living Quarters (ALQs) means a subordinate building with or without separate utilities, the use of which is incidental to the main building and used for habitation. ALQs shall not be used for commercial or rental purposes. When an ALQ is detached from the main building, but connected to the building by a covered breezeway constructed solely for aesthetic attachment purposes, the breezeway shall not be considered part of the detached ALQ. ALQs, including covered breezeways, must be architecturally compatible with the main building on the property. An ALQ shall be subject to the Total Lot Coverage Maximum Permitted definition established herein. 
    Automobile and motor vehicle sales area means an open area, other than a street or required automobile parking space, used for the display or sale of new or used automobiles or trailers, and where no repair work is done except minor incidental repair of automobiles or trailers to be displayed and sold on the premises. 
    Babysitting means the caring for nine or fewer non-resident children on an irregular basis. 
    Billboard means any sign of advertisement used as an outdoor display for the purpose of making anything known, the origin or point of sale of which is remote for said display. 
    Block means an area within the city enclosed by streets or alleys and occupied by or intended for building. 
    Breezeway means a covered passage one story in height connecting two buildings. 
    Buffer zone means that portion of an open space that separates residential districts from industrial and commercial districts. 
    Building means any enclosed structure erected for the support, shelter, and enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or moveable property of any kind. 
    Building inspector or official means the legally designated inspection authority of the city, or the authorized representative. 
    Building line means a building limit fixed at a specific distance from the property boundaries of a lot beyond which a structure cannot lawfully extend. 
    Building, main , means an enclosed structure in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated. 
    Building setback line means the line within a property defining the minimum horizontal distance between a building and the adjacent street line. 
    Carport structures on residential lots are not included in the definition of garage, private, and are not considered accessory buildings. Moreover, carport structures shall not be subject to the Total Lot Coverage Maximum Permitted definition established herein; however, carport structures shall not exceed 900 square feet in size. 
    Certificate of occupancy means a certificate issued by the building inspector for the use of a building, structure, and/or land complying with the provisions of all applicable city codes, ordinances, and regulations. 
    City official means the legally authorized representative when acting in an official capacity for the city. 
    Clinic means an establishment of offices in which a group of physicians, dentists, or other practitioners of the healing arts, and allied professional assistants, are associated for the purpose of diagnosing and treating ill or injured persons. A clinic may include a medical or dental laboratory, but may not include facilities for providing room or board for patients, nor may a clinic include offices or facilities for veterinarians. 
    Club or lodge means an association of persons for the promotion of some nonprofit common object, as literature, science, politics, good fellowship, and the like, meeting periodically, limited to members. 
    Commercial amusement means any enterprise whose main purpose is to provide the general public with an amusing or entertaining activity, where tickets are sold or fees collected at the gate of the activity. Commercial amusements include zoos, concerts, carnivals, expositions, miniature golf courses, rodeos, driving ranges, arcades, fairs, exhibitions, athletic contests, tent shows, Ferris wheels, children's rides, roller coasters, skating rinks, ice rinks, traveling shows, bowling alleys, pool parlors, and similar enterprises. 
    Commercial semitrailer means a vehicle without motive power that is designed or used with a motor vehicle, so that some of its weight and the weight of its load rests on or is carried by the motor vehicle, used for the transport of goods, merchandise, persons, or animals for money or other consideration. 
    Commercial trailer means a vehicle without motive power that drawn by a motor vehicle and is designed or used to carry property or passengers on its own structure exclusively and used to transport goods, merchandise, persons, or animals for money or other consideration. 
    Commission means the Planning and Zoning Commission of the city. 
    Common access route means a private way which affords the principal means of access to individual home lots or auxiliary buildings. 
    Common property means a parcel or parcels of land, together with the improvements thereon, the use and enjoyment of which are shared by the owners and occupants of the individual building sites in a "planned unit." 
    Comprehensive master plan means a legal document often in the form of a map and accompanying text adopted by the legal legislative body. The plan is a compendium of its general policies regarding the long-term development of its jurisdiction. It is also called a "general plan" or "city plan." 
    Council means the City Council. 
    Court means an open, unoccupied space bounded on more than two sides by the walls of a building. An inner court is entirely surrounded by the exterior walls of a building. An outer court has one side open to a street, alley, yard, or other permanent open space. 
    Crosswalk way means a public right-of-way, six feet or more in width between property lines, which provides pedestrian circulation. 
    Cul-de-sac means a street having but one outlet to another street, and terminated on the opposite end by a vehicular turn-around. 
    Dead-end street means a street, other than a cul-de-sac, with only one outlet. 
    District means a section of the city for which regulations governing the zoning area, height, and use of buildings are uniform. 
    Driveway means a minor entranceway off the common access route within the city, into an off-street parking area. 
    Dumpster means a box constructed of metal or other substantial material with dimensions larger than a length of three feet, a width of three feet, and a depth of four feet used for the purpose of receiving waste and rubbish. 
    Easement means an interest in land granted to the city by the public generally, and/or to a private utility corporation, for installing or maintaining utilities across, over and under private land, together with the right to enter thereon with machinery and vehicles necessary for the maintenance of said utilities. 
    Enclosed means enclosed within a building; activity being inside a structure having walls on all sides and a roof overhead. 
    Engineer means a person duly authorized and properly registered under the provisions of the state Engineering Registration Act, as heretofore or hereafter amended, to practice the profession of engineering. 
    Family means a collective number of individuals domiciled together in one dwelling unit whose relationship is of a continuing non-transient domestic character and who are cooking and living as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit. This definition shall not include any society, club, fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, organization, or group of students or other individuals whose domestic relationship is of a transitory or seasonal nature or for an anticipated limited duration of a school term or other similar determinable period. 
    Farm means an area of ten acres or more, which is used for the usual farm products such as vegetables, fruit trees, and grain and their storage on the area as well as the raising thereon of the usual farm poultry and farm animals such as horses, cattle, and sheep and including dairy farms with the necessary accessory uses for treating and storing the produce; provided, however, that the operation of such accessory use shall be secondary to the normal activities. 
    Fence, eight-foot privacy , means a visual barrier with no more than five percent open area in the vertical plane constructed to the minimum height of eight feet above the finish grade or the original natural grade whichever is at the higher elevation. 
    Fraternal club or lodge means a membership organization, excepting one whose chief activity is a service customarily carried on as a business and excluding on-premises sale and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages, in the B-1 through B-2 districts. Such use shall be nonprofit and with no retail sales of any nature being permitted. 
    Front yard means an open unoccupied space on a lot facing a street and extending across the front of a lot between the side yard lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the street line and the main building or any projection thereof other than the projection of the usual steps or eave overhang. 
    Frontage means all property on one side of a street between two intersecting streets (crossing or terminating) measured along the line of the street, or, if the street is dead-ended, then all the property abutting on one side between and intersecting street and the dead end of the street. 
    Garage, commercial , means a premise and structure used for housing repair, hire or sale of motor vehicles for remuneration. 
    Garage, private , means an accessory building designed or used for the storage of motor vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the building to which it is accessory. Not more than one of the vehicles may be a commercial vehicle of not more than two-ton capacity. 
    Garden home means a single-family dwelling unit located on a platted lot that may be separated from the adjoining unit or units by a vertical fire wall (to be constructed in accordance with city codes and ordinances) along the dividing lot line or by a side yard and each such single-family dwelling unit being separate from any other building by space on all sides. 
    Gravel pit means a tract of land used primarily for the extraction of soil, sand, gravel, clay and other similar materials, other than oil or gas, which are processed and sold or used for commercial purposes. This term does not include the excavation or grading necessary for the development of a lot or tract. 
    Height, building , means the vertical dimension measured from the average elevation of the finished lot grade at the front of the building, to the highest point of ceiling of the top story in the case of a flat roof; to the decking of a mansard roof; and to the average height between the plate and ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof. 
    Home occupation means any occupation that can be performed at home that does not involve a structural change in the building, that does not require the employment of help, that does not emit an odor or result in noise in excess of the normal residential activities, that does not result in any outdoor visible evidence of the business use other than the permitted signage, and that does not result in more than two additional vehicles at the residence at any one time. A home occupation shall not include beauty shops, beauty culture schools, beauty parlors, auto repair and/or painting shops, or other similar uses. 
    Hospital means an institution or place where sick or injured in-patients are given medical or surgical care either at public (charity) or private expense. 
    Hotel/motel means a building or arrangement of buildings designed and occupied as a temporary abiding place of individuals who are lodged with or without meals, in which the rooms are usually occupied singly for hire, in which there are no provisions for cooking in individual rooms or apartments, and in which there are more than 12 sleeping rooms. 
    Kennel means any lot or premises on which domestic or wild animals are kept. 
    Loading space means a space within the main building or on the same lot therewith providing for the standing, loading or unloading of trucks. 
    Lot means the physical and undivided tract or parcel of land as shown on the duly recorded plat. 
    Lot area means the area of a lot between lot lines, including any portion of an easement which may exist within such lot lines. 
    Lot corner means a lot which has an interior angle of less than 135 degrees at the intersection of two street lines. A lot abutting upon a curved street shall be considered a corner lot if the tangents of the curve at the points of the intersection of the side lot lines intersect at an interior angle of at least 135 degrees. 
    Lot, double frontage , means a lot having a frontage on two nonintersecting streets as distinguished from a corner lot. 
    Lot, interior , means a building lot other than a corner lot. 
    Lot of record means a lot which is part of a subdivision, the map of which has been recorded in the office of the county clerk; or a parcel of land, the deed of which was recorded in the office of the county clerk. 
    Manufactured structure means a moveable or portable structure constructed to be towed by a motor vehicle on its own chassis over state roads and highways under special permit, connected to utilities, and designed without a permanent foundation, for year-round living. It may consist of one or more units that can be telescoped when towed and expanded later for additional capability, or of two or more units separately towable but designed to be joined into one integral unit. "Manufactured structure" includes any manufactured building, housing or structure not erected on-site. A storage building is not a manufactured structure. 
    Mini-storage means one storage unit with no more than 15 storage units per building, to be used only for storage. 
    Mobile home. See Manufactured structure. 
    Mobile home park means a unified development of mobile homes and travel ownership spaces arranged on a tract of land under single entity ownership, meeting all requirements of this chapter. 
    Municipal street means the entire width of a right-of-way held by the city in fee or by easement or dedication that has a part open for public use for vehicular travel. The term does not include a designated state or federal highway or road or a designated county road. 
    Nonconforming use means the use of land or a building, or a portion thereof, which use does not conform to the use regulations of a district in which it is situated. 
    Nursery, day care or kindergarten means a child care facility which is a state licensed facility operated in accordance with state law that provides care, training, education, custody, treatment or supervision for a child who is not related by blood, marriage, or adoption to the owner or operator of the facility, for all or part of the 24-hour day, whether or not the facility is operated for profit or charges for the service it offers. 
    Occupancy means the use or intended use of the land or building by proprietors or tenants. 
    Open spaces are included in any side, rear or front yard or any unoccupied space of the lot that is open and unobstructed to the sky except for the ordinary projection of cornices, eaves or porches. 
    Oversized vehicle means a motor vehicle, trailer, or boat, which by itself or together with other structure(s) or vehicle(s) attached to it, exceeds 24 feet in length, eight feet in width, or eight feet in height, exclusive of apparatus such as antennas, luggage racks, and mirrors. 
    Parking space means area required for the placing of a common size automobile with sufficient room to enable the vehicle access in and out of the space, minimum size being 180 square feet with minimum width of nine feet. 
    Permit means an official document or certificate issued by the authority having jurisdiction authorizing performance of a specified activity. 
    Person means any natural individual, firm, trust, partnership, association, or corporation. 
    Planned residential unit development means a single planned unit as initially designed; or such a unit as expanded by annexation of additional land area; or a group of continuous planned units, as separate entities or merged into a single consolidated entity. 
    Planned unit means a land area which has individual building sites and common property such as a park, and is designed to be capable of satisfactory use and operation as a separate entity without necessarily having the participation of other building sites or other common property. The ownership of the common property may be either public or private. 
    Plant nursery means a place where trees, shrubs, or flowering plants are raised from seed or otherwise in order to be transplanted or propagated. 
    Plat means a complete and exact plan for the subdivision of a tract of land into lots for building purposes, which, if approved, may be submitted to the county clerk for recording. 
    Plot plan means a plan showing the use of the land, to include locations of buildings, drives, sidewalks, parking areas, drainage facilities and other structures to be constructed. 
    Public parking lot means any premises used for the purpose of parking motor vehicles for remuneration. No repairs or sales will be permitted on the premises. 
    Quarry means a tract of land used primarily for the extraction of limestone, or other similar materials, but not oil or natural gas, for processing, sale, or use for any purpose. This term does not include the excavation or grading necessary for the development of a lot or tract. 
    Radio station or television station means other than citizens radio service. 
    Residence, one-family, means a detached building having accommodation for and occupied by one family only, being the only structure per lot, except as permitted under Accessory, Associated Living Quarter, and Storage Buildings. 
    Residence, two-family, means a dwelling or group of dwelling on one plat containing separate living units for two families. 
    Right-of-way means the right given to the general public or groups of the general public to utilize, in the future, property or rights of another without compensation of any kind at any time. Utilization when such future time arrives of such right-of-way will be by ordinance, resolution, statute, conveyance of any easement, or through any act of the planning commission, declaring that such right-of-way shall thereafter be utilized by the general public or groups of the general public. 
    Sand or gravel pit means a tract of land used primarily for the extraction of soil, sand, gravel, clay and other similar materials, other than oil or gas, which are processed and sold or used for commercial purposes. This term does not include the excavation or grading necessary for the development of a lot or tract. 
    Setback line means a line which marks the setback distance from the property line, and establishes the minimum required front, side and rear yard space of a building plan. 
    Shopping center means an integrated grouping of commercial activity, primarily of a retail and personal service nature, in a single building complex having the individual establishments joined by a common covered pedestrian mall. 
    Sign means any device or surface on which figures, letters, illustrations, photographs, designs, logos, or outlines and used for such purposes as identification of individuals, partnerships or organizations, advising of products and/or location which is visible to the public. This includes light, banners, and similar devices to attract attention but excludes signs affixed to motor vehicles. 
    Single-family residence means a detached building having accommodation for and occupied by one family only, being the only structure per lot, except as permitted under Accessory, Associated Living Quarter, and Storage buildings. 
    Storage building means a subordinate building without utilities other than electric in a residential zoned district, the use of which is incidental to and used in conjunction with the main building only. A storage building shall be detached from the main building and shall not be used for habitation or for commercial purposes. A storage building must be architecturally compatible with the main building on the property. A storage building shall be subject to the Total Lot Coverage Maximum Permitted definition established herein. A storage building shall not be attached to the main building by a breezeway or other form of attachment. Storage buildings shall not exceed one standard story in height. A storage building shall not be a portable structure designed to be towed by a motor vehicle on its own chassis. 
    Story means that portion of a building, other than a basement, included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or, if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. 
    Story, half, means a partial story under a gable, hip, or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more than four feet above the floor of such story, except that any partial story used for residence purposes, other than for a janitor or caretaker and his family, or by a family occupying the floor immediately below it, shall be deemed a full story. 
    Story, standard, means one having 11 feet six inches between floors. 
    Street means a public right-of-way which provides primary vehicular access to adjacent land, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, avenue, lane, boulevard, road, place, drive or however otherwise designated. 
    Street line means a dividing line between a lot, tract, or parcel of land and a contiguous street. 
    Structure means anything constructed or built, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having a permanent location on the ground. 
    Structure, alterations, means any change in the supporting member of a building, such as a bearing wall, column, beams or girders. 
    Structure, principal , means the principal structure which fulfills the purpose for which the building plot is intended. 
    Total Lot Coverage Maximum Permitted means the total surface area of a Single-family Residential Zoning District lot that may be covered by accessory buildings, associated living quarters, and storage buildings combined, pursuant to the following: 
Lot Size Lot Coverage Maximum Permitted 1/2 acre or less Not more than 800 square feet Greater than 1/2 acre Not more than 1,000 square feet or 3% of lot square footage, whichever is greater  
Townhouse means a building that has single-family dwelling units erected in a row as a single building on adjoining platted lots, each being separated from the adjoining unit or units by a vertical fire wall (to be constructed in accordance with city codes and ordinances) along the dividing lot line and each such building being separate from any other building by space on all sides. 
    Trailer and mobile home sales or rental means a business venture or enterprise where trailers and mobile homes are sold, rented, leased, or otherwise conveyed from the control or ownership of one party, company or individual to another party, company or individual. "Rental" in this definition means rental for off-premises use and not rental of a trailer or mobile home for use on that site. This definition does not include the rental or sale of a single privately owned existing trailer and mobile home in any zoning district, either in compliance or whose status may be "grandfathered" noncompliance. 
    Use means the purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon is designed, arranged or intended, or for which is it occupied or maintained, and shall include any manner of performance of such activity with respect to the performance standards of this chapter. 
    Variance means a legal deviation of a district zoning regulation whose strict enforcement will result in undue hardship. Pecuniary hardship to the owner, standing alone, shall not be deemed to constitute undue hardship. 
    Yard means an open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of the rear yard, the minimum horizontal distance between the lot lines and the main building shall be used. 
    Yard, front , means a yard extending across the front of a lot between the side lot lines, and being the minimum horizontal distance between the street or place line and the main building or any projections of the usual uncovered steps, uncovered balconies, or uncovered porch. On corner lots the front yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least dimension. 
    Yard, rear, means a yard extending across the rear of a lot and being the required minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the main building or any projections thereof other than the projections of uncovered steps, unenclosed balconies, or unenclosed porches. 
    Yard, side, means a yard between the main building and the side line of the lot, and extending from the required front yard to the required rear yard and being the minimum horizontal distance between a side lot line and the side of the main buildings or any projections thereon. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. I, § 4), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 269, § 1, 10-28-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 419, § 1, 11-12-2009; Ord. No. 571, § 1, 7-9-2015) 
Sec. 98-5. - Compliance required. 
(a)  No land shall be used and no building shall be erected for or converted to any use other than provided in the regulations prescribed for the district in which it is located, except as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  The minimum yards, parking spaces, and open space, including lot area per family, required by the height and area provisions of this chapter for each and every building existing at the time of passage of this chapter or for any building hereafter erected, shall not be encroached upon or considered as part of the yard or parking space or open space required for any other building, nor shall any lot area be reduced below the requirements of this chapter for the district in which such lot is located. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. I, § 5), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-6. - Location of alcoholic beverage sales restricted. 
    No business engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be located within 300 feet of a church, public school, or public hospital. The measurement of the distance shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door, and in direct line across intersections. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. I, § 6), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-7. - Visual barriers obstructing sight line at intersections. 
    No visual barrier, including, but not limited to, fences, hedges, shrubs, weeds, or trees, which obstructs sight lines at elevations between three feet and eight feet above the roadway shall be placed or permitted to remain on any corner lot within the triangular area formed by the street property lines and a line connecting them at points 25 feet from the intersection of the street lines, or in the case of a rounded corner, 25 feet from the intersection of the street lines extended. The same sight line limitations shall apply at the intersection of a street property line and edge of driveway or alley pavement except distance from the intersection shall be ten feet. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. I, § 7), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-8. - Private sewer facilities. 
    The city, being totally within the county and having no public sewer system, is dependent upon private sewer facilities and the San Antonio Water System (SAWS). All private sewer facilities are subject to the county commission court order titled "Regulating and Licensing of Private Sewer Facilities in Bexar County Subject to the Jurisdiction of Commissioner Court, Bexar County." The provisions of this court order may require minimum lot sizes in excess of those noted elsewhere in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. I, § 8), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-9. - Zoning of businesses involved in multiple categories. 
    For purposes of zoning, business involved in multiple types or categories of business as identified in this chapter and/or listed in the Schedule of Uses (appendix of this chapter) shall comply with the most restrictive requirements of this chapter pertaining to any of the types or categories of business conducted on the site. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. I, § 9), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-10. - General prohibitions. 
(a)  Parking of oversized vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having control of any oversized vehicle, as defined in section 98-4, to park the same upon any municipal street within the PD pre-development district, R-1 single-family residential district, R-2 two-family residential district, or R-3 mobile home residential district at any time. Provided this section shall not apply to the parking of such vehicles for such time as actually necessary to load or unload passengers, freight, or merchandise. 
(b)  Parking of commercial trailers and semitrailers. 
(1)  The parking of a commercial semitrailer or trailer on any residentially zoned property is prohibited. 
(2)  The parking of a commercial semitrailer or trailer on a street directly adjacent to a residentially zoned parcel or lot is prohibited. 
(3)  Exceptions: 
a.  A commercial trailer or semitrailer may be temporarily parked in the areas otherwise prohibited for such time as is actually necessary to load or unload passengers, freight or merchandise. 
b.  A commercial trailer or semitrailer may be temporarily parked in the areas otherwise prohibited if parked on or directly adjacent to a lot or parcel while a residential unit is under construction on that lot or parcel but in no event for a period of more than 90 days in any consecutive 12-month period. The construction must be pursuant to a valid building permit. 
c.  A commercial trailer or semitrailer may be parked in the areas otherwise prohibited if the owner thereof can obtain a permit from the city administrator after the applicant shows the city administrator evidence that the applicant: 
1.  Has a mobility impairment; and 
2.  Uses the trailer or semitrailer as that person's primary means of transportation. 
A permit issued hereunder shall be valid for a term of one year and may be renewable annually upon a re-examination of the facts by the city administrator. 
(c)  Dumpsters. 
(1)  The use and maintenance of a dumpster on any residentially zoned property is prohibited. 
(2)  Exceptions: 
a.  A dumpster may be temporarily used and maintained on property zoned residential during construction activity on a lot or parcel where it is located provided that a valid building permit has been obtained for construction on said lot or parcel and the dumpster is not left on said lot or parcel for a period exceeding 180 days in any consecutive 12-month period. 
b.  A dumpster may be temporarily used and maintained on property zoned residential for a period not to exceed 31 consecutive days in any consecutive 12-month period. 
(3)  The board of adjustments is authorized to grant one extension of not more than 180 days for the use and maintenance of a dumpster upon a showing by the applicant of a good faith effort to complete the construction of a residence and accessory structures within said extension period. The applicant for such an extension shall pay the board of adjustment fee prior to the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. I, § 10), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-11. - Ornamental towers and similar structural elements. 
(a)  This section sets height limitations for ornamental towers, spires, and similar structural elements that are not designed for occupancy. 
(b)  Definitions. 
Tower is defined as a tall, narrow freestanding structure that is not designed and constructed for occupancy, but rather, for architectural, ornamental, or attention-getting purposes. Spire is defined as a tapering, conical or pyramidal freestanding structure that is not designed and constructed for occupancy, but rather, for architectural, ornamental, or attention-getting purposes.  
(c)  In all zoning districts, the maximum height of ornamental towers, spires, and similar structural elements shall not exceed a maximum allowable height of 20 feet from average grade of the centerline of the adjacent road way in all zoning districts. 
(d)  The quantity, placement, width, design, insignia and / or wording, if any, on ornamental towers, spires, and similar structural elements shall be reviewed and approved in accordance with Chapter 98 Zoning, Article IX Architectural Review. 
( Ord. No. 18-07 , § 1, 5-10-2018) 
Secs. 98-12-98-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS, BOUNDARIES AND MAP 

Sec. 98-31. - Districts established. 
    The city is divided into types of districts as follows: 
PD, Pre-Development District. 
R-1, Single-Family Residential District. 
R-2, Two-Family Residential District. 
R-3, Mobile Home District. 
B-1, Office and Professional District. 
B-2, Neighborhood Service District. 
B-3, General Business District. 
B-3 OD, General Business/Residential Overlay District. 
B-4, Central Business District. 
I-1, Industrial District. 
OTHSD, Old Town Helotes Special District. 
Cluster Development. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. II, § 1), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 269, § 2, 10-28-2004; Ord. No. 310, § 1, 6-22-2006; Ord. No. 387, § 1. 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-32. - Boundaries. 
    The boundaries of these districts are indicated upon the zoning map of the city, which is on file in the offices of the city and made a part of this chapter, the same as if copied in full herein. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such center lines. 
(2)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 
(3)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be construed as following such city limits. 
(4)  Boundaries indicated as following shorelines of creeks shall be construed to following such shorelines; and in the event of their movement, the boundaries shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streams, river, canals, lakes, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such center lines. 
(5)  Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the rails of the main line. 
(6)  In unsubdivided property, the district boundary lines on the zoning map shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the map. 
(7)  In the case of a district boundary line dividing a property into two parts, the property will remain divided until the property owner, firm, or corporation petitions the City Council for rezoning. 
(8)  Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action of the City Council the zoning district adjoining each side of such street, alleys or other public way shall be automatically extended to the center of such vacation and shall then henceforth be subject to all regulations of the extended districts. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. II, § 2), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1. 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-33. - Official zoning map. 
(a)  Maintenance. 
(1)  The official zoning map shall be kept in the office of the Planning and Zoning Commission and one copy shall be posted in the city hall. 
(2)  It shall be the duty of the Planning and Zoning Commission chairman to keep the official map current and the copies thereof, herein provided for, by entering on such maps any changes which the City Council may from time to time order by amendment to the zoning chapter and map. 
(b)  Identification. The city secretary, upon adoption of this chapter, shall affix a certificate identifying the map as the official zoning map of the city. He shall likewise officially identify the copies directed to be kept by the Planning and Zoning Commission and in the city hall. All amendments to the map shall be made immediately after their enactment and the date of the change shall be noted on the certificate. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. II, § 3), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-34. - Classification of new and unscheduled uses. 
    It is recognized that new or unlisted types of land use may seek to locate in the city. In order to provide for such contingencies, a determination of any new or unlisted form of land shall be made as follows: 
(1)  Questions concerning any new or unlisted use shall be referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission for interpretation as to the zoning district into which such should be placed. The use interpretation question shall be accompanied by a statement of facts listing the nature of the use and whether it involves dwelling activity, sales, processing, anticipated employment, transportation requirements, the amount of noise, odor, fumes, dust, toxic material and vibration likely to be generated and the general requirements for public utilities such as water and sanitary sewer. Requests for consideration shall be in accordance with article VI, section 3. 
(2)  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing and meet the parties of interest and shall consider the nature and described performance of the proposed use and its compatibility with the uses permitted in the various districts and determine the zoning district or districts within which such use should be permitted. Such public hearings shall be scheduled and conducted in accordance with the provisions of sections 98-403 through 98-405. 
(3)  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall transmit its findings and recommendations to the City Council as to the classification proposed for any new unlisted use. The City Council shall hold a public hearing and review recommendations of the Planning and Zoning Commission and make such determination concerning the classification of such use as it determines appropriate in accordance with provisions of sections 98-405 through 98-407. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. II, § 4), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-35. - Newly annexed territory. 
    All territory hereafter annexed to the city shall be temporarily classified as PD, pre-development district. The Planning and Zoning Commission will review all territory for consideration of zoning within 180 days of annexation. The procedure for establishing permanent classification of annexed territory shall conform to the procedure established by law for the adoption of the original zoning regulations. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. II, § 5), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Secs. 98-36-98-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 98-61. - Pre-development district (PD). 
    In an area temporarily classified as PD, pre-development district: 
(1)  No person shall erect, construct, or add to any building or structure or cause the same to be done in any newly annexed territory without first applying for appropriate zoning. 
(2)  No permit for the construction of a building or use of land shall be issued by the building permit official other than a permit which shall allow the construction of a building permitted in the PD, pre-development district, unless and until such territory has been classified in a district by the City Council in the manner in accordance with the provisions as follows. 
(3)  An application for a permit for any use shall be made to the building inspector for the city and by him referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission for consideration and recommendation to the City Council. The commission in making its recommendation to the City Council shall take into consideration the appropriate land use for the area and the comprehensive land use plan. The City Council after receiving and reviewing the recommendations of the Planning and Zoning Commission may by majority vote authorize the issuance of a building permit or certificate of occupancy or may disapprove the application. 
(4)  In a pre-development district no land shall be used for and no building shall be erected for or converted to any use other than: See Schedule of Uses in the appendix at the end of this chapter and section 98-34. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. III, § 1), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-62. - Single-family residential district (R-1). 
(a)  Use regulations. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purpose: See Schedule of Uses in the appendix at the end of this chapter and section 98-34. 
(b)  Height regulations. No building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height and be greater than two floors. Refer to Sec. 98-4. 
(c)  Area regulations. 
(1)  Front yard setback. A front yard setback shall be a minimum of 40 feet, except in areas platted where setback minimums are established prior to the effective date of this chapter. Where lots have double frontage, running through from one street to another, the required front yard shall be provided on both streets. 
(2)  Side yard setback. There shall be a side yard on each side of the lot, having a width of not less than 25 feet, except a detached garage or other permitted accessory building located 70 feet or more from the front property line shall not be located nearer than five feet to any side property line. 
(3)  Rear yard setback. There shall be a rear yard, having a depth of not less than 25 feet, except a detached garage or other permitted accessory building which shall not be located nearer than five feet from the rear property line. 
(4)  Area of lot. The minimum area of the lot shall be 32,000 square feet. 
(5)  Width of lot. The minimum area of the lot shall be 120 feet. 
(6)  Depth of lot. The minimum depth of the lot shall be 120 feet. 
(d)  Parking regulations. Off-street parking spaces behind the front setback line of property shall be provided on the lot to accommodate a minimum of two automobiles for each dwelling unit. 
(e)  Accessory buildings, associated living quarters and storage buildings. An accessory building, associated living quarters, or storage building shall not extend beyond the front line of the main building, and shall be a minimum of 25 feet from the side property line and five feet from the rear property line. (Exception: An accessory building located 70 feet or more from the front property line shall be a minimum of five feet from the side property line.) 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. III, § 2), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008; Ord. 419, § 2, 11-12-2009) 
Sec. 98-63. - Cluster development. 
    A cluster development is a residential subdivision in which the lots are allowed to be smaller (in area and width) than otherwise required for the underlying, base R-1 single-family residential zoning district, but in which the overall density cannot exceed two units per acre. Through the cluster development option, a subdivision can contain no more lots than would otherwise be allowed for a conventional subdivision in the same zoning district, but the individual lots within the development could be smaller than required in a conventional subdivision. Smaller lot sizes within a cluster development are required to be offset by a corresponding increase in open space. 
(1)  Purpose. 
a.  It is the purpose of this section to permit residential cluster development in order to: 
1.  Encourage creative and flexible site design that is sensitive to the land's natural features and adapts to the natural topography; 
2.  Protect environmentally sensitive areas of a development site and preserve on a permanent basis open space, natural features, and hill country features; 
3.  Decrease or minimize nonpoint source pollution impacts by reducing the amount of impervious surfaces in site development; 
4.  Promote cost savings in infrastructure installation and maintenance by such techniques as reducing the distance over which utilities, such as water and sewer lines, need to be extended or by reducing the width or length of streets; and 
5.  Provide opportunities for social interaction and walking and hiking in open space. 
(2)  Conflict with other regulations. If there is a conflict between the cluster development standards of this section and any other requirement of this Code, the standards of this section control. Where no conflict exists, a cluster development is subject to all other applicable requirements of this Code. 
(3)  Where allowed. Cluster developments may by allowed in a R-1 single-family residential district provided that specific city council approval is granted for the cluster development pursuant to the terms of article V of this chapter. 
(4)  Approval procedure. Cluster developments are subject to the zoning and subdivision procedures set forth herein. 
(5)  Categories of cluster developments. An applicant for a cluster development specific use permit must obtain authorization for multifamily cluster development townhouse cluster development or a garden home cluster development. Should city council authorize the issuance a specific use permit for a cluster development said permit shall specify the category of cluster development so authorized. Rules relating to each category are as follows: 
a.  Multifamily residential cluster development. 
1.  Use regulations. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: multifamily dwelling units. 
2.  Heights regulations. No building shall exceed forty (40) feet in height and be greater than two floors. Refer to Sec. 98-4. 
3.  Area regulations. 
i.  Front yard setback. There shall be a front yard having a minimum depth of 20 feet. 
ii.  Side yard setback. There shall be a minimum side yard setback of five feet. 
iii.  Rear yard setback. There shall be a rear yard setback having a minimum depth of ten feet. 
iv.  Density. A maximum of 30 units may be constructed per acre provided the cluster development open space requirements of this section are met. 
4.  Parking regulations. Off-street parking spaces behind the front yard set-back line of property shall be provided on the lot to accommodate a minimum of two automobiles for each dwelling unit. 
5.  Buffer zone multifamily cluster development to PD, R-1, R-2, or R-3. A buffer zone of 200 feet from the nearest building in the multifamily cluster development shall be maintained along property lines adjoining properties zoned or used as PD, R-1, R-2, or R-3. The buffer zone shall consist of passive open space and may not contain any impervious cover except that the width of an existing street may be counted towards the buffer zone distance requirement. 
6.  Accessory buildings, associated living quarters and storage buildings. Accessory buildings and offices associated with the management and maintenance of the: multifamily development and amenities thereto. 
b.  Townhouse single-family residential cluster development. 
1.  Use regulations. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: single-family dwelling unit. 
2.  Heights regulations. No building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height and be greater than two floors. Refer to Sec. 98-4. 
3.  Area regulations. 
i.  Front yard setback. There shall be a front yard having a minimum depth of five feet. 
ii.  Side yard setback. There shall be no minimum side yard setback provided that each building is located on separate adjoining platted lots, each being separated from the adjoining unit or units by a vertical firewall (to be constructed in accordance with city codes and ordinances) along the dividing lot line. In those instances where buildings do not share a common firewall the side yard setback shall be a minimum of five feet. 
iii.  Rear yard setback. There shall be a rear yard setback having a minimum depth of ten feet. 
iv.  Density. A maximum of ten units may be constructed per acre provided the cluster development open space requirements of this section are met. 
4.  Parking regulations. Off-street parking spaces behind the front yard set-back line of property shall be provided on the lot to accommodate a minimum of two automobiles for each dwelling unit. 
5.  Buffer zone townhouse cluster development to PD, R-1, R-2, or R-3. V A buffer zone of 200 feet from the nearest building in the multifamily cluster development shall be maintained along property lines adjoining properties zoned or used as PD, R-1, R-2, or R-3. The buffer zone shall consist of passive open space and may not contain any impervious cover except that the width of an existing street may be counted towards the buffer zone distance requirement. 
6.  Accessory buildings, associated living quarters and storage buildings. Accessory buildings associated living quarters, or storage buildings are not permitted in an "R-TH" zoning district. 
c.  Garden home single-family residential cluster development. 
1.  Use regulations. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes single-family dwelling unit. 
2.  Heights regulations. No building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height and be greater than two floors. Refer to Sec. 98-4. 
3.  Area regulations. 
i.  Front yard setback. On each lot there shall be a front yard having a minimum depth of 20 feet. 
ii.  Side yard setback. On each lot there shall be a side yard having a minimum depth of five feet. 
iii.  Rear yard setback. There shall be a rear yard setback having a minimum depth of 25 feet. 
iv.  Lot size. Each lot shall be a minimum of 6,600 square feet, shall have a minimum lot width of 55 feet and shall have a minimum lot depth of 120 feet provided the cluster development open space requirements of this section are met. 
4.  Parking regulations. Off-street parking spaces behind the front yard set-back line of property shall be provided on the lot to accommodate a minimum of two automobiles for each dwelling unit. 
5.  Accessory buildings, associated living quarters and storage buildings. There may be only one single-family structure on each lot and no accessory, associated or additional living quarters shall be permitted in a garden home single-family residential cluster development. One accessory building, other than living quarters, or one storage building shall be permitted. Said accessory or storage building shall not extend beyond the front line of the main building, and shall be a minimum of five feet from the side property line and five feet from the rear property line. 
(6)  Open space plan. 
a.  An open space plan must be submitted with the submittal of the for cluster development specific use permit request. 
b.  No specific use permit for cluster development shall be granted unless the open space plan: 
1.  First receives a recommendation to the city council by the planning and zoning commission; and 
2.  Is thereafter approved by city council prior to or at the time city council considers the specific use permit for the cluster development. 
c.  Plan must show the open space contiguous or otherwise approved by city council. 
d.  Once an open space plan is approved by city council it shall not be modified without the subsequent approval of city council. 
(7)  Cluster development open space requirements. 
a.  Minimum requirement. Common open space is required within a cluster development to ensure that the overall density within the development does not exceed the maximum density allowed by the underlying R-1 single-family residential zoning district. Common open space must be provided in an amount at least equal to the difference between: 
1.  The actual, average lot area per dwelling unit within the cluster development; and 
2.  The required lot area per dwelling unit for conventional development within the underlying R-1 single-family residential district base zoning district. 
b.  Use of open space. Common open space must be set aside and designated as an area where no development will occur. 
c.  Designation of open space. Open space shall be designated as such on the subdivision plat of the property and by conservation easement or other instrument, approved by the city attorney, and which shall be recorded in the property records of Bexar County Texas. 
d.  Homeowners association. Multifamily condominium, townhouse and garden home cluster developments shall have a mandatory homeowners or property owners association who shall maintain, manage and control the open space. 
e.  Location of open space. Prior to approval of a special use permit for a cluster development the proposed open space shall be identified by survey, metes and bounds or other description acceptable by the city engineer. Where applicable, city council may require the open space to include "sensitive land" which comprise: 
1.  Wetlands; 
2.  Woodlands; 
3.  Sensitive aquifer recharge features; 
4.  All of the floodway and flood fringe within the 100-year floodplain, as shown on the most current official FEMA maps; 
5.  All areas within 100 feet of the edge of the 100-year floodplain as delineated on the FEMA maps and any letter of map revision; 
6.  All areas within 100 feet of the banks of any stream shown as a blue line on the USGS 1:24,000 (7.5 minute) scale topographic maps for Bexar County; 
7.  Steep slopes (i.e., slopes exceeding 25 percent); 
8.  Soils subject to slumping, as indicated on the medium-intensity maps contained in the most current county soil survey published by the USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service; 
9.  Significant wildlife habitat areas; and 
10.  Historic, archaeological or cultural features listed (or eligible to be listed) on national, state, or city registers or inventories. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 2 (App. A), 6-22-2006; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008; Ord. 419, § 2, 11-12-2009) 
Sec. 98-64. - Two-family residential district (R-2). 
(a)  Use regulations. A building or premises shall be used for the following purposes: See Schedule of Uses in the appendix at the end of this chapter and section 98-34. 
(b)  Height regulations. No building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height and be greater than two floors. Refer to Sec. 98-4. 
(c)  Area regulations. 
(1)  Front yard setback. There shall be a front yard having a minimum depth of not less than 40 feet. 
(2)  Side yard setback. There shall be a side yard on each side of the lot, having a width of not less than 25 feet, except a detached garage or other permitted accessory building located 70 feet or more from the front property line shall not be located nearer than five feet to any side property line. 
(3)  Rear yard setback. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 25 feet, except a detached garage or other permitted accessory building which shall not be located nearer than five feet from the rear property line. 
(4)  Area of lot. Except as hereinafter provided, all dwellings erected, enlarged, relocated, reconstructed, or converted shall be located upon lots containing the following area: A lot on which a two-family dwelling is located shall contain not less than 32,000 square feet. 
(5)  Width of lot. The minimum width of the lot shall be 100 feet for the two-family dwelling. 
(6)  Depth of lot. The minimum depth of the lot shall be 120 feet. 
(d)  Parking regulations. Off-street parking spaces behind the front line of the dwelling shall be provided on the lot to accommodate a minimum of two automobiles for each dwelling unit. 
(e)  Accessory buildings, associated living quarters and storage buildings. An accessory building, associated living quarters, or storage building shall not extend beyond the front line of the main building, and shall be a minimum of 25 feet from the side property line and five feet from the rear property line. (Exception: An accessory building located 70 feet or more from the front property line shall be a minimum of five feet from the side property line.) 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. III, § 3), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 419, § 2, 11-12-2009) 
Sec. 98-65. - Mobile home district (R-3). 
(a)  Use regulations. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: See Schedule of Uses in the appendix at the end of this chapter and section 98-34. 
(b)  Height regulations. The average height of the mobile home frame above the ground elevation, measured at 90 degrees to the frame, shall not exceed three feet. 
(c)  Area regulations. 
(1)  The minimum front yard setback shall be ten feet from the nearest corner of the mobile home to the front line of the mobile home space. 
(2)  No mobile home or accessory building shall be closer than 25 feet to any property line nor closer than 40 feet to the property line adjoining a public street. 
(3)  The minimum distance between mobile homes at any point shall be 25 feet, provided, however, that mobile homes parked end-to-end may have a clearance of not less than ten feet. 
(4)  A mobile home district shall be such that a minimum street of 36 feet is provided on one side or end of each space. 
(d)  Parking regulations. Off-street parking shall be provided at the rate of two spaces per mobile home space. All parking spaces shall be minimum 40 feet off city streets and off of mobile home district streets. 
(e)  Accessory buildings and storage buildings. An accessory building, associated living quarters, or storage building shall not extend beyond the front line of the main building, and shall be a minimum of 25 feet from the side property line and five feet from the rear property line. (Exception: An accessory building located 70 feet or more from the front property line shall be a minimum of five feet from the side property line.) 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. III, § 4), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 419, § 2, 11-12-2009) 
Sec. 98-66. - Office and professional district (B-1). 
(a)  Use regulations. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  These districts are composed of land and structures occupied by or suitable for such uses as offices, studios, and limited light commercial uses. 
(2)  See Schedule of Uses in the appendix at the end of this chapter and section 98-34. 
(b)  Height regulations. No building shall exceed forty (40) feet in height. Refer to Sec. 98-4. 
(c)  Area regulations. Area uses are governed by the regulations prescribed. 
(1)  Front setback. The minimum front setback shall be ten feet. 
(2)  Side area setback. No minimum except that a side yard of not less than ten feet in width shall be provided on the side of the lot common to a side street. 
(3)  Area of lot. The minimum area of the lot shall be 6,000 square feet. 
(4)  Width of lot. The minimum width of the lot shall be 60 feet. 
(5)  Depth of lot. The minimum depth of the lot shall be 100 feet. 
(6)  Buffer zone B-1, to PD, R-1, R-2, or R-3. A buffer zone of 100 feet, or a street plus 30 feet or 30 feet plus an approved eight-foot privacy fence shall be maintained. 
(7)  Fire lane. A minimum fire lane of 16 feet shall be maintained adjacent to one side of the building having doors. 
(d)  Parking regulations. See article IV of this chapter. 
(e)  Accessory buildings. No accessory buildings as permitted herein shall be more than fifteen (15) feet in height and have more square feet in floor area than 25 percent of the ground floor area of the main building. No accessory building may be closer than five feet to the main building in the rear yard. Accessory buildings, as permitted herein, are allowed in side yards; provided, however, that no accessory building may be closer than five feet to any main building on the same lot, nor closer than five feet to a common B-1, B-2, B-3, or B-4 property line, unless the property line is common to a street in which case the minimum setback shall be 30 feet. If common property line to R-1, R-2, or R-3, the minimum setback shall be 25 feet if a 100-foot buffer exists, 40 feet if a 40-foot plus street buffer exists, or 15 feet if a 30-foot plus eight-foot privacy fence buffer exists. No accessory building shall be allowed in the front yard or allowed to extend beyond the front line of the main building. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. III, § 5), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 419, § 2, 11-12-2009) 
Sec. 98-67. - Neighborhood service district (B-2). 
(a)  Use regulations. 
(1)  These districts are composed of land and structures occupied by or suitable for furnishing retail goods such as groceries, drugs, clothing and such services to satisfy the household needs of the surrounding residential area. 
(2)  A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: See Schedule of Uses in the appendix at the end of this chapter and section 98-34. 
(b)  Height regulations. No building shall exceed forty (40) feet in height. Refer to Sec. 98-4. 
(c)  Area regulations. Area uses which may be permitted within a neighborhood service district are governed by the prescribed regulations. 
(1)  Front setback. Ten-foot minimum, except that drive-in gasoline service islands may not be located nearer than 25 feet to the front property line. 
(2)  Side area setback. No minimum, except that a side area of not less than ten feet in width shall be provided on the side adjoining a side street. 
(3)  Area of lot. The minimum lot area shall be 6,000 square feet. 
(4)  Width of lot. The minimum lot width shall be 60 feet. 
(5)  Depth of lot. The minimum depth of the lot shall be 100 feet. 
(6)  Buffer zone, B-2 to PD, R-1, R-2, or R-3. A buffer zone of 100 feet or a street plus 40 feet or 30 feet plus an approved eight-foot privacy fence shall be maintained. 
(7)  Fire lane. A minimum fire lane of 16 feet shall be maintained adjacent to one side of the building having entry doors. 
(d)  Parking regulations. See article IV of this chapter. 
(e)  Accessory buildings. No commercial accessory building as permitted herein shall be more than fifteen (15) feet in height and have more square feet in floor area than 25 percent of the ground floor area of the main building. No accessory building may be closer than five feet to the main building in the rear yard. Accessory buildings, as permitted herein, are allowed in side yards; provided, however, that no accessory building be closer than five feet to any main building, nor closer than five feet to a common B-1, B-2, B-3 or B-4 district property line, unless the property line is common to a street, in which case the minimum setback shall be 30 feet. If common property line to R-1, R-2 or R-3 districts, the minimum setback shall be 25 feet if a 100-foot buffer exists, 40 feet if a 40-foot plus street buffer exists, or 15 feet if a 30-foot plus eight-foot privacy fence buffer exists. No accessory building shall be allowed in the front yard or allowed to extend beyond the front line of the main building. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. III, § 6), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 419, § 2, 11-12-2009) 
Sec. 98-68. - General business district (B-3). 
(a)  Use regulations. 
(1)  These districts are composed of land and structures used for area retail and wholesale sales and limited repair/fix-it operations. Typical uses are department stores, restaurants, camera repair, appliance repair and limited warehousing in conjunction with wholesale distribution. 
(2)  A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: See Schedule of Uses in the appendix at the end of this chapter and section 98-34. 
(b)  Height regulations. No building shall exceed forty (40) feet in height. Refer to Sec. 98-4. 
(c)  Area regulations. Area uses permitted within a general business district are governed by the regulations prescribed. 
(1)  Front setback. The minimum front setback shall be ten feet. 
(2)  Side area setback. No minimum except that a side yard of not less than ten feet in width shall be provided on the side of the adjoining side street. 
(3)  Area of lot. The minimum area of the lot shall be 6,000 square feet. 
(4)  Width of lot. The minimum width of lot shall be 60 feet. 
(5)  Depth of lot. The minimum depth of the lot shall be 100 feet. 
(6)  Buffer zone B-3 to PD, R-1, R-2, or R-3. A buffer zone of 100 feet, or a street plus 40 feet or 30 feet plus an approved eight-foot privacy fence shall be maintained. 
(7)  Fire lane. A minimum fire lane of 16 feet shall be maintained adjacent to one side of the building having doors. 
(d)  Parking regulations. See article IV of this chapter. 
(e)  Accessory buildings. No commercial accessory building as permitted herein shall be more than fifteen (15) feet in height and have more square feet in floor area than 25 percent of the ground floor area of the main building. No accessory building may be closer than five feet to the main building in the rear yard. Accessory buildings, as permitted herein, are allowed in side yards; provided, however, that no accessory building on the same lot be closer than five feet to any main building, nor closer than five feet to a common B-1, B-2, B-3 or B-4 property line, unless the property line is common to a street, in which case the minimum setback shall be 30 feet. If common property line to R-1, R-2, or R-3, the minimum setback shall be 25 feet if a 100-foot buffer exists, 40 feet if a 40-foot plus street buffer exists, or 15 feet if a 30-foot plus an eight-foot privacy fence buffer exists. No accessory building shall be allowed in the front yard or allowed to extend beyond the front line of the main building. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. III, § 7), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 419, § 2, 11-12-2009 
Sec. 98-69. - Overlay district (B-3 OD). 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the B-3 Overlay District is: 
(1)  To create a more attractive, cohesive, and safe environment; and 
(2)  To safeguard the City's heritage by preventing the spoliation of areas that reflect important elements of the City's cultural, natural, historic, and economic fabric; and 
(3)  To create favorable impressions of Helotes that provide environmental enrichment for the citizens of the City and visitors thereto; and 
(4)  To preserve, protect, and enhance nearby residential areas; and 
(5)  To reduce visual chaos and limit distractions along public roadways; and 
(6)  To stabilize and strengthen property values within the corridor. 
(b)  Zoning process and classification. 
(1)  This section authorizes the establishment of B-3 Overlay Districts; however, separate ordinances are required to designate each district. 
(2)  The B-3 Overlay Districts are established as overlays to the regular base zoning districts. Any property located within a B-3 Overlay District must comply with the requirements of the base district, as well as the Overlay District. If there is a conflict between the requirements of the base district and the Overlay District, the more restrictive requirement shall prevail. 
(3)  The zoning designation for the B-3 Overlay District shall consist of the base zone symbol and the Overlay District symbol (OD) as a suffix. 
(c)  Permitted and non-permitted uses. 
(1)  The uses that are not permitted in a B-3 Overlay District are as follows: 
a.  Automobile (Incl. Motorcycles) Sales and Service (New and Used, When Used Incidental to New Sales) (Service Completely Enclosed in B-3 District). 
b.  Automobile Parking Lots or Garages (Commercial). 
c.  Bus Passenger Station at Existing Business other than Busing Company. 
d.  Manufacturing, Light. 
e.  Newspaper Printer (Completely Enclosed in B-3 District). 
f.  Pawnshop (Completely Enclosed in B-2 and B-3 Districts). 
g.  Recreation Vehicle Park. 
h.  Storage Building (Marine, Automobile, Home, Commercial) (Completely Enclosed in B-3 District). 
i.  Theater (Outdoor) (Consumption of Alcohol Permitted). 
j.  Theater (Outdoor) (Consumption of Alcohol Not Permitted). 
k.  Veterinarian Office and Hospital (with Outside Boarding). 
(2)  The uses that may be permitted by the City Council, pursuant to the methodology prescribed in Chapter 98, Article V Specific City Council Approved Use Permit are as follows: 
a.  Alcoholic Beverage (Retail) Sales (No On-premises Consumption). 
b.  Automobile Car Wash (Full-service). 
c.  Automobile Car Wash (Self-service). 
d.  Automobile Filling Station and/or Service (Service Completely Enclosed in B-2 and B-3 Districts). 
e.  Automobile Paint and Auto Body Shop (Completely Enclosed in B-3 District). 
f.  Automobile Part Sales (Completely Enclosed) (Retail). 
g.  Automobile Rental (Rental Car Parking Area Completely Fenced with Six ft. Opaque Fencing in B-2 and B-3 Districts). 
h.  Carpet Service and Cleaning (Completely Enclosed in B-2 and B-3 Districts). 
i.  Club or Lodge (Governmental and Non-profit). 
j.  Club or Lodge (Non-governmental). 
k.  Convenience Store (Completely Enclosed in B-2 and B-3 Districts). 
l.  Funeral Home. 
m.  Hotel (Other Than Motel or Motor Inn Where Patrons Access Rooms Via Parking Area). 
n.  Marine Sales and Service (New and Used, When Used Incidental to New Sales) (Service Completely Enclosed in B-3 District). 
o.  Restaurant with Drive Thru (Alcoholic Beverages Incidental to Food Sales). 
p.  Stone Cutting and Monument Sales/Service (Completely Enclosed in B-3 District). 
q.  Tavern with Outdoor Area for Patrons/No live or recorded music allowed outside. 
r.  Tavern (Completely Enclosed in B-2 and B-3 Districts). 
s.  Theater (Completely Enclosed) (Consumption of Alcohol Permitted). 
t.  Theater (Completely Enclosed) (Consumption of Alcohol Not Permitted). 
(3)  Any use permitted by the Schedule of Uses [in Appendix A at the end of this Chapter] in a B-3 General Business District and that is not prohibited by Subsection (c)(1) of this section, nor require a Specific City Council Approved Use Permit by subsection (c)(2) of this Section, is permitted as a matter of right in a B-3 Overlay District. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. III, § 8), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 409, § 1, 8-13-2009; Ord. No. 18-07 , § 2, 5-10-2018) 
Sec. 98-70. - Central business district (B-4). 
(a)  Use regulations. These districts are composed of land and structures used for a variety of retail, wholesale sales, repair, entertainment and limited manufacturing which does not emit offensive odor, dust, smoke, fumes, or noise beyond the boundary lines of a B-4 district. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: See Schedule of Uses in the appendix at the end of this chapter and section 98-34. 
(b)  Height regulations. No building shall exceed forty (40) feet in height. Refer to Sec. 98-4. 
(c)  Area regulations. Area uses which may be permitted within a central business district are governed by the prescribed legislation. 
(1)  Front setback. There shall be provided a front building setback of no less than ten feet. 
(2)  Side area setback. No minimum except that a side yard of not less than ten feet in width shall be provided on the side of an adjoining side street. 
(3)  Rear area setback. No rear yard is required, except that a rear yard of not less than 50 feet on depth shall be provided upon that portion of a lot abutting a rear street or B-1, B-2 or B-3 districts. No parking, storage, or similar use shall be allowed in required rear yards in the B-4 district within 25 feet of the rear property line. 
(4)  Area of lot. The minimum area of the lot shall be 10,000 square feet. 
(5)  Width of lot. The width of the lot shall be 60 feet. 
(6)  Depth of lot. The minimum depth of the lot shall be 100 feet. 
(d)  Buffer zone, B-4 to PD, R-1, R-2 or R-3. A buffer zone of 200 feet or a street plus 80 feet or 60 feet plus an approved eight-foot privacy fence shall be maintained. 
(e)  Fire lane. A minimum fire lane of 16 feet shall be maintained adjacent to one side of the building having an entry door. 
(f)  Parking. See article IV of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. III, § 9), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 419. § 3, 11-12-2009) 
Sec. 98-71. - Industrial district (I-1). 
(a)  Use regulations. Manufacturing, industrial servicing or storage process not prohibited by law are permitted per the Schedule of Uses in the appendix at the end of this chapter, and section 98-34, and upon approval by the City Council in accordance with the specific use permit procedure, article V of this chapter. 
(b)  Height regulations. No building shall exceed forty (40) feet in height. Refer to Sec. 98-4. 
(c)  Area regulations. Area uses which may be permitted within the industrial districts are governed by the prescribed legislation. 
(1)  Front area setback. There shall be a front setback of no less than 50 feet. 
(2)  Side area setback. There shall be provided a side building setback no less than 25 feet to I-1 and 50 feet to B-1 through B-4, side yard adjacent to side street minimum 50 feet. 
(3)  Rear yard setback. No rear yard is required, except that a rear yard of not less than 50 feet of depth shall be provided upon that portion of a lot abutting a rear street or I-1 district. No parking, storage, or similar use shall be allowed in required rear yards in I-1 districts within 25 feet of the rear property line. A rear yard of not less than 100 feet in depth shall be provided upon that portion of a lot abutting a B-1, B-2 or B-3 district. 
(4)  Area of lot. The minimum area of the lot shall be 10,000 square feet. 
(5)  Width of lot. The width of the lot shall be 100 feet. 
(6)  Depth of lot. The minimum depth of the lot shall be 100 feet. 
(d)  Buffer zone I-1 to PD, R-1, R-2 or R-3. A buffer zone of 300 feet or a street plus 200 feet or 100 feet plus an approved eight-foot privacy fence shall be maintained. 
(e)  Fire lane. A minimum fire lane of 16 feet shall be maintained on two nonadjacent sides of the building having doors. 
(f)  Safety. All I-1 property lines abutting any other district shall have a safety fence of nine gauge chain link fence with a minimum barrier height of six feet or approved equal. Safety fence may be deleted across the front of the property, provided the fence abuts each side of the building at not more than 20 feet behind the front line of said building. 
(g)  Parking. See article IV of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. III, § 10), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 419, § 3, 11-12-2009) 
Sec. 98-72. - Old Town Helotes Special District. 
(a)  Establishment of Districts. For the purpose of regulating development in and near Old Town Helotes and, more specifically, within the Old Town Helotes Special District, the following subdistricts are hereby established: 
(1)  Mixed-Use Village; and 
(2)  Service Village. 

(b)  Purpose. 
(1)  General. The Old Town Helotes districts are established for the purpose of preserving and protecting the character of the Old Town area as the community grows. The Old Town Helotes Plan provides substantial additional detail and should be consulted during consideration of development applications within these subdistricts. The intent for the area west of Highway 16 (Bandera Road) is to create and maintain a pedestrian environment with a rural village character. Informal clusters of buildings are most appropriate. A variety of setbacks are appropriate, including deep setbacks where parking occurs between and among the trees. Parking surfaces between the building and street are allowed, provided that parking surfaces are located, at a minimum, forty (40) feet from the street. Such parking surfaces are encouraged to be pervious. Where three stories are allowed, the third story use must be residential. Two-story and one-story uses should be located in proximity to Old Bandera Road, Riggs Road, and Highway 16 (Bandera Road). 
(2)  Mixed Use Village Purpose. The purpose of the Mixed Use Village subdistrict is to maintain and enhance the existing mixed use, walkable pedestrian environment in Old Town. A mix of residential, retail, entertainment, and restaurant uses is appropriate. Civic, cultural, and institutional uses are also appropriate. Upper floors are encouraged to include office or residential uses. Uses are intended to create an active, pedestrian-oriented street edge. Residential uses are intended to take advantage of scenic creek views. The Mixed Use Village encompasses both the mixed use village and the mixed use residential areas described in the Old Town Helotes Plan. 
(3)  Service Village Purpose. The purpose of the Service Village subdistrict is to provide for service commercial establishments in a walkable, mixed use setting. Upper floors are encouraged to include office or residential uses. Uses are intended to reflect the orientation to both Old Bandera Road and Highway 16 (Bandera Road). It is anticipated that a balance between users arriving by car and from the Mixed Use Village will occur. The area is intended to serve as a transition between the core of Old Town and surrounding areas. 
(c)  Use Regulations. 
(1)  The following uses are permitted in the OTH subdistricts. Where a use is not clearly allowed by the table and use definitions below, the Board of Adjustment shall interpret whether or not such a use was intended to be allowed within the subdistrict. 
USE TABLE Mixed Use Village Service Village ¦ = Permitted By Right ? = Permitted Only by City Council Blank = Not Permitted Residential Single-family detached (1 unit) ¦ Single-family attached (2 units) ¦ ¦ Townhouse (3+ units) ¦ ¦ Multifamily (3+ units) ¦ ¦ Associated living quarters ¦ ¦ Upper story residential ¦ ¦ Senior living ? ? Civic Day care ¦ ¦ Park ¦ ¦ Place of worship ¦ ¦ School, public or private ¦ ¦ Commercial Alcoholic beverage sales ¦ ¦ Entertainment ¦ ¦ Food Truck Park and Bar Facility ¦ ¦ Office ¦ ¦ Office, Medical ¦ ¦ Overnight accommodations ¦ ¦ Parking, commercial ¦ ¦ Personal services ¦ ¦ Restaurant ¦ ¦ Retail ¦ ¦ Gambling Sexually-oriented business Vehicle sales or service Warehousing or storage Industrial All industrial uses  
(2)  Nonconforming Uses. Nonconforming uses shall be allowed to continue. Such uses may be operated and sold; however, nonconforming uses shall not be expanded or otherwise altered. No change in use, except to a conforming use, is permitted. 
(3)  Drive-Through Facilities. No drive-through facilities shall be allowed in any OTH subdistrict. 
(4)  Use Definitions. Many of the uses included in the use table above are defined in Chapter 98-4 of the Helotes City Code. Where a definition is included below, it shall supersede any other definition. Where a use is not clearly allowed by the use definitions below, the Board of Adjustment shall interpret whether or not such a use was intended to be allowed within the subdistrict. 
Associated Living Quarters. Associated living quarters means servants' quarters and additional living areas of the main residence. The total area of associated living quarters shall be determined in conformance with the table in the definition of associated living quarters in the zoning ordinance. 
Upper Story Residential. A residential use in an upper floor above a commercial use. 
Senior Living. Any group housing and services program for two or more unrelated adults age 55 or older that makes available, at a minimum, one meal a day and housekeeping services and provides personal care services directly or through a formal written agreement with one or more licensed home care or hospice agencies. 
Day Care. A facility designed to care for children or adults, as licensed by the State of Texas. 
Entertainment. Live vocalists, musicians, disc jockeys, comedians, karaoke, performers (paid or not, including contestants), and the like. 
Office. Activities conducted in an office setting and generally focusing on business, government, professional, or financial services. 
Office, Medical. A facility designed to provide office, clinic, surgical, or lab space for doctors, dentists, and similar professionals. 
Overnight Accommodations. A hotel, motel, bed & breakfast, inn, or hostel facility. 
Commercial Parking. A facility that charges patrons for parking. 
Personal Services. A facility providing services on a personal basis, such as an athletic or health club; barbershop or beauty shop; dance, art, gymnastic, or music studios or classes; nail, tanning, and similar personal care services. 
Restaurant. An establishment that prepares and sells food for on- or off-premise consumption. 
Retail. A facility selling, leasing, or renting consumer, home, and/or business goods directly to end consumers, including, but not limited to, antiques, art, art supplies, baked goods, bicycles, books, cameras, crafts, clothing, convenience goods, dry goods, electronic equipment, fabric, flowers, gifts or novelties, groceries, household products, jewelry, music, musical instruments, pet supplies, pharmaceuticals, photo finishing, picture frames, plants, postal substation, printed materials, produce, souvenirs, sporting goods, stationery, tobacco, videos, and related products. Also includes art or photo studio or gallery and light manufacturing associated with the creation of individual pieces of art or crafts. 
Vehicle Sales or Service. A facility or tract of land for the sale or service of motor vehicles, boats, recreational vehicles, or manufactured or modular homes. 
Warehousing or Storage. A facility, whether self-service or full-service, that provides for the storage or movement of goods for themselves or others. This definition shall include office/warehouse facilities where the offices occupy less than 75 percent of the facility; however, it is not intended to include incidental storage for offices as a principal use. 
Industrial Use. A facility engaged in the manufacturing, assembly, repair, or servicing of industrial, business, or consumer machinery, equipment, products, or by-products mainly by providing centralized services for separate retail outlets. Includes contractors, building maintenance services, and similar uses that perform services off-site. Few customers, especially the general public, come to the site. Specifically does not include activities associated with the creation of individual pieces of art or crafts. 
(d)  Dimensional Standards. 
(1)  The following dimensional standards shall apply within the subdistricts of the Old Town Helotes Special District (OTH): 
DIMENSIONS Mixed Use Village Service Village Lot Area (min.) 6,000 SF 6,000 SF Lot Width (min.) 60 feet 60 feet Impervious Cover (max.), 
Buildings plus Surfaces* 47.5 percent 55 percent Building Footprint (max.) 10,000 SF 15,000 SF Building Module (max.)** 5,000 SF 8,000 SF Height (max.) 1 or 2 standard stories; Maximum plate height of 42 feet (three standard stories) allowed where setback from Old Bandera Road, Hwy. 16, and Riggs Road is at least 60 feet 1 or 2 standard stories; Maximum plate height of 42 feet (three standard stories) allowed where setback from Old Bandera Road, Hwy. 16, and Riggs Road is at least 60 feet Residential Density 10 units/acre 10 units/acre Setbacks (min.)  Front*** 0 feet 0 feet  Side 0 feet 0 feet  Rear 10 feet 10 feet  Side/rear abutting street 10 feet 10 feet  
*  Edwards Aquifer Authority standards control where they are more restrictive. The Texas Commission on Environmental Quality standards control where they are more restrictive. Impervious cover includes roofed buildings, paved surfaces, such as sidewalks and driveways, and any other surface that does not permit water to move through to the aquifer. Concrete, clay, and brick pavers shall be considered pervious cover, as long as joints formed from abutting pavers are not filled with impervious materials, such as concrete. 
**  Building module is used here to describe designing a larger building so that it appears as multiple smaller buildings through articulation, change in materials, or other similar techniques. Where the building footprint exceeds the maximum allowed module, the building must be designed as though it were made up of two separate buildings that may be connected. 
***  Varied front setbacks are encouraged. 
(2)  Nonconforming Structures. Nonconforming structures shall be allowed to continue. A nonconforming structure may be expanded provided it does not cause the nonconformity of the structure to increase. An example of a permitted expansion would be the addition of a second story to a structure that was nonconforming due to its footprint exceeding the impervious cover maximum set out in the dimension standards table. However, the expansion of the footprint of such a structure would not be permitted because the expansion would cause an increase in the structure's nonconformity. 
(3)  Building Types. The Old Town Helotes Plan provides for a variety of building types that are appropriate in Old Town, including traditional storefront, traditional village, mixed use village, and mixed use commercial cluster types. See the Plan for additional details, including key design features. 
(4)  Residential Buffer Zone. A buffer zone of 30 feet (or a street plus 10 feet) shall be maintained where any OTH subdistrict abuts an existing R-1, R-2, or R-3 District. 
(5)  Stream Buffer Zone. A stream buffer zone shall be established within the boundary lines of the 100-year floodplain along Helotes Creek, as established by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). Activity within this stream buffer zone shall be limited to recreational purposes, such as trails, overlooks, and similar facilities. Where the City Council feels that appropriate measures have been taken to ensure the stability of the stream bank and the vegetative filtering qualities of the buffer, private development may extend into the stream buffer, provided that it does not block public access along the Creek. Private development is encouraged to dedicate a public easement along Helotes Creek to the City for the continuation of trails, overlooks, and similar facilities. 
(6)  Plazas, Public Spaces, and Paths. Where appropriate, plazas and public spaces should be located near Helotes Creek and throughout Old Town. Paths through private parcels that connect to the Creek are encouraged. 
(7)  Accessory Buildings. 
a.  Commercial Accessory Buildings. No commercial accessory building shall exceed forty (40) feet in height or have more than 25 percent of the ground floor area of the main building. The commercial accessory building shall be located in the rear yard, no closer than 10 feet from the main building or any common property line. No commercial accessory building shall be located within 30 feet of a street. 
b.  Residential Accessory Buildings. A residential accessory building, associated living quarters, or storage building shall not extend beyond the front line of the main building, and shall be a minimum of 25 feet from the side property line and five feet from the rear property line. (Exception: A residential accessory building located 70 feet or more from the front property line shall be a minimum of five feet from the side property line.) No residential accessory building, associated living quarters, or storage building shall exceed thirty (30) feet in height or have more than 50 percent of the ground floor area of the main building. No residential accessory building, associated living quarters, or storage building shall be located within 30 feet of a street. 
(e)  Design Regulations. Review of all development within the OTH subdistricts shall be subject to the concepts and design guidelines of the Old Town Helotes Plan. The Plan content and guidelines replace any existing guidelines used by the Planning and Zoning Commission to consider development in any designated OTH subdistrict. 
(f)  Parking Regulations. 
(1)  Intent. Parking regulations are intended to minimize the appearance of parked cars within the OTH subdistricts. Shared parking is encouraged. Off-street interconnection between parking areas shall be required, where feasible, as determined by the City Engineer. Landscaping in parking areas should have a natural, rural appearance rather than a formal, urban appearance. Protection of existing trees in parking areas is important and parking between and among trees is highly encouraged. 
(2)  Parking Between Buildings and Streets. With the exception of on-street parking, generally no parking shall be allowed between a building and Old Bandera Road, Riggs Road, and/or Hwy. 16 in any OTH subdistrict. Parking surfaces between buildings and streets are allowed, however, provided that parking surfaces are located, at a minimum, forty (40) feet from the street. Such parking surfaces are encouraged to be pervious. Parking between and among trees shall be allowed. Drive aisles and aprons for parking may be concrete or asphalt where determined necessary due to anticipated patterns of use. 
(3)  Maximum Parking Pod Size. Parking shall be broken up by landscaped areas, tree islands, and buildings into pods containing no more than the number of parking spaces listed in the table below. Existing, mature trees shall be integrated into parking areas to the maximum extent feasible. 
Subdistrict Parking Pod Size (max.) Mixed Use Village 30 spaces Service Village 45 spaces  
(4)  Parking Ratios. The following parking shall be provided on the project site or in a location within 600 feet of the project site that is contractually reserved for parking purposes for a minimum of 10 years: 
Use Required Parking Spaces (min.) Residential Uses  Single-family detached, attached or townhouse 2 spaces per dwelling unit  Multifamily, under 2 bedrooms 11/4 spaces per dwelling unit  Multifamily, 2 bedrooms or more 2 spaces per dwelling unit  Senior living 1 space per 2 bedrooms All Civic Uses 1 space per 500 square feet of gross floor area All Commercial Uses 1 space per 500 square feet of gross floor area  
(5)  Cooperative Parking Plan. Any individual use or group of uses may prepare a cooperative parking plan, notwithstanding the restrictions of Section 98-104, provided the form of the parking agreement is approved by the City Attorney. 
(6)  Reduction for Access to Public Parking. Where public parking is available within 1,000 feet of the project site, the City Council may consider a reduction of up to 100 percent of the required parking. 
(7)  Parking Surfaces. Any parking surface that is intended for use by the general public (other than required handicapped spaces) may be surfaced with alternative surfaces that are more pervious than typical asphalt or concrete. Pervious surfaces are preferred; however, other materials such as asphalt, concrete, or another material acceptable to the City Engineer are allowed. All such surfaces shall be stable, firm, and slip-resistant. 
(g)  Sign Regulations. 
(1)  Intent. The intent of the sign regulations in the OTH subdistricts is to create and maintain the small-town rural feel of the area. Signs should suggest hand craftsmanship in their design and materials. Pole-mounted and freestanding signs for wayfinding and advertising purposes throughout the area are appropriate. All other signs should be focused on the pedestrian and not on vehicular traffic associated with adjacent roadways. 
(2)  Existing Regulations Apply. The sign regulations of Chapter 66 shall apply to signs in the OTH subdistricts, except as expressly set forth below. 
(3)  Design and Construction. Sign materials and design shall be suggestive of hand craftsmanship, and the use of local materials is encouraged. 
(4)  Exempted and Restricted Signs. See sign regulations of Chapter 66. No internally illuminated awnings are permitted. 
(5)  Signs and Acts Prohibited. See sign regulations of Chapter 66. Pole-mounted and freestanding signs are acceptable for wayfinding and advertising purposes within the Old Town Helotes Special District. 
(6)  Signs Authorized. 
a.  Signs Authorized By Reference. See the following sections: 
1.  Residential signs (Chapter 66, Article 5, Sec. 66-42; 
2.  Residential subdivision entry signs (Chapter 66, Article 5, Sec. 66-43); 
3.  Banners, temporary and site development signs (Chapter 66, Article 5, Sec. 66-44); 
4.  Traffic control and directional amenity signs (Chapter 66, Article 5, Sec. 66-45); 
5.  Freestanding real estate signs that do not meet the requirements of Chapter 66, Article 5, Sec. 66-46; 
6.  Political signs (Chapter 66, Article 5, Sec. 66-47); 
7.  Public institutions, schools and churches (Chapter 66, Article 5, Sec. 66-48); 
8.  Miscellaneous signs (Chapter 66, Article 5, Sec. 66-52); 
b.  Signs Authorized Specifically in the Old Town Helotes Subdistricts. The following sign requirements shall replace those of Chapter 66, Article 5, Secs. 66-49 thru 66-51. 
1.  Commercial Signs: Single-Business or Multi-Tenant Shopping Center, Business Park, or Office Complex (Monument-Type) 
i.  Size. The surface area of the sign shall not exceed 20 square feet, including the sign face, framing, and mounting hardware. 
ii.  Height. No part of the sign shall extend above five feet from average grade, including a base which is not less than 18 inches above the average grade. 
iii.  Number. One sign for each street frontage on which the building abuts. Not allowed in conjunction with a wall sign on the same frontage. 
iv.  Location. On premises of the business or office and adjacent to major traffic way which the building abuts, subject to the required clear vision area. 
v.  Design. The monument sign design should contain the address where it is located, but the address may be placed on the sign frame or face. The base of the monument sign shall have a minimum height of 18 inches in a landscaped setting, and any design shall be shown not to create a traffic hazard. 
vi.  Lighting. Indirect or internally illuminated. 
vii.  Landscaping. Shall be as follows: 
1)  A landscaped area shall extend a minimum of two feet from each face around the base of the sign subject to the granting of an exception by the Planning and Zoning Commission if justified by unusual site conditions; 
2)  All landscaped areas shall be maintained in a healthy, neat and clean condition; 
3)  Any unhealthy or dead landscaping materials shall be replaced with comparable materials; and 
4)  A plan showing the landscaping must be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission by the applicant. 
2.  Commercial Signs - Projecting, Wall, Hanging, or In/On Windows. Businesses may elect to have one of the following signs per street or pedestrian way which the building faces or abuts, with a maximum of two such signs. Such signs must be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission for review and approval prior to installation. 
i.  Wall Signs. Wall signs by single businesses or an individual business in a multi-tenant shopping center, office complex, or business park shall be regulated as follows: 
1)  Area. Wall signs shall have a maximum sign area of 32 square feet, including sign face, framing, and mounting hardware. 
2)  Height. The top of the sign shall be below the eave line and at a height no greater than 20 feet above the ground immediately adjacent to the sign. 
3)  Number. One sign per street or pedestrian way which the building faces or abuts, with a maximum of two signs. 
4)  Location. All wall signs shall be installed flat against the wall of a building and shall not extend from the wall more than 12 inches. Not allowed in conjunction with a monument sign on the same frontage. 
5)  Lighting. Indirect, internally illuminated, or neon. 
6)  An individual business with a basement entrance with no calculable frontage may have one wall sign with a maximum area of six square feet. 
ii.  Projecting and Hanging Signs. Hanging commercial signs may be used by single-businesses or an individual business in a multi-tenant shopping center, office complex, or business park and shall be regulated as follows: 
1)  Area. Hanging signs shall have a maximum sign area of 24 square feet, including sign face, framing, and mounting hardware. 
2)  Height. No part of the sign shall extend below eight feet from the average grade nor shall it extend above the eave line of the building to which it is attached. 
3)  Number. One sign per street or pedestrian way which the building faces or abuts, with a maximum of two signs. 
4)  Lighting. Indirect, internally illuminated, or neon. 
5)  Special Provisions. Projecting and hanging signs must hang from a structural element of the exterior wall, awning, or overhang. 
iii.  Commercial Signs In or On Windows/Doors. Commercial signs in or on windows or doors or window signs may be used by single-businesses or an individual business in a multi-tenant shopping center and shall be regulated as follows: 
1)  Size. A maximum area of eight square feet or no more than one-half the area of the window or door, whichever is smaller, including sign face, framing, and mounting hardware. A maximum area of six square feet is allowed if the area of the window or door is less than 12 square feet. Area used for the business address, hours of operation, and open or closed status is excluded from the maximum size limit. 
2)  Height. No part of the sign shall extend above eight feet from the average grade, unless a greater height is necessary to center the sign in the window. 
3)  Number. One sign per street or pedestrian way which the building faces or abuts. 
4)  Location. In or on the window or door and entirely within the perimeter of the window or door. 
5)  Lighting. Indirect, internally illuminated, or neon. 
3.  Off-Premises Signs. 
i.  Off-premise signs located in the right-of-way for wayfinding purposes only are permitted provided the design of such signs is consistent with the concepts set out in the Old Town Helotes Plan. 
ii.  Pole-mounted or freestanding signs may be erected off-premises, provided they are used solely for area-wide wayfinding purposes. 
iii.  Pole-mounted and freestanding signs shall have a maximum sign area of 20 square feet, regardless of whether they are off-premises or on-premises or used for way finding or advertising purposes. 
(7)  Creative Sign Review. 
a.  Purpose. This section establishes standards and procedures for the design, review and approval of creative signs in Old Town Helotes. Creative signs that meet the character and intent of the Old Town Helotes Plan may be permitted upon the approval of the City Council. The purposes of this creative sign program are to: 
1.  Encourage signs of unique design, and that exhibit a high degree of thoughtfulness, imagination, inventiveness, and spirit; and 
2.  Provide a process for the application of sign regulations in ways that will allow creatively-designed signs that make a positive visual contribution to the overall image of Old Town Helotes, while mitigating the impacts of large or unusually designed signs. 
b.  Applicability. An applicant may request approval of a sign permit under the creative sign program to authorize on-site signs that employ standards that differ from the other provisions of this paragraph G., but comply with the provisions of this paragraph 7. 
c.  Approval Authority. A sign permit application for a creative sign shall be subject to review by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approval by the City Council. 
d.  Design Criteria. In approving an application for a creative sign, the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council shall ensure that a proposed sign meets the following design criteria: 
1.  Design quality. The sign shall: 
i.  Constitute a substantial aesthetic improvement to the site and shall have a positive visual impact on the surrounding area; 
ii.  Be of unique design, and exhibit a high degree of thoughtfulness, imagination, inventiveness, and spirit; and 
iii.  Provide strong graphic character through the imaginative use of graphics, color, texture, quality materials, scale, and proportion. 
2.  Contextual criteria. The sign shall contain at least one of the following elements: 
i.  Classic historic design style; 
ii.  Creative image reflecting current or historic character of Old Town Helotes; 
iii.  Inventive representation of the use, name or logo of the structure or business. 
3.  Architectural criteria. The sign shall: 
i.  Utilize and/or enhance the architectural elements of the building; and 
ii.  Be placed in a logical location in relation to the overall composition of the building's facade and not cover any key architectural features/details of the facade. 
4.  Old Town Helotes Plan consistency. The sign shall be consistent with the character and intent for Old Town Helotes, as described in the Old Town Helotes Plan. 
(8)  Review Procedures, Variances. With the exception of Creative Sign Review, the administrative procedures of Chapter 66 shall apply to all signs; however, no variances shall be granted in any OTH subdistrict except through the creative sign review provisions above. 
(9)  Sign Design Review Guidelines. The sign design guidelines in the Old Town Helotes Plan shall supplement those of Chapter 66. 
(10)  Special Provisions. Signs with Historic Significance - As long as building use does not change, any nonconforming sign in Old Town Helotes is grandfathered in perpetuity. 
(h)  Tree Preservation. The tree preservation provisions of Chapter 94, Article I, shall apply. Further, any off-site tree mitigation planting required shall occur within the Old Town Helotes Special District. 
(i)  Landscaping. The landscape provisions of Chapter 94, Article II, shall apply, with the exception that only Texas native landscape materials may be planted in any OTH subdistrict for required landscaping purposes. Other accent plantings that are not required may be non-native. All interior planting areas for trees shall have a minimum width of six feet. Where the planting patterns described in the Old Town Helotes Plan, especially with respect to rural or informal planting, differ from the requirements of the landscape ordinance, the City shall consider the contents of the Plan to supersede the landscape ordinance. Where screening is required, plant materials shall be reasonably anticipated to provide an opaque screen within three years of planting, including those near parking areas. 
(j)  Walkways. All new development in OTH subdistricts shall be required to provide a detached walkway parallel to the street where such a facility does not already exist. All walkways shall comply with all applicable federal, state, and local accessibility laws, standards, and codes and be a minimum of four feet in width. The area between the walkway and the street shall be planted in native vegetation, especially groundcover or native grasses. Where the site is constrained due to existing buildings, a walkway adjacent to the road edge may be considered by the City Council. 
(k)  Walls and Fences. New walls and fences shall reflect traditional walls and fences in Old Town. Native rock and wood rail fences are encouraged. Concrete block, un-faced concrete, plastic, fiberglass, re-bar, iron, plywood, or mesh construction fences are not allowed for permanent use. 
(l)  Exterior Lighting. The exterior lighting provisions of Chapter 34, Article III, shall apply. Where the exterior lighting described in the Old Town Helotes Plan, especially with respect to rural character, differs from the requirements of the lighting ordinance, the City shall consider the contents of the Plan to supersede the lighting ordinance. Exterior lighting shall not interfere with the rural character of Old Town. Light impacts on adjacent properties shall be minimized by using fully-shielded fixtures and focused light sources. Washing an entire building façade with light is not allowed. All exterior lighting shall have an informal appearance. Formal spacing or uniform alignment of street lights is not allowed. The height of street lights shall not exceed 16 feet. Paths and walkways shall be illuminated, where appropriate, with low-scale fixtures. 
(m)  Mechanical and Service Area Screening. Mechanical areas, air handling equipment, compressors, satellite dishes, rainwater storage tanks, dumpsters, transformers, stand-alone utility boxes, and all other service areas shall be located to the side and rear of buildings to the maximum extent determined feasible by the City. Such areas shall be screened from view using landscaping, a fence, or other enclosure(s). Where landscaping is employed, plant materials shall be reasonably anticipated to provide an opaque screen within three years of planting. 
(n)  Overnight Outdoor Storage and Outdoor Display. Overnight outdoor storage and outdoor display shall be limited in the OTH subdistricts. 
(1)  Defined. 
a.  Outdoor display is the outdoor display of products actively available for sale. Outdoor display shall not include merchandise or material in boxes, in crates, on pallets or other kinds of shipping containers (such merchandise shall be considered outdoor storage). 
b.  Outdoor storage is the overnight outdoor storage of vehicles awaiting repair, RV and boat storage at a self-service storage facility, merchandise or material in boxes, in crates, on pallets or other kinds of shipping containers, shopping carts, garden supplies, building supplies, plants, fleet vehicles and other similar merchandise, material or equipment. Outdoor storage shall also include salvage yards, vehicle storage yards, overnight outdoor storage of shipping containers, lumber, pipe, steel, junk and other similar merchandise, material or equipment. 
(2)  Allowed. 
a.  Outdoor display shall be allowed where all display materials are returned inside the building during hours the business is closed, excluding sculptures or other handcrafted pieces of art. 
b.  Overnight outdoor storage is permitted to the side or rear of a main building, provided it is completely screened from view using landscaping, a fence, or other enclosure. Where landscaping is employed, plant materials shall be reasonably anticipated to provide an opaque screen within three years of planting. 
(o)  Review of Development. 
(1)  Pre-Application Conference. A pre-application conference may be held with the City of Helotes Economic Development Corporation (EDC). The EDC shall provide advice and assistance with regard to the approval of the proposed development and, especially, with regard to the contents of the Old Town Helotes Plan. A joint work session called by the EDC with various other Boards and Commissions is encouraged during the pre-application conference. 
(2)  Traffic Impact Analysis. A traffic impact analysis shall not be required for any development in the OTH subdistricts located west of Highway 16 (Bandera Road). 
(3)  Review Process. 
a.  City staff shall perform the initial review of all development. 
b.  The Economic Development Corporation shall be encouraged to comment on all submittals during the pre-application conference referenced above. 
c.  The City Arborist shall review, and approve or deny all applications for tree removal, tree replacement, tree mitigation, and/or landscaping within the OTH subdistricts within 45 days of the application submittal. 
d.  The Planning & Zoning Commission shall review and make recommendations to the City Council regarding development within the OTH subdistricts within 45 days of the application (design) submittal to the Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review and approve or deny, barring variance requirements, all sign applications within 45 days of the application submittal to the Commission. The Planning & Zoning Commission shall review and make recommendations to the City Council regarding all plats within the OTH subdistricts within the timeframes established by state law. Any conditions imposed on a plat shall be limited to those required to bring the plat into compliance with state law and the City's requirements. 
e.  Once the review has been completed by City staff and the Commission, the City Council shall schedule its review at the next available regularly-scheduled City Council meeting. The City Council shall review and approve, approve with conditions, or deny all development applications within the OTH sub districts. 
f.  In making a decision regarding approval of the development, the following criteria shall be considered: 
1.  The development is consistent with the content and design guidelines of the Old Town Helotes Plan; 
2.  The development meets or exceeds the standards of the City regulations, including specifically, Chapter 98 (Zoning), Chapter 78 (Subdivisions), and any other supporting ordinance and regulations. 
(4)  Minor Plat. 
a.  A minor plat may be approved in any Old Town Helotes subdistrict in accordance with this section. A minor plat is any plat for four or fewer lots fronting on an existing street and not requiring the creation of any new street (not including drive aisles) or the extension of municipal facilities. Any plat that requires a waiver from subdivision design and improvement standards, any utility dedication, or any dedication of land shall not be processed as a minor plat. 
b.  The City Engineer (or designee) shall review the application and approve or approve with conditions the application. 
c.  The City Engineer (or designee) shall not deny a minor plat application - a minor plat that does not meet the City's requirements shall be forwarded to the Planning & Zoning Commission for review and City Council for final action. 
d.  The minor plat shall not be recorded until it has been endorsed by the City Engineer (or designee). 
(Ord. No. 297, § 1, 1-26-2006; Ord. No. 339, § 2, 5-12-2007; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-08-2008; Ord. No. 419, § 4, 11-12-2009; Ord. No. 587 , §§ 1, 2, 3-10-2016; Ord. No. 588 , § 1, 3-10-2016; Ord. No. 590, § 1, 5-12-2016) 
Secs. 98-73-98-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PARKING REGULATIONS 

Sec. 98-101. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to establish the guidelines for off-street parking space consistent with the proposed land use to: 
(1)  Eliminate occurrence of nonresident on-street parking in adjoining neighborhoods; 
(2)  Avoid the traffic congestion and public safety hazards caused by a failure to provide such parking space; and 
(3)  Expedite the movement of traffic on public thoroughfares in a safe manner, increase the carrying capacity of the streets, and reduce the amount of land required for streets, and the cost to both the property owner and the city. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. IV, § 1), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008 
Sec. 98-102. - Number of parking spaces required. 
Use Number of Parking Spaces Required Dwelling units 2/dwelling unit Office 1/300 gross square feet Retail 1/200 gross square feet Restaurant 1/100 gross square feet Health Club 1/100 gross square feet Warehouse 1/500 gross square feet Assembly 1/300 gross square feet Medical office 1/200 gross square feet Schools 1/3.5 seats in assembly rooms, plus 1/faculty member Hotels/Motels 1/guest room, plus 1/500 square feet of common area Industry 1/500 gross square feet  
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. IV, § 2), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 381, § 2, 10-23-2008; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-103. - Computation of number of parking spaces. 
    In computing the number of such parking spaces required, the following rules shall govern: 
(1)  For the purpose of this article, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: Floor area means gross floor area of the specific uses. 
(2)  Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall be construed to be the next higher whole number. 
(3)  When a building or use existing prior to the effective date of the chapter is enlarged in floor area, area used, seating capacity or otherwise, by ten percent or more over the capacity on the effective date of this chapter, the parking requirements set forth herein shall be complied with as follows: Whenever a building or use constructed or established after the effective date of this chapter is changed or enlarged in floor area, seating capacity or otherwise to create a deficiency in parking spaces as set forth herein of ten percent or more such spaces shall be provided as required to effect 100 percent compliance with the parking requirements set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. IV, § 3), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-104. - Location of parking spaces; cooperative parking plan. 
    All parking spaces required herein shall be located on the same lot with the building or use served, except that where an increase in the number of spaces is required by a change or enlargement of use or where such spaces are provided collectively or used jointly by two or more buildings or establishments, the required spaces may be located not to exceed 300 feet from an institutional building served and not to exceed 500 feet from any other non-residential building served. 
(1)  Churches. Up to 100 percent of the parking spaces required for a church or church school auditorium may be provided and used jointly by banks, offices, retail stores, repair shops, service establishments and similar uses not normally open, used, or operated during the same hours; provided however, that written agreement therefor is properly executed and filed as specified in subsection (2). 
(2)  Written agreement. In any cases where the required parking spaces are not located on the same lot or contiguous with the building or use served, or where such spaces are collectively or jointly provided and used, a written agreement thereby assuring their retention for such purposes shall be properly drawn and executed by the parties concerned, approved as to form by the city attorney, and shall be filed with the application for a building permit. The agreement shall identify the entire land area to be included within the cooperative parking plan, the owner or owners of all structures then existing on such land area, and all parties having a legal interest in such land area and structure. Sufficient evidence to establish the status of applicants as owners or parties in interest shall be provided. The application shall include plans showing the location of the uses or structures for which off-street parking facilities are required and the schedule of times used by those sharing in common. 
(3)  Registration of cooperative parking plan. Upon approval of the plan, a copy of such plan shall be registered with the building permit. 
(4)  Amendment or withdrawal of cooperative parking plan. Pursuant to the same procedure and subject to the same limitations and requirements by which the cooperative parking plan was approved and registered, any such plan may be amended or withdrawn, either partially or completely, if all the conditions and limitations of the plan and all land and structures withdrawn from such plan comply with parking regulations. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. IV, § 4), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-105. - Development and maintenance of parking areas. 
    Every parcel of land hereafter used as public parking area, including commercial parking lots and automobile, farm equipment or other open-air sales lots, shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Drainage and surfacing; maintenance. Areas shall be properly graded for drainage, surfaced with concrete, asphaltic concrete, or asphalt and maintained in good condition, and free of weeds, dust, trash, and debris. 
(2)  Wheel guards. Boundary or perimeter areas shall be provided with wheel guards or bumper guards, so located that no part of parked vehicles will extend beyond the property line of the parking area. 
(3)  Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area shall be arranged so as to direct or shield the light away from the adjoining premises in any residential district and so it does not interfere with traffic. 
(4)  Entrances and exits. Facilities shall be provided with entrances and exits so located as to minimize traffic congestion. 
(5)  Prohibition of other uses. Facilities shall not be used for the repair, dismantling or servicing of any vehicle, equipment, materials or supplies. 
(6)  Dimensions of parking spaces. Each off-street parking space shall be a minimum of nine feet wide and have not less than 180 square feet, exclusive of access or maneuvering area, ramps and other appurtenances. 
(7)  Number of parking spaces. The number required shall be determined from the table in section 98-102. The classification of uses referred to shall be deemed to include and apply to all uses. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. IV, § 5), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-106. - Off-street loading regulations. 
    Every building or part thereof erected or occupied for retail or wholesale service, manufacturing, storage, warehouse, hotel, mortuary, or any other use similarly involving the receipt or distributing of materials or merchandise shall provide and maintain, on the same premises, loading space in accordance with the following regulations: 
(1)  Types. Based on the business need there shall be two sizes of off-street truck loading spaces designated "large" and "small." 
a.  Large spaces. Each "large" space shall have an overhead clearance of at least 14 feet, shall be at least 12 feet wide, and shall be at least 50 feet long, exclusive of access or maneuvering area, platform, and other appurtenances. 
b.  Small spaces. Each "small" space shall have an overhead clearance of at least ten feet, shall be at least eight feet wide and shall be at least 20 feet long, exclusive of access or maneuvering area, platform and other appurtenances. 
(2)  Location. Off-street truck loading facilities shall be located such that: 
a.  Trucks will not extend into a public street while positioning to or parking at the loading dock; 
b.  Trucks will not block any fire lane while at the dock. 
(3)  Development and maintenance of off-street loading. Off-street truck loading facilities shall be constructed, maintained and operated in accordance with the following specifications: 
a.  Drainage and surfacing; maintenance. Areas shall be properly graded for drainage, surfaced with concrete, or asphaltic concrete, or asphalt, and maintained in good condition, free of weeds, dust, trash and debris. 
b.  Protective screen fencing. Areas shall be provided with protective screen fencing such that occupants of adjacent structures are not unreasonably disturbed during the night by the movement of vehicle lights. 
c.  Lighting. Lighting facilities shall be so arranged that they neither unreasonably disturb occupants of adjacent residential properties nor interfere with traffic. 
d.  Entrances and exits. Areas shall be provided with entrances and exits so located as to minimize traffic congestion. 
(4)  Minimum loading spaces required. The minimum number of truck loading spaces for structures containing the uses enumerated for B-2, B-3, B-4 and I-1 districts shall be: 
Gross Floor Area in Structure (square feet) Minimum Number of Spaces and Type 0 to 15,000 1 small or 1 large 15,000 to 30,000 2 small or 2 large or combination 30,001 to 50,000 2 large 50,001 to 100,000 3 large For each additional 50,000 1 large  
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. IV, § 6), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Secs. 98-107-98-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SPECIFIC CITY COUNCIL APPROVAL USE PERMIT 

Sec. 98-131. - Authorized uses. 
    The City Council, after public hearing and proper notice to all parties affected in accordance with the notice procedures prescribed under article XII of this chapter for amending the zoning code, and after recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission, may authorize the issuance of a specific use permit for zoning a specific use at a specific location within the zoning district identified within the schedule by a "CC." 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. V, § 1), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-132. - Development standards. 
(a)  The Planning and Zoning Commission in considering and determining their recommendation and the City Council in considering any request for a specific City Council use permit may require from the applicant plans, information, operating date and expert evaluation concerning the location, function and characteristics of any building or use proposed. The commission may recommend additional restrictions or conditions to carry out the spirit and intent of this chapter and to mitigate adverse effects of the proposed use. These requirements may include, but are not limited to, increased open space, loading and parking requirements, suitable landscaping and additional improvements such as curbing and sidewalks. 
(b)  The City Council may in compliance with this chapter establish conditions of operations, location, arrangement and construction of any use for which a permit is authorized. In authorizing the location of any of the uses listed as specific City Council approval use permits, the City Council may impose such development standards and safeguards as the conditions and location indicate important to the welfare and protection of adjacent property from excessive noise, vibration, dust, dirt, smoke, fumes, gas, odor, expulsion, glare, offensive view or other undesirable or hazardous conditions. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. V, § 2), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-133. - Temporary construction buildings and storage areas; temporary subdivision sales offices. 
(a)  Temporary construction buildings and storage areas. Temporary buildings and temporary building material storage areas to be used for construction purposes may be permitted for a specified period of time in accordance with the building permit. Upon completion, abandonment of construction or expiration of permit, such field offices and buildings shall be removed within 30 days, or at the direction of the city building inspector. 
(b)  Temporary subdivision sales office. A temporary subdivision sales office, if otherwise permissible under this chapter, may be erected or prefabricated for use for a six-month period of time. An on-site subdivision sales office shall require a city permit renewable every six months. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. V, § 3), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-134. - Temporary development signs. 
    Temporary development and promotional signs shall comply with the Sign Regulation Ordinance of the city (chapter 66). 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. V, § 4), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-135. - Distribution of copies of permit. 
    One copy of the City Council approved specific use permit shall be delivered to the owner of the property, one copy shall be filed in the office of city secretary, one copy to the building inspector, and one copy to each member of the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. V, § 5), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-136. - Compliance with permit; expiration of permit. 
    Following the issuance of a City Council approved specific use permit, the building inspector shall insure that, if the development is undertaken, it is completed in compliance with the permit. However, if a specific use permit has not been used within six months (180 calendar days) after the date approved by the City Council, the permit is automatically cancelled, which fact shall be noted over the signature of the building official on the file copies of the permit, and the owner shall be so notified in writing by the building inspector. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. V, § 6), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Secs. 98-137-98-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 600, § 1, adopted Dec. 8, 2016, effectively repealed the former Art. IV, §§ 98-161-98-163, and enacted a new Art. IV as set out herein. The former Art. IV pertained to planned residential unit development and derived from Ord. No. 253, § 1(Art. VI, §§ 1-3), adopted Apr. 8, 2004; and Ord. No. 387, § 1, adopted Dec. 8, 2008. 

Sec. 98-161. - Purpose. 
    It may be desirable that some properties in the city be developed in accordance with site plans prepared and approved in advance of development. To encourage such planned unit development, regulatory provisions are provided in sections 98-162 through 98-164. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 12-8-2016) 
Sec. 98-162. - Authorized uses. 
    Whenever any property is proposed to be within a planned unit development, the following types of uses may be authorized: 
(1)  Residential housing development consistent with area zoning, as deemed appropriate by the city council. 
(2)  Commercial development consistent with area zoning and design standards defined within article IX, section 98-253 (procedures and review standards) of this chapter, as deemed appropriate by the city council. 
(3)  Recreation area/open space. 
(4)  A combination of any of the types of developments listed above. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 12-8-2016) 
Sec. 98-163. - Site plan; procedures. 
(a)  A site plan setting forth the uses to be incorporated into the planned unit development shall be approved and filed as part of the ordinance. The provisions of article XII of this chapter shall govern the review and processing of each application for a planned unit development. 
(b)  Such required site plan shall show the provisions for ingress and egress to the property, access from a public street, number and type of housing and/or commercial units proposed, sidewalks, utilities, drainage, parking space, height of buildings, maximum lot coverage, yards and open spaces, screening walls or fences and other development and protective requirements considered necessary to create a reasonable transition and protection of the adjacent property. 
(c)  The planning and zoning commission may recommend that the city council impose conditions relative to the standards of development and as a part of the planned unit development zoning. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 12-8-2016) 
Sec. 98-164. - Amendments of approved PUD plans. 
(a)  Amendments to approved planned unit development plans shall not be authorized by the board of adjustment, but rather shall be made in accordance with the provisions of article XII of this chapter after review by the planning and zoning commission and approval by the city council. 
(b)  Amendment applications shall include the requisite application, fee, proposed plans, and a summary of all amendments prior to processing the application. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 12-8-2016) 
Secs. 98-165-98-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES 
DIVISION 1. - NONCONFORMING USES 

Sec. 98-191. - Continuation of use. 
    Any nonconforming use of land may be continued in present use indefinitely and is transferable. If, however, a continuous operation is not carried on in such nonconforming use during a continuous period of one year, the building, the structure, or tract of land where the nonconforming use previously existed shall thereafter be occupied and used only for a conforming use. Intent to resume active operation shall not affect the foregoing. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. VII, § 1), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 498, § 1, 03-14-2013) 
Sec. 98-192. - Change of use. 
    A nonconforming use may be changed to any conforming use. A nonconforming use shall not be changed to any other type of nonconforming use. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. VII, § 2), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 498, § 1, 03-14-2013) 
Sec. 98-193. - Damage and destruction. 
    A nonconforming use occurring within a building or structure shall not be extended or rebuilt in case of obsolescence or total destruction by fire or other cause. In the case of partial destruction, not exceeding 50 percent (50%) of the building or structure's value, the Development Services Department shall issue a permit for reconstruction. If greater than 50 percent (50%) of the building or structure's value, the building or structure shall be brought into compliance or a zoning variance requested through the Board of Adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. VII, § 3), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 498, § 1, 03-14-2013) 
Sec. 98-194. - Enlargement. 
    A nonconforming use shall not be enlarged or extended with respect to the operation of the use in a building or structure, except in compliance with zoning requirements for that district. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. VII, § 4), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 498, § 1, 03-14-2013) 
Sec. 98-195. - Normal maintenance. 
    Normal maintenance of a building or structure containing a nonconforming use is permitted, including necessary nonstructural repairs and incidental alterations not extending the operation of the nonconforming use. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. VII, § 5), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 498, § 1, 03-14-2013) 
Sec. 98-196. - Structural changes. 
    No structural alteration shall be made in a building or other structure containing a nonconforming use, except that required by law. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. VII, § 6), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 498, § 1, 03-14-2013) 
Secs. 98-197-98-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES 

Sec. 98-211. - Limitation on regulations. 
    No structure, otherwise in accordance with the provisions of these regulations or an amendment hereto, shall be rendered or be deemed a nonconforming structure solely for a failure to comply with provisions relating to signs. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 1, 03-14-2013) 
Sec. 98-212. - Continuance of nonconforming structures. 
    Subject to all limitations herein set forth, any nonconforming structure may be occupied and operated and maintained in a state of good repair, but no nonconforming structure shall be enlarged or extended unless the enlargement or extension can be, and is, made in compliance with all of the provisions herein established for structures in the district in which the nonconforming structure is located. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 1, 03-14-2013) 
Sec. 98-213. - Accidental damage to building. 
    If a nonconforming structure is destroyed by fire or the elements, it may not be reconstructed or rebuilt except to conform to the provisions contained herein. In the case of partial destruction by fire or other causes, not exceeding 50 percent (50%) of the structures value, the Development Services Department may issue a permit for reconstruction. If greater than 50 percent (50%) of the structures value, the Board of Adjustment may grant a permit for repair but not for the enlargement of the structure. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 1, 03-14-2013) 
Sec. 98-214. - Obsolescence of structure. 
    The right to operate and maintain any nonconforming structure shall terminate and shall cease to exist whenever the nonconforming structure becomes obsolete or substandard under any applicable Code of the City and the cost of placing such structure in lawful compliance with the applicable regulation exceeds 50 percent (50%) of the replacement cost of such structure on the date that the Building Official, Code Enforcement Officer, and/or City Administrator determines that such structure is obsolete or substandard. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 1, 03-14-2013) 
Sec. 98-215. - Determination of replacement costs. 
    In determining the replacement cost of any nonconforming structure, there shall not be included therein the cost of land or any factors other than the nonconforming structure itself. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 1, 03-14-2013) 
Sec. 98-216. - Alterations. 
    The Board of Adjustment may grant, as a special exception, an application to extend or enlarge a nonconforming structure, provided such grant does not serve to prevent the return of such structure to a conforming structure in the future. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 1, 03-14-2013) 
Secs. 98-217-98-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES 

Sec. 98-221. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city and to prevent the concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction of the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment to the Constitution of the United States of America, or to deny access by distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. However it is the intent of the City Council that locational restrictions are promulgated to address adverse secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses. 
(Ord. No. 266, § 1, 10-14-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-222. - Definitions. 
    Definitions which apply to this article are as follows: 
    Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features: 
(1)  Persons who appear in a state of nudity; or 
(2)  Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities"; or 
(3)  Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
    Adult motel means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which: 
(1)  Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; or 
(2)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours; or 
(3)  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours. 
    Adult movie theater means a commercial establishment the primary business of which is the offering or showing, for any form of consideration, of films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
    Adult novelty store, adult bookstore or adult video store means a commercial establishment wherein 40 percent or more of the displayed inventory which is offered for sale or rental for any form of consideration includes one or more of the following: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, DVDs or video reproductions, slides, or other photographic reproductions which depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or 
(2)  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities"; or 
(3)  Any other items intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to the customer. 
A business that does not make on-premise sales of the above noted goods is not subject to the provisions of this article. 
    Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
    Adult video arcade or adult movie arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, video tape players or recorders, video reproduction devices or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
    Chief of police means the chief of police of the city or his designated agent. 
    Escort means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person. 
    Escort agency means a person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes, for a fee, tip, or other consideration. 
    Establishment means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; 
(3)  The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or 
(4)  The relocation of any sexually oriented business. 
    Nude model studio, nude studio or love parlor means any place where a person who appears in the state of nudity or displays "specified anatomical areas" is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. 
    Nudity or a state of nudity means: 
(1)  The appearance of a human bare buttocks, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or female breast; or 
(2)  A state of dress which fails to opaquely cover a human buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals or areola of the female breast. 
    Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity. 
    Residential district means a single-family, two-family, multiple-family or mobile home district included in the city zoning districts R-1, R-2 or R-3. 
    Residential use means a single-family, two-family, multiple-family, or mobile home district use which is located within the city zoning districts R-1, R-2 or R-3. "Residential use" shall also include existing single-family, two-family, multiple-family, or mobile home districts, if in such use as of March 1, 1993, regardless of the zoning district where located. 
    Semi-nude means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areolas of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices, and/or displays commonly known as "G-strings," "pasties," or "wet T-shirt contest," and any similar such devices and/or displays. 
    Sexual encounter center means a business or commercial enterprise that, as its primary business purpose, offers for any form of consideration: 
(1)  Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the same sex and/or the opposite sex; or 
(2)  Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons are in a state of nudity or are semi-nude. 
    Sexually oriented business means an adult movie arcade, adult video arcade, adult novelty store, adult bookstore, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult movie theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude studio, nude model studio, love parlor or sexual encounter center, or any other commercial enterprise, the primary business of which is the offering of a service or the selling, renting, or exhibiting of devices or any other items intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification of the customer. 
    Specified anatomical areas means human genitals in a state of sexual arousal. 
    Specified sexual activities means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; 
(2)  Sex acts, actual or simulated, including intercourse, or copulation, or sodomy; 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (1) through (3) above. 
    Substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business means the increase in floor area occupied by the business by more than 25 percent, as the floor area exists on March 1, 1993. 
    Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease or sublease of any property, or any portion thereof, used for or in relation to any such business; 
(2)  The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
(Ord. No. 266, § 1(1), 10-14-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-223. - Location. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within 750 feet of any real property boundary line of: 
(1)  Any church, synagogue and/or any other public place of worship; 
(2)  Any public or private pre-school, elementary and/or secondary school, educational center or facility, youth activity center, or facility; 
(3)  Any public library; 
(4)  City hall; 
(5)  Any public park; or 
(6)  Any lot devoted to a residential use as defined in this article. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he causes or permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within 750 feet of any real property boundary line of another sexually oriented business. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if he causes or permits the operation, establishment, or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented business in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, or the increase of floor area of any sexually oriented business in any building structure, or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business. 
(d)  For the purposes of subsection (a) of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the real property boundary line of an affected church, public or private elementary school, public park, residential district or residential lot. 
(e)  For the purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the distance between any two sexually oriented businesses shall be measured, in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest portion of the real property of any property boundary line on which each business is located. 
(f)  Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on March 1, 1993, or on the date such use is annexed, that is in violation of subsection (a) or subsection (b) of this section, shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed three years, unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of 180 days or more. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended, or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two or more sexually oriented businesses are within 750 feet of each other, as defined in subsection (b) of this section, and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was first established and continually operating at that particular location is the conforming use and the later-established business(es) is (are) the nonconforming. 
(g)  A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the lawful opening of such a business, of a public place of worship, school, public or private pre-school, elementary or secondary school, youth activity center, public park, residential district, residential use, or the city hall within 750 feet of the sexually oriented business as defined in this article. 
(Ord. No. 266, § 1(2), 10-14-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-224. - Administrative procedures. 
(a)  Survey required. Any person who desires to establish a sexually oriented business as defined in this article shall first provide a survey under seal to the city administrator to establish that the business is at least 750 feet from a lot devoted to residential use or district zoned for residential use, a public place of worship, a public or private pre-school, elementary or secondary school, youth activity center, public library, public park or the city hall. 
(b)  Fee. In addition to the survey, the applicant shall pay a non-refundable fee as prescribed in the most recent adopted fee schedule passed and approved by the City Council to offset the costs of the city's investigation to confirm that the proposed location is more than 750 feet from the protected uses established above. 
(c)  Investigation. The city administrator shall complete the investigation herein provided for and notify the applicant of the result not more than 20 business days after receiving the sealed survey and application fee. 
(d)  Rejection of application. If the application is rejected, the city administrator shall provide a letter that specifies the reason(s) for denial, and the applicant shall have 30 days to either appeal the decision of the city administrator to the City Council or seek review in a court having jurisdiction of such matter. If no appeal is made, the decision of the city administrator is final. 
(e)  Application for certificate of occupancy. Subsequent to the verification of the sealed survey herein required, the applicant may apply for a certificate of occupancy which shall be issued in conformance with this Code within 20 business days of application therefor. If upon inspection the premises do not meet the Code requirements, the building inspector shall notify the applicant of the specific reasons for denial, in writing. Provided, however, the applicant may request one 20-business-day extension of the application if the request is in writing and received by the building inspector prior to the expiration of the initial 20-business-day period established herein for issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The fee for a certificate of occupancy shall be in accordance with the fee schedule of the city. 
(f)  Appeal of denial of certificate of occupancy. If the certificate of occupancy is denied by the building inspector, the applicant shall have 30 days to either appeal the decision to the City Council or seek review in a court having jurisdiction of such matter. If no appeal is made, the decision of the building inspector is final. 
(Ord. No. 266, § 1(3), 10-14-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 394, § 10, 2-12-2009) 
Sec. 98-225. - Enforcement; penalty; defenses. 
(a)  Violation of section 98-223 is punishable as a Class C misdemeanor with a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $2,000.00 upon conviction, and each day such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense and punishable as such. 
(b)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 98-223 that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
(1)  By a preparatory school licensed by the State of Texas; or a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
(2)  By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
(3)  In a structure: 
a.  Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; and 
b.  Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and 
c.  Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 98-223 that each item of descriptive, painted, film, or video material offered for sale or rental, taken as a whole, contains serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. 
(Ord. No. 266, § 1(4), 10-14-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-226. - Injunction. 
    A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business in violation of section 98-223 and/or any other section of this article is subject to a suit for injunction to prohibit violation, in addition to prosecution for criminal violations under section 98-225. 
(Ord. No. 266, § 1(5), 10-14-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Secs. 98-227-98-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW BY PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION AND CITY COUNCIL 

Sec. 98-251. - Objectives. 
(a)  The design and construction of all new commercial structures and structures which are renovated shall reflect forms, styles, and materials that are complementary to the Texas Hill Country and meet the following objectives: 
(1)  Promote orderly and harmonious development of the City; 
(2)  Encourage the attainment of the most desirable use of land and improvements; 
(3)  Enhance the desirability of living conditions in the City; 
(4)  Promote high aesthetic quality of development in the City; and 
(5)  Preserve and enhance historic sites, structures, and areas. 
(Ord. No. 399, § 1, 3-26-2009) 
Sec. 98-252. - Board established; membership; organization; jurisdiction. 
(a)  The Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council shall review plans for all proposed commercial construction, alterations, and/or renovations for compliance with the design standards set forth in this Article. 
(b)  Jurisdiction. To ensure compatibility with the approved design standards, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall review and make recommendations to the City Council, and the City Council shall have the authority to review and act on all plans for commercial development in the City's corporate City limits. If approved, the City Council shall issue a letter of compliance for each project before permits may be issued. 
(Ord. No. 399, § 1, 3-26-2009; Ord. No. 18-17 , § 1, 8-9-2018) 
Sec. 98-253. - Procedures and review standards. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  Design standards. The design and construction of all new, remodeled, or renovated commercial structures shall adhere to the adopted design standards below. 
(2)  The design standards address all exterior construction changes in the commercially-zoned districts. All buildings and structures shall go through the design review process outlined in Article IX before any alteration may be made to a building or structure. The review process applies to commercial exterior additions, renovations, and new construction. 
(b)  Guidelines. 
(1)  These guidelines present design standards for commercially-zoned districts in Helotes. The standards are meant to provide a common basis for making decisions about the design of commercial structures. The design standards are designed to provide a consistent, yet flexible, approach to the preparation and review of commercial development plans by defining a range of appropriate responses to specific design issues. 
(2)  The design standards are intended to aid in the preservation of Helotes' cultural and historic resources within commercially-zoned districts and promote new construction that is compatible with the character of the architecture within the surrounding area. 
(3)  Using the Design Standards. 
a.  Property owners, contractors, and architects shall utilize the standards when completing commercial exterior additions, renovations, or new construction. 
b.  Property owners, contractors, and architects should hold a pre application conference with City representatives. Permit applications will include proposed site plans and building elevation information, as well as other documents required by the City. Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall review and make recommendations to the City Council, and the City Council shall determine if the proposed project satisfies the design guidelines of the City. 
(4)  Design Standards. 
a.  Site and Streetscape Design Standards. 

Preserve views from public right-of-way of scenic natural features.
1.  Views. 
a)  Views from public rights-of-way of natural features should be maintained as much as possible. 
b)  Buildings should be situated to frame and preserve Hill Country views from public rights-of-way. 
c)  Provide overlook opportunities from public rights-of-way when feasible. 
2.  Landscaping. 

Incorporate existing clusters of live oaks when feasible. The use of native plantings is also encouraged.
a)  Refer to City landscaping regulations. 
b)  Hill Country landscaping includes a canopy of native live oak trees, grasses, and wildflowers and is a key characteristic that should be preserved. Such vegetation should be incorporated into site development. 
i.  Locate buildings and parking areas where they will best preserve the Hill Country landscape. Integrate existing stands of live oaks and other significant vegetation into the site design. 
ii.  Utilize native grasses, wildflowers, and limestone boulders in the landscape design. 
c)  Some sites have portions that are steeply sloped. These natural land forms should be maintained when possible. 

Paths and walkways should be provided to connect parking areas, buildings, and outdoor spaces.
i.  Terrace cuts into landforms with rock retaining walls and plant materials. 
d)  Outdoor dining should have low level, architectural or landscape screening to protect surrounding areas from windblown trash, yet preserve visibility. 
3.  Automobile Circulation. 
a)  Maintain the character of the rural road edge by sharing access and drives between two or more properties when possible. 
4.  Pedestrian and Bicycle Circulation. 
a)  Refer to City sidewalk regulations. 
b)  Promote a walkable and bikeable community. When feasible, coordinate pedestrian and bicycle circulation systems within a large site or to join two or more sites together. 
5.  Off-Street Walkways. 

The use of outdoor courtyards and patios is encouraged.
a)  Paths which lead from parking areas to buildings should convey a "progression" of walking experiences throughout the site. This progression, comprised of spaces between parking areas, outdoor spaces, and buildings, begins with walkways that lead from the street or parking areas. 
b)  Paths and walkways should be provided, where feasible, to connect parking areas to buildings and outdoor spaces. 
6.  Courtyards and Outdoor Spaces. 

Brick, stone, and interlocking pavers should be considered in courtyards adn outdoor spaces.
a)  When utilized, outdoor use areas, including patios, courtyards, and decks, should be in character with the Hill Country. They should reflect a modest, low-key quality and may occur in a variety of locations. Some may be in front of a building, while others may be to the side or rear. 
b)  Incorporate an informal character into these areas. 
c)  Incorporating benches and other furniture is appropriate. 

Outdoor areas should be in character with the Texas Hill Country.
d)  Consider using a courtyard as a transitional element between buildings. 
e)  Brick, stone, stamped concrete and interlocking pavers should be considered in courtyards and outdoor spaces. 
7.  Fences and Site Walls. 
a)  Traditional fences and rock walls enhance the character of the area and should be preserved. Fences were typically wood rail, relatively low in height, and had a "transparent" character, allowing views into yards and providing interest to pedestrians. Low rock walls were also used to define property lines or highlight an entry. New fencing or site walls should be in character with those used traditionally. 

If a new fence is constructed, it should be "transparent" in character.
b)  New fencing should be transparent in character and reflect those seen traditionally. 
c)  Rock walls should remain low in scale and reflect those seen traditionally. 
d)  Unfaced concrete block or concrete, plastic, fiberglass, rebar, wrought iron, plywood, cyclone, chain link, and mesh construction fences are inappropriate. 
8.  Lighting. 
a)  Refer to City lighting ordinance. 

Rock walls were traditionally low in character.
b)  Exterior lighting shall be full cutoff in order to preserve the rural character and protect the view of the night sky. Street lights should be placed randomly to avoid an urban appearance; however, street lights should still provide adequate lighting at street intersections and along public walkways. Outdoor site lighting may be installed to illuminate walkways and outdoor use areas, and lights may be used to illuminate signs and building entrances. 
c)  Prevent glare onto adjacent properties by using shielded and focused light sources. 
d)  Unshielded, high intensity light sources and those that direct light upward are prohibited. 

Prevent glare onto adjacent properties by using full cutoff light fixtures.
e)  Lights that cast a color similar to that of daylight are preferred. 
f)  Do not wash an entire building façade in light. 
g)  Low-scale light fixtures are recommended for paths and walkways within a property. 
h)  Light fixtures should be simple in character. 
9.  Parking. 
a)  Refer to City parking regulations. 
b)  Parking areas should have a positive visual impact. Private and public lots should be screened and located away from the road edge, where feasible. Large surface lots should be divided into smaller "rooms." 
c)  Screen parking areas from view with landscaping. 
d)  Divide parking areas into smaller lots with planted buffers between them to minimize the perceived scale of the total parking area. 

A parking area should have a positive visual impact.
e)  Where feasible, locate parking lots to the sides or rear of buildings. 
f)  Integrate existing, mature trees into the parking design. 
10.  Mechanical Equipment and Service Areas. 
a)  Locate mechanical equipment to the rear or sides of a property and screen them with landscaping if visible from public rights-of-way. 
b)  Window air conditioning units or condenser elements should be located where they are not visible on a front façade. 
c)  Mechanical equipment should have a matte or non-reflective finish. 
d)  Satellite dishes or antennae should be located away from the front of a structure and, if applicable, placed into a landscaped setting. 
e)  Service areas should not be visible from major pedestrian ways or public rights-of-way. 
f)  Trash areas should be screened from view using a fence, landscaping, or enclosure. 
g)  All roof mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened from view from any public right-of-way. Screening materials for rooftop equipment must be of a material architecturally compatible with the materials used elsewhere on the structure. 

Place an addition to the rear or side of a building.
b.  Building Additions. 
1.  It is important to preserve and maintain the setting and character of traditional buildings in the area. Therefore, an addition should be designed to maintain the existing character of the building as it is perceived from the street. 
2.  Where feasible, keeping the size of the addition in proportion to the main structure will minimize its visual impact. If an addition must be larger, it could be set apart from the main building and connected with a smaller linking element. Consider designing the addition so that it complements-not copies-the existing building style. 
3.  Place an addition to the rear or side of a building or set it back from the front to minimize its visual impact. 
4.  An addition should relate to the original structure in mass, scale, and form. 
5.  When feasible, design the addition so it appears subordinate to the main structure. 
6.  For a larger addition, break up the mass of the addition into smaller modules that relate to the traditional building. 
7.  An addition should be simple and similar in design to prevent it from competing with the primary façade. 
c.  Rooftop Additions. 
1.  A rooftop addition should be subordinate to the main building. Additional space can be created by adding dormers to an attic or by adding a "pop-top" or new floor. 
2.  Set a rooftop addition back from the front of the building so that it will maintain the structure's original profile. 

Where feasible, new buildings should be organized in clusters to create outdoor spaces. Such clustering of structures reflects rural development in the Hill Country.
d.  Design Standards for Infill Development. 
1.  Refer to City subdivision and zoning regulations for building setbacks, building mass, and building scale. 
2.  This chapter presents design guidelines for the construction of new buildings or renovations in Helotes. These "infill" principles relate to the fundamental relationship between building and context-such as mass, scale, and form. A key objective is that new developments continue to reinforce the low-key, rural town character. Structures should be designed to reflect the small scale of traditional building forms and materials, while accommodating other larger permitted uses. 
3.  Building Setbacks. 
a)  Building setbacks vary in Helotes. This diversity adds interest and should be continued to maintain the traditional relationship of buildings to the street. 
b)  A building should fit within the range of front, rear, and side yard setbacks seen in the area. 
c)  A prominent entry will contribute to the "pedestrian friendly" character of the street. 
d)  Use a porch or one-story element to define the entry. 
e)  Where two or more buildings will be located on a site, arrange them in a cluster to define outdoor spaces. 
4.  Street Level Interest. 

The use of display windows to provide interest to pedestrians and passersby is encouraged for commercial buildings.
a)  When a building is oriented to the street or parking area, it should be designed to provide interest to pedestrians. For example, commercial buildings with storefronts are of interest to passersby, while porches, courtyards, and decorative wall surfaces add interest to multiple building types. 
b)  Building facades viewed from public rights-of-way or parking areas should include interesting details and materials to avoid presenting a "back side" to one street or parking area or another. For example, buildings that are double-fronted should incorporate windows and display cases on both elevations. 
c)  A large expanse of blank wall is inappropriate on any public street, parking area, or outdoor space. 
5.  Building Mass and Scale. 

Divide large buildings into smaller modules that reflect the traditional scale of buildings in the area.
a)  Design a new building to reinforce a sense of human scale. The traditional scale of buildings, usually designed as one and two-story buildings, still dominates and enhances the Hill Country character of the street. To the greatest extent possible, new construction should maintain this human scale. While new buildings are typically larger than those seen before, they should be articulated in their form and material similar to those seen traditionally. 
b)  Use building materials that are of traditional dimensions. 
c)  Provide a porch or one-story element that is similar in size to that seen traditionally. 
d)  Subdividing the mass of a larger building into smaller "modules" that are similar in size to new buildings are lengthy or horizontal, façade elements should reduce the proportion and the visual width of the building. Examples of those elements that give the impression of multiple structures include varying parapet heights, alternating projecting and recessed sections of walls, and variegated window arrangements. Further, typical historic features that reduce the mass of large facades include columns or pilasters at regular intervals, repetitive patterns of openings, and horizontal masonry bands at each floor level. 

In order to preserve the traditional scale of the area and maintain views to the hillsides, buildings in the area should not be taller than two stories.
e)  A new building or addition should not be greater than two floors in height. 
f)  Floor-to-floor heights should appear similar to those seen traditionally. 
6.  Building Materials. 
a)  Use building materials that appear similar to those used traditionally. Building materials on a new structure should be compatible with adjacent, traditional buildings to establish a sense of visual continuity. Clay or concrete brick, terra-cotta, natural stone, cast stone, granite, architectural decorative material (copper, bronze, et cetera), stucco, or wood are appropriate. 
b)  Horizontal lap siding should be applied in a manner similar to that seen historically. 
i.  It should match the lap exposure, texture, and finish of traditional wood siding. 
ii.  Trim boards that show substantial depth should be used. 
iii.  Wood siding should have a weather-protective, painted or stained finish. 
iv.  Use of a highly reflective material, such as polished metal or stone, is inappropriate. 

The use of masonry that appears similar to that seen traditionally is appropriate.
c)  The use of masonry that appears similar to that seen traditionally is appropriate. 
i.  The use of limestone, similar to that used traditionally, is encouraged. 
ii.  The bond patterns, mortar color, and width and shape of joints should be compatible with traditional buildings in the area. 
d)  Contemporary interpretations of traditional building materials are appropriate. 

Contemporary interpretations of traditional building materials are appropriate. Notice the vertical, double hung windows on the second story.
i.  If used, contemporary materials should appear similar in character to those seen traditionally. Characteristics, including color, texture, and size, should be considered when utilizing contemporary materials. 
ii.  Stucco is appropriate as a secondary material. 
iii.  A matte or non-reflective finish is preferred. Polished stone, reflective metal, and mirrored glass should be avoided. 
e)  Roof materials should convey a scale and texture similar to those used traditionally. 
i.  Roof materials should be earth toned and have a matte, non-reflective finish. 
ii.  Non-reflective standing seam metal roofs are appropriate. The seam profile should be similar to that seen traditionally. 
iii.  Many of the commercial structures in the Hill Country have flat roofs with parapet walls that extend above the roof. This treatment is encouraged for new structures. A projected cornice at the top of the parapet should be considered in the design of new buildings. A cornice serves to screen roofs and mechanical equipment and provide architectural interest and historic character. 

The use of limestone similar to that used traditionally is appropriate.
7.  Porches. 
a)  Porch elements are strongly encouraged to provide shade, to reflect traditional building scales, and to provide a sense of entry and visual interest. Porch elements should be similar to those seen traditionally. 
b)  A porch should relate to the overall architectural style and scale of the primary structure. 
c)  The porch should appear to be an integral element of the building in regard to material, scale, and detailing. 
d)  Porch supports should be substantial enough in size that the porch does not appear to float above the entry. 

A porch should relate to the overall architectural style and scale of the primary structure. Porch supports should be of a substantial enough size that the porch does not appear to float above the entry. Notice the parapet wall and flat roof above the porch.
8.  Windows and Doors. 
a)  Windows and doors give scale to buildings and provide visual interest to the composition of individual facades. 
b)  Windows and doors should be similar in size, shape, and proportion to those used traditionally. 
i.  Vertically proportioned, double hung windows are preferred. Historic upper story windows in urban areas are vertical-not horizontal-in form; have rectangular or arched tops; and have multi-paned, divided glass. 
ii.  Traditional storefront windows are appropriate on commercial type building facades and their use is encouraged. 
iii.  The ratio of openings to solid wall on primary facades should be similar to those seen traditionally. 
iv.  Large expanses of glass are inappropriate. 
c)  Metal or vinyl clad wood windows and clear or unfinished aluminum windows and storm windows should be finished in a color typical of the Texas Hill Country. 
d)  Security bars have become a common method of preventing loss of property. However, inappropriate use of them can detract from property values in the area and even discourage customers. Security bars are acceptable only if installed on the interior of glass windows and doors. 

Vertically proportioned, double hung windows are preferred.
9.  Accessory Structures. 
a)  An accessory structure should be visually subordinate to a primary structure. Traditionally, accessory structures, such as sheds, garages, and other outbuildings, were subordinate in scale and character to the primary structure and were located to the rear of the structure. The tradition of detached accessory structures is encouraged because it reduces the overall perceived mass of a building on a site. 
b)  Locate an accessory structure to the sides or rear of a lot. 
c)  An accessory structure should reflect the architectural character and style of the main structure. 
d)  Basic rectangular forms, with hip, gable, or shed roofs, are appropriate. 
e)  Accessory buildings should appear subordinate in height to primary structures. 
10.  Awnings and Canopies. 
a)  Awnings and canopies serve a number of functions, including providing shelter from wind and sun in pedestrian areas; protecting interior furnishings and finishes from fading caused by direct sunlight; allowing reflected light to enter the interior without increasing heat load; and adding architectural interest or historic ambiance to structures. However, the appropriateness of awnings to a building's architectural style should be considered before installing them. 
b)  Location. Awnings and canopies may be placed at the top of openings, but they should not hide important architectural details and elements. 
c)  Shape. The shape of awnings and canopies should fit the shape of the opening-round or arched awnings over arched openings and rectangular awnings over rectangular openings. Odd shapes, bull nose awnings, and bubble awnings are inappropriate for Hill Country structures. 
d)  Operable Awnings. Operable awnings are encouraged, but rigid frame awnings also may be considered. 
e)  Materials. Acceptable awning materials are canvas or woven acrylic over painted steel or anodized aluminum frames. Shiny vinyl or plastic fabrics should be avoided, as should prefabricated metal awnings. Canopies should be constructed of a material consistent with the architecture. 
f)  Color. The color of awnings and canopies should be compatible with the overall color scheme for the project. 
g)  Lighting. Internally illuminated awnings are discouraged. Indirect lighting is preferred. 
11.  Color. 
a)  Color can help to coordinate facade elements into an overall composition-one that will highlight features of the façade. Distinctive architectural elements may be dramatized with a contrasting color. Any color scheme should be subdued, not garish, and in keeping with the character and color schemes of nearby structures and the Texas Hill Country. 
b)  Compatible Trim Color. Trim colors should be selected that are compatible with other, more permanent building materials on the structure, such as brick, stone, or stucco. The natural colors of these primary materials should dominate the color scheme from the street. 
c)  Trim, including horizontal and vertical trim boards, porch framing and columns, and window framing, should be painted in a color that compliments the base shade. Window sashes, doors, and/or shutters may be painted in a third color. 

Munsell Color System -wikipedia.com
d)  Bright Colors. Extremely bright or fluorescent exterior colors are discouraged. Bright colors should be used in small amounts and for accent only. An extremely bright or fluorescent color is a color defined by the Munsell Book of Color as having a minimum value of eight (8) and a minimum chroma of ten (10). 
e.  Building Types. 
1.  Traditional Storefront. 
a)  The Traditional Storefront has a retail-oriented first floor. It may have upper floors that typically house offices. 
b)  Features: 
i.  Display windows at street or parking area level 
ii.  Storefront at the walkway edge 
iii.  Upper floors are more solid with less glass 
iv.  Awning or canopy defines first floor level 
v.  Recessed entry 
vi.  Masonry or lap siding 

Traditional Storefront Type
2.  Traditional Rural Type. 
a)  The Traditional Rural Type draws inspiration from traditional rural structures. It has a sloping, gable roof and may have stone, wood lap, or vertical board and batten siding. Metal, seamed roofs are typical. The ground level has less glass than the Traditional Storefront, but display windows may be used. 
b)  Features: 

Traditional Rural Type
i.  Gable roof, sometime with dormers 
ii.  Less glass at street level than the Traditional Storefront 
iii.  Porch at front 

Traditional Storefront types and Traditional Rural types may be combined into attached structures.
3.  Mixed Use Rural Type. 

Mixed Use Rural Type
a)  The Mixed Use Rural Type is a cousin of the Traditional Rural Type, but is somewhat larger. It has two stories and may be designed for a mix of commercial and residential uses. 
b)  Features: 
i.  Gable roof, sometimes with dormers 
ii.  Less glass at street level than the Traditional Storefront 
iii.  Porch at front 
4.  Mixed Use Commercial Cluster Type. 
a)  This building type is larger in scale, yet it draws upon traditional forms and materials. This building type should occur in clusters with edges oriented toward streets and parking areas. Although less glass may be located at the street or parking level than in the Traditional Storefront type, some transparency should be maintained along any walls that are visible to the street, parking, or outside areas. 
b)  Features: 
i.  Gable roof, sometimes with dormers 
ii.  Less glass at street or parking level than the Traditional Storefront 
iii.  Porch at front 

Mixed Use Commercial Cluster Type
f.  Signage. 
1.  Refer to City sign regulations. 
2.  Signage serves two functions-to convey information and to attract attention. The overall facade composition, including ornamental details, color, and materials, should be considered when determining the location, size, and character of signage. 
3.  Sign Design. Consider both pedestrian and vehicular traffic in selecting and designing signage. 
4.  Signage and the Building. Signage should be low-key in order to avoid competition with the architecture of the structure. Materials should be compatible with the building's materials and style. 
5.  Locate signs so that they emphasize design elements of the facade, but do not obscure architectural details, windows, or other significant features. Signs can also reinforce the horizontal lines of moldings, transoms, and accent architectural details when placed appropriately. 
6.  The design and style of both the lettering and sign should complement the style of the building. Signs for multiple businesses in a single building should be designed with similar materials, backs, and lettering styles. 
7.  Materials. Glass, painted wood, painted metal, or architectural decorative metals, such as copper, bronze, brass, aluminum, or stainless steel, are appropriate sign materials. 
8.  Sign Lighting. Incandescent or metal halide lights are more appropriate than fluorescent or high-pressure sodium lighting. Neon decoration and signs should be used only in small amounts and where appropriate to the building design. 
(c)  Plan Submittal Requirements (PSR). A completed PSR checklist shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission for review and City Council action. Providing false or misleading information on any documents submitted to the City is a Class A misdemeanor, which is punishable by incarceration, fine, or both (V.T.C.A., Penal Code Ch. 37). Further, providing false or misleading information shall cause the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council to reject the proposal and bar the owner, owner's agent, or both from submitting an application for a period of 12 months. 
(d)  Review by the Planning and Zoning Commission and action by the City Council. The Commission should make an initial review of a complete submittal within 45 days of the applicant's initial submittal to the City. The Commission shall review and make recommendations to the City Council on the submittal. Upon receipt, the City Council may take the following actions on an application: 
(1)  Approved. Prior to the issuance of a building permit for exterior construction, alterations, or renovations, a letter of compliance must be obtained from the City Council. 
(2)  Approved with Conditions. The City Council may impose such conditions as it deems reasonable and necessary to ensure compatible development with the surrounding area and to ensure that the spirit and intent of this Article and the City's Design Standards are followed. 
(3)  Disapproved. The City Council may disapprove the application. 
(4)  Postpone. The City Council may request additional changes or information and the re-submission of the changes and/or information within 60 days. 
(e)  Vote Required. An affirmative vote of the majority of the Councilmembers present at a meeting shall be required for issuance of a letter of compliance and building permit. 
(f)  Appeal to City Council. Any applicant aggrieved by a decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission as to their application, may appeal the decision to the City Council. Such notice of appeal must be filed with the City Administrator within ten (10) working days of the decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission. Such appeal shall stay the issuance of a building permit, and matter shall be placed on the agenda for the next available City Council meeting. The City Council may finally affirm, reverse, vacate, remand or modify the decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(Ord. No. 399, § 1, 3-26-2009; Ord. No. 414, § 5, 11-12-2009; Ord. No. 18-17 , § 1, 8-9-2018) 
Sec. 98-254-98-280. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - QUARRY, SAND, AND GRAVEL BUSINESSES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 98-281-98-300. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SAND AND GRAVEL DISTRICT (SGD) 

Sec. 98-301. - Established; purpose. 
    A sand and gravel district (SGD) is a special zoning district allowing the operation of a sand or gravel extraction operation where soil, sand, gravel, and clay may be removed for commercial use on or off the property. Additional uses are specifically noted in section 98-302, such as concrete and asphalt production and other uses. A SGD must have within its boundaries, as a primary use, a material extraction and materials processing operation that is designed to extract or process soil, sand, gravel or clay. This district is designed to protect the environmental character of a site and to promote compatible development with adjacent land uses and future redevelopment of the site. SGD is a zoning classification that is intended to create a controlled environment for materials extraction and processing related directly to sand or gravel pits. (Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. X, § 1), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-302. - Permitted uses. 
    Within a SGD only those uses directly related to the operation of the material extraction process shall be allowed. Such related uses are limited to the extraction, processing, storage, production of finished products, and shipment of such materials and products from within the property, and are specifically limited to the following: 
(1)  Testing for, or extraction of, raw materials such as sand, soil, clay, gravel, or other similar materials that are mined or removed without the use of blasting or explosives. 
(2)  The processing and handling of extracted materials including, without limitation, loading, screening, washing, sorting, stockpiling, and distribution by rolling equipment or conveyor systems. 
(3)  Production of materials and finished products through processing plants, including, without limitation, concrete, bulk or bagged sand, soil, clay and/or gravel. 
(4)  Warehousing and storage of bulk or bagged sand, soil, clay, cement and/or gravel as well as exterior storage of sand, soil, clay and gravel in bulk form. 
(5)  Laboratory, weighing, and testing facilities for conducting test and chemical analysis of materials. 
(6)  The administrative activities associated with such uses including, without limitation, offices and associated uses. 
(7)  Outside storage of equipment, spare parts and supplies to be used at the site; provided that such storage is screened from public view by natural buffers, screening or fencing. 
(8)  No storage of fuel, flammable, or explosive materials shall be permitted. 
(9)  Transportation related uses including, but not limited to, the use of trucking and railroad vehicles for transporting materials and product to and from the SGD. This would include maintenance and storage of the equipment and vehicles utilized by the sand or gravel pit operator, provided such storage is screened from public view by natural buffers, screening or fencing. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. X, § 2), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-303. - Operating standards. 
    It is the intent of these regulations to allow the existence of sand, soil, clay and/or gravel extraction and processing in a manner which is sensitive to surrounding land uses and cognizant of the concerns of neighborhood and environmental interest with respect to protecting water quality, quality of life and ensuring protection of the environment. As such, the following operating standards are established to allow sand or gravel pit operations located within a SGD to be carried out in a manner that is compatible with surrounding land uses. All extraction, processing, and related operations performed in a SGD shall be done and shall operate in conformance with the standards set forth in each applicable subsection below. 
(1)  Frontage requirements. All property within a SGD shall have a minimum of 60 feet of frontage on at least one adjacent public right-of-way or recorded easement at least 60 feet in width, which provides ingress or egress to public roads. Regardless of the frontage provided onto a public road, a SGD shall comply with the provisions of subsection (7) (clear vision and queuing). 
(2)  Natural buffer. A natural area shall be maintained around the perimeter of the property within the district and no grading, removal, or disturbance of native plant material shall be allowed within 500 feet of any perimeter property line of the property within the district or public right-of-way except as required for establishing fencing and berming as provided for herein and for providing a 20-foot-wide access road for the purpose of establishing and maintaining fencing, landscaping, access and/or security patrol. 
(3)  Screening requirements. Notwithstanding subsection (2) above, greater visual screening is required at any point where the extraction is located within 1,000 feet of a public right-of-way carrying pedestrian or vehicular traffic. In such areas, the visual screen shall not be less than eight feet in height at or near the property line and shall be made up of any combination of the following materials: existing native plant materials, supplementary plant materials, existing grading, berming, and/or fencing. 
(4)  Fencing requirements. A fence shall be provided around the perimeter of the property or not less than 25 feet from the outer edge of any excavation that is ten feet or greater in depth. Such fence shall be a minimum of eight feet in height and a maximum of 12 feet in height and shall be constructed of visually screening material. 
(5)  Excavation setbacks. No excavation or extraction of material (other than is required for the installation and maintenance of fences, landscape screen, access points, crossings, or clear vision zones at entry points) shall be allowed closer than 500 feet from the property line of the SGD district or closer than 500 feet from any public right-of-way. 
(6)  Facility setbacks. All facilities for the production of excavated and processed products shall be located at least 500 feet from the property line of any adjoining property that is developed and/or zoned for residential use and at least 50 feet from any public right-of-way on which pedestrian or vehicular access is allowed. 
(7)  Clear vision and queuing requirements. A triangular clear vision zone shall be provided on the subject property at the intersection of all access points with public roads to provide an area of clear vision of vehicles. The zone shall be defined by a triangle consisting of 200 feet parallel with the public road and 50 feet along the access road or drive measured from the intersection point of the two right-of-ways. A queuing area accommodating four trucks of no less than 2,400 square feet shall be provided between the edge of the public right-of-way and the access point or gate station, whichever is nearest the public right-of-way. 
(8)  Pit walls and slopes. All walls of the pit or excavated areas shall be maintained in compliance with applicable state and federal safety requirements. 
(9)  Floodplain protection. No building may be placed within 150 feet from the outer limit of a 100-year floodplain. All NPDES and TNRCC requirements must be met any time the quarry operations come within 150 feet of a 100-year floodplain to prohibit silt or sediment from entering the creek or stream. This restriction would not apply in any case where the floodplain is located more than 150 feet inside the property line of the SGD. 
(10)  Industrial waste monitoring. Upon request by the city, any person operating an activity within a SGD shall provide, to the city's satisfaction, documentation evidencing the characterization, handling, and disposal of any industrial waste generated within the SGD. Documentation which may satisfy the characterization inquiry includes process knowledge literature and/or waste analysis records. 
(11)  Material safety data. Upon request by the city, independent of the Federal Community Right to Know and Emergency Planning Act, any person operating an activity within a SGD shall provide copies of Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) for materials maintained, stored, or used within the SGD. The materials subject to this section are those materials whose properties for volatility, flammability, explosive potential, corrosiveness, radioactivity, or other toxic or hazardous property allow them to be listed in the North American Emergency Response Guidebook, current edition and as amended. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. X, § 3), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-304. - Identification of boundaries and surrounding uses; ERZD environmental assessment report. 
    Not less than 30 days prior to the submission of a zoning case to the Planning and Zoning Commission for obtaining SGD zoning on a property, eight copies of a boundary map and metes and bounds description shall be provided by the applicant showing the outer perimeter line of the property that is owned, leased, under contract, or optioned by the operator and which the operation is to utilize. This boundary description and drawing shall be submitted to the city secretary and shall be considered the official boundary description on which the SGD will be established and within which the permitted uses allowed in the district will be allowed. All setbacks and distance requirements shall be measured from the boundary lines identified on the boundary map provided under this section. If the applicant is not the owner of the property the applicant shall provide written authorization to act as agent on behalf of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. X, § 4), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-305. - Site plan. 
    Eight copies of a site plan shall be submitted at the time any property owner initiates a zoning case by filing a zoning application requesting the establishment of a SGD. The site plan shall be submitted to the city secretary and shall graphically depict, to scale, the location and size of all then-existing permanent and affixed structures, buildings, and facilities in relation to the boundaries of the property. The site plan shall also illustrate the location of all then-existing access points and their relationship to adjoining or crossing major thoroughfares. The information required by this section may be incorporated into the boundary map required by section 98-304, and an aerial photo may be used as the base document for the site plan. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. X, § 5), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-306. - Signs. 
(a)  Signs surrounding or within a SGD may be used to provide the following: 
(1)  To identify the extraction or manufacturing operation; 
(2)  To inform customers of the facility with respect to access points and the existence of the facility; 
(3)  To identify the occupants or operations within a specific building or area of the district; and 
(4)  To provide directional, safety, and other information to the general public, occupants, employees, patrons, and visitors to the district. 
(b)  Signs within a SGD shall be in conformity with chapter 66 to the extent those regulations apply. 
(c)  Signs shall be posted at all exit points from a permitted SGD to a public road that reminds truckers that their loads must be covered in accordance with city and state regulations that impose fines if violated. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. X, § 6), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-307. - Blasting. 
    No blasting or use of any explosive shall be permitted within a SGD. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. X, § 7), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-308. - Asphaltic concrete production. 
    No asphaltic concrete plant activity may be conducted, and no storage of asphalt materials may occur for purposes of batching or producing asphaltic or any other purpose concrete, within a SGD. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. X, § 8), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-309. - Continuation of existing uses. 
    Any use such as livestock grazing, ranching operations, barns, or farm operations that would be a continuing use that was non-conforming as a result of the establishment of the SGD may continue. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. X, § 9), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-310. - Redevelopment after termination of use. 
    After the sand and gravel and related uses have terminated within a SGD, the property shall not be redeveloped for any purpose until a beneficial reuse concept plan (BRCP) has been prepared and submitted in accordance with the regulations of chapter 54 and a new permanent base zoning district has been applied for and received through the required public process, including, at a minimum, one or more public hearings before the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. X, § 10), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Secs. 98-311-98-330. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - QUARRY DISTRICT (QD) 

Sec. 98-331. - Established; purpose. 
(a)  The quarry district (QD) is a special zoning district intended to allow for a quarry and related uses for the extraction of limestone and other raw materials and the processing of those materials into finished products. A QD must have within its boundaries, as a primary use, a material extraction and materials processing operation that is designed to extract limestone or any other similar materials which are mined on the property and/or which are processed on the property subsequent to mining. This district is designed to protect the environment and promote compatible land use relationships with adjoining properties and to allow for the safe development of commercial quarrying, cement, concrete products and lime manufacturing, and related industries, together with accessory support facilities that relate directly to the on-site quarrying, processing, and manufacturing operations. The district is specifically created in order to classify such materials extraction, processing and related uses in a district zoning category that expressly encompasses such uses, as opposed to the other ordinary districts within the permitted uses table, which do not specifically embody, collectively, such uses. Quarry district (QD) is a zoning classification that is intended to allow for a broad range of directly related uses that would create a controlled environment for the development of diverse material extraction and processing activities, including by way of example, but without limitation, mining, blasting, extraction, processing, handling, crushing, washing, screening, sorting, stockpiling, and the production, packaging, distribution, and transportation of aggregate, ready-mix concrete, asphaltic concrete, lime and hydrated lime, cement, concrete, precast and prestressed concrete products, Portland cement, concrete pipe, concrete blocks, and other concrete products within the district, including activities required for the support of such directly related operations, including but not limited to vehicle and rail maintenance facilities, office and dispatch facilities, outside storage of materials, and other operations incidental to quarry operations. 
(b)  Quarry district (QD) use regulations and operating standards set forth in this division shall apply to all quarry and related processing uses within a QD district. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. X, § 11), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-332. - Permitted uses. 
    Within the district no building, structure, or land shall be used for any purpose other than the following, or any combination thereof, provided that such uses take place within the site specific boundaries of the district designated as QD, or on which said activities are otherwise designated by law, in accordance with the operating standards for this zoning district: 
(1)  Testing for or extraction of raw materials such as limestone or other similar materials that are mined or removed without the use of blasting or explosives (or using blasting or explosives if approved under section 98-337). 
(2)  The processing and handling of extracted materials including, without limitation, loading, primary and secondary crushing, screening, washing, sorting, stockpiling, and distribution by rolling equipment or conveyor systems. 
(3)  Production of materials and finished product through processing plants, including but not limited to cement plants, lime plants, ready-mix concrete plants, concrete batch plants, asphaltic concrete plants, pug mills and production facilities for precast and prestressed concrete, concrete blocks, packaged cement, packaged concrete, and concrete pipe. 
(4)  Rail, vehicle and equipment maintenance facilities. 
(5)  Warehousing and distribution facilities for finished products and raw materials such as mined aggregate, and raw cement in various stages of production (i.e., cement powder, clinker, gypsum, etc.). 
(6)  Laboratory, weighing, and testing facilities for conducting tests and chemical analyses of materials. 
(7)  The administrative activities associated with such uses including, without limitation, offices and associated uses. 
(8)  Outside storage of materials equipment, spare parts and supplies to be used at the site; provided that such storage is screened from public view by natural buffers, screening or fencing. 
(9)  Transportation related uses including, but not limited to, the use of equipment, and trucking and railroad vehicles for transporting quarry materials and product to and from the particular site(s). This would include maintenance and storage of the equipment, and trucking and/or railroad vehicles utilized by the operator of the QD, providing such storage is screened from public view by natural buffers, screening or fencing. 
(10)  No on-site storage of ammonium nitrate or fuel shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. X, § 12), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-333. - Operating standards. 
    It is the intent of these regulations to allow the existence of quarrying and processing operations which are sensitive to surrounding land uses and cognizant of the concerns of neighborhood interest and environmental interest with respect to protecting quality of life and ensuring protection of the environment. As such, the following operating standards are established to allow the quarry and processing operations to be carried out in a manner that is as compatible as possible with the surrounding land uses. All quarrying, processing, and related operations performed in a QD shall be done and shall operate in conformance with the standards set forth in each applicable subsection below. 
(1)  Frontage requirements. All property within a QD shall have a minimum of 60 feet of frontage on an adjacent public right-of-way or recorded easement, at least 60 feet in width, which provides ingress or egress to public roads. Regardless of the frontage provided onto a public road a district shall comply with the provisions of subsection (7) (clear vision and queuing). 
(2)  Natural buffer. A natural area shall be maintained around the perimeter of the property within the district and no grading, removal, or disturbance of native plant material shall be allowed within 500 feet of any perimeter property line of the property within the district or public right-of-way except as required for establishing required berms and fencing and for a 20-foot-wide access road for the purpose of establishing and maintaining fencing, landscaping, access and/or security patrol. 
(3)  Screening requirements. Notwithstanding subsection (2) above, visual screening is required at any point where the active quarry pit is located within 1,000 feet of a public right-of-way carrying pedestrian or vehicular traffic. The visual screen in such areas shall not be less than 30 feet in height at or near the property line and shall be made up of a vegetated berm. 
(4)  Fencing requirements. A fence shall be provided around the perimeter of the property or not less than 25 feet from the outer edge of any excavation that is ten feet or greater in depth and shall be a minimum of eight feet in height and a maximum of 12 feet in height. Such fence shall be constructed of visually screening material. 
(5)  Excavation setbacks. No excavation or extraction of material, other than is required for the installation and maintenance of fences, landscape screen, access points, crossings, or clear vision zones at entry points, shall be permitted closer than 950 feet from the property line of any adjoining property zoned for residential use or closer than 950 feet from any public right-of-way. 
(6)  Facility setbacks. All facilities for the production of finished products that are made from excavated materials (i.e., ready-mix concrete batch plants, lime plants, cement plants, concrete block plants, cement packaging plants, precast and prestressed yards, concrete pipe plants, and other similar facilities) shall be located at least 950 feet from the property line of any adjoining property that is developed and/or zoned for residential use and at least 950 feet from any public right-of-way on which pedestrian or vehicular access is allowed. 
(7)  Clear vision and queuing requirements. A triangular clear vision zone shall be provided at the intersection of all access points with public roads to provide an area of clear vision for vehicles. The zone shall be defined by a triangle consisting of 200 feet parallel with the public road and 50 feet along the access road or drive measured from the intersection point of the two right-of-ways. A queuing area sufficient to accommodate four or more trucks of no less than 2,400 square feet shall be provided between the edge of the public right-of-way and the access point or gate station, whichever is nearest the public right-of-way. 
(8)  Floodplain protection. No building may be placed within 150 feet from the outer limit of a 100-year floodplain. All NPDES and TNRCC requirements must be met any time the quarry operations come within 150 feet of a 100-year floodplain to prohibit silt or sediment from entering the creek or stream. This restriction would not apply in any case where the floodplain is located more than 150 feet inside the property line of the QD. 
(9)  Water quality protection. Operations within a QD shall comply with applicable water quality standards set forth by the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission and all applicable federal and state laws, rules and regulations. 
(10)  Industrial waste monitoring. Upon request of the city, any person operating an activity within a QD shall provide, to the requesting agency's satisfaction, documentation evidencing the characterization, handling, and disposal of any industrial waste generated within the QD. Documentation which may satisfy the characterization inquiry includes process knowledge literature and/or waste analysis records. 
(11)  Material safety data. Upon request of the city, independent of the Federal Community Right to Know and Emergency Planning Act, any person operating an activity within a QD shall provide copies of Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) for material maintained, stored, or used within the QD. The materials subject to this section are those materials whose properties for volatility, flammability, explosive potential, corrosiveness, radioactivity, or other toxic or hazardous property allow them to be listed in the North American Emergency Response Guidebook, current edition and as amended. 
(12)  Blasting setback. Blasting shall not be allowed within 1,000 feet of a residential structure under construction or completed at the time the QD is established. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. X, § 13), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-334. - Identification of boundaries and surrounding uses. 
    Not less than 30 days prior to the submission of a zoning case to the Planning and Zoning Commission for obtaining quarry district (QD) zoning on a property, eight copies of a boundary map and metes and bounds description shall be provided by the applicant showing the outer perimeter line of the property that is owned, leased, under contract, or optioned by the operator and which the operation is to utilize. This boundary description and drawing shall be submitted to the city and shall be considered the official boundary description on which the quarry district will be established and within which the permitted uses in the QD will be allowed. All setbacks and distance requirements shall be measured from the boundary lines identified on the boundary map provided under this section. If the applicant is not the owner of the property the applicant shall provide a written authorization to act as agent on behalf of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. X, § 14), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-335. - Site plan. 
    Eight copies of a site plan shall be submitted at the time any property owner initiates a zoning case by filing a zoning application requesting the establishment of a QD. The site plan shall be submitted to the city and shall graphically depict, to scale, the location and size of all permanent and affixed structures, buildings, and facilities in existence at the time of submission in relation to the boundaries of the property. The site plan shall also illustrate the location of all access points and their relationship to adjoining or crossing major thoroughfares. The information required by this section may be incorporated into the boundary map required by section 98-334 and an aerial photo may be used as the base document for the site plan. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. X, § 15), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-336. - Signs. 
(a)  Signs surrounding or within a quarry district (QD) may be used to provide the following: 
(1)  To identify the quarrying or manufacturing operations located within the district; 
(2)  To inform customers of the quarry facility with respect to access points and the existence of the facility; 
(3)  To identify the occupants or operations within a specific building or area of the district; and 
(4)  To provide directional, safety, and other information to the general public, occupants, employees, patrons, and visitors to the district. 
(b)  Signs within a QD shall be in conformity with chapter 66, to the extent those regulations apply. 
(c)  Signs shall be posted at all exit points from a permitted QD to a public road that reminds truckers that their loads must be covered in accordance with city and state regulations that impose fines if violated. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. X, § 16), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-337. - Blasting. 
(a)  No blasting or use of explosives shall be permitted within a QD unless a specific City Council approval use permit, for such activity, is granted within the QD. The issuance of a specific City Council approval use permit is subject to the applicable provisions of this Code; provided, however, the city shall set a date of expiration for the permit. If such approval is granted, blasting may be used within the boundaries of the QD provided such use complies with the applicable requirements of the Unified Fire Code, or the International Fire Code as amended and adopted by the City Council. 
(b)  A minimum buffer zone of 1,000 feet shall be maintained between the blasting area and the nearest residence and shall be screened by a minimum 30-foot vegetated berm. 
(c)  Blasting shall be permitted only during the following time periods: 
(1)  Monday through Friday (no Saturdays, Sundays, or legal holidays). 
(2)  80 percent between the hours of 3:00 p.m. and 5:00 p.m. 
(3)  20 percent between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. 
(d)  Crushing operations shall be permitted only during the following time periods: 
(1)  Monday through Saturday (no Sundays or legal holidays). 
(2)  8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. 
(e)  Ground vibration shall be limited to a maximum of 0.28 PPV (peak particle velocity) as measured at 3,000 feet from the quarry property line or the nearest residence, whichever is closest. 
(f)  Air overpressure (air shock) shall not exceed 127 dB (decibels). 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. X, § 17), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-338. - Asphaltic concrete production. 
    No asphaltic concrete production plants or storage of asphalt materials may be utilized within a QD unless a specific City Council approval use permit for such activity is granted within the QD. The issuance of a specific City Council approval use permit is subject to the applicable provisions of this Code; provided, however, the city shall set a date of expiration for the permit. If such approval is granted, asphaltic concrete production may occur within the boundaries of a QD provided such use complies with the applicable requirements of the TNRCC, the EPA, and of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. X, § 18), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-339. - Redevelopment after termination of use. 
    After the quarry and related uses have terminated within a QD, the property shall not be redeveloped for any purpose until a beneficial reuse concept plan (BRCP) has been prepared and submitted in accordance with the regulations of chapter 54 and a new permanent base zoning district has been applied for and received though the required public process including, at a minimum, one or more public hearings before the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. X, § 19), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-340. - Continuation of existing uses. 
    Any use such as livestock grazing, ranching operations, or farm operations that would be a continuing use that was non-conforming as a result of the establishment of the QD may continue. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. X, § 20), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Secs. 98-341-98-360. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES 

Sec. 98-361. - Purpose. 
    The provisions of this article are intended to ensure that telecommunication facilities are located, installed, maintained and removed in a manner that: 
(1)  Minimizes the number of transmission towers throughout the community; 
(2)  Encourages the collocation of telecommunication facilities; 
(3)  Encourages the use of existing buildings, light or utility poles or water towers as opposed to construction of new telecommunication towers; 
(4)  Recognizes the need of telecommunication provides to build out their systems over time; and 
(5)  Ensures that all telecommunication facilities, including towers, antennae, and ancillary facilities, are located and designed to minimize the visual impact on the immediate surroundings and throughout the community, and minimize public inconvenience and disruption. Nothing in this section shall apply to amateur radio antennae. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. XI, § 1), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-362. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following words and phrases mean: 
    Ancillary facilities means the buildings, cabinets, vaults, enclosures and equipment required for operation of telecommunication systems including but not limited to repeaters, equipment housing, and ventilation and other mechanical equipment. 
    Antenna means an electrical conductor or group of electrical conductors that transmit or receive radio waves, excluding amateur radio antennae. 
    Attachment means an antenna or other piece of related equipment affixed to a transmission tower, building, light or utility pole, or water tower. 
    Collocation means placement of an antenna on an existing transmission tower, building, light or utility pole or water tower where the antenna and all supports are located on the existing structure. 
    Provider means a person in the business of designing and using telecommunication facilities including cellular radiotelephones, personal communications services, enhanced/specialized mobile radios, and commercial paging services. 
    Specific City Council use permit means a permit that is required for a use that may be permitted by the City Council pursuant to the methodology prescribed in article V of this chapter (Specific City Council Approved Use Permit). 
    Stealth design means a telecommunication facility that is designed or located in such a way that the facility is not readily recognizable as telecommunications equipment. 
    Telecommunication facility means a facility designed and used for the purpose of transmitting, receiving, and relaying voice and data signals from various wireless communication devices including transmission towers, antennae and ancillary facilities. For purposes of this article, amateur radio transmission facilities and facilities used exclusively for the transmission of television and radio signals are not "telecommunication facilities." 
    Transmission tower means the monopole or lattice framework designed to support transmitting and receiving antennae. For purposes of this article, amateur radio transmission facilities and facilities used exclusively for the transmission of television and radio signals are not "transmission towers." Transmission towers include: 
(1)  Guyed tower. A tower which is supported by the use of cable (guy wires) which are permanently anchored. 
(2)  Lattice tower. A tower characterized by an open framework of lateral cross members which stabilize the tower. 
(3)  Monopole. A single upright pole, engineered to be self supporting and does not require lateral cross supports or guys. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. XI, § 2), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-363. - Siting restricted. 
    No telecommunication facility, as defined in section 98-362, may be constructed, modified to increase its height, installed or otherwise located within the city except as provided in this article. Depending on the type and location of the telecommunication facility, the telecommunication facility shall be either an outright permitted use or require a specific City Council use permit. 
(1)  Prohibited in residential districts. The siting of a telecommunication facility is prohibited in any residential district (PD, R-1, R-2 and R-3) within the city. 
(2)  Specific City Council use permit. As provided herein, siting of a telecommunication facility may be permitted in specified zoning districts by the City Council pursuant to the methodology prescribed in article V of this chapter (Specific City Council Approved Use Permit) as well as provisions of this article. Should a conflict arise between the specific City Council use permit process and the requirements of this article, the requirements of this article shall prevail. 
(3)  Outright permitted uses. As provided herein, the siting of a telecommunication facility may be permitted as a matter of right in specified zoning districts subject only to the requirements of obtaining site review approval and a building permit or permits. 
(4)  Site review. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall perform all site reviews required by sections 98-364 through 98-366. No building permit shall be issued prior to completion of the site review process, including any appeals to the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. XI, § 3), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 361, § 1, 6-26-2009) 
Sec. 98-364. - Collocation of additional antennae on existing transmission tower. 
(a)  Permitted use. Collocation of an additional antenna on an existing transmission tower shall be considered an outright permitted use in B-3, B-4 or I-1 zoning districts. 
(b)  Specific City Council use permit. In B-1 and B-2 districts such collocation shall require a specific City Council use permit. No exceptions to the standards contained herein shall be permitted except as authorized by section 98-370. 
(c)  Prohibited zoning districts and locations. No transmission tower shall be permitted in any residential zoning district (PD, R-1, R-2, and R-3). 
(d)  Site review. Such collocation on an existing transmission tower shall be subject to site review approval provided that the antennae and ancillary facilities comply with the standards contained herein. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. XI, § 4), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-365. - Collocation of antennae on existing buildings, light or utility poles, and water tower. 
    In addition to collocation on a transmission tower, an antenna may be collocated on existing buildings, light or utility poles, and water towers. 
(1)  Permitted use. In B-3, B-4, or I-1 districts collocation on a building, light or utility pole, or water tower, shall be considered an outright permitted use provided that the antennae and ancillary facilities comply with the standards and requirements contained herein. 
(2)  Specific City Council use permit. In B-1 and B-2 districts such collocation shall require a specific City Council use permit. No exceptions to the standards contained herein shall be permitted except as authorized by section 98-370. 
(3)  Prohibited zoning districts and locations. No collocation of antennae shall be permitted in any residential zoning district (PD, R-1, R-2, and R-3). 
(4)  Site review. Such collocation on a building, light or utility pole, or water tower shall be subject to site review approval provided that the antennae and ancillary facilities comply with the standards contained herein, and the color of the antennae blends in with the existing structure and surroundings. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. XI, § 5), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-366. - Construction of transmission towers. 
    Construction of a transmission tower, or a modification of an existing transmission tower to increase its height, shall be allowed as follows: 
(1)  Permitted use. 
a.  Such construction or modification shall be considered an outright permitted use in the I-1 zoning district. 
b.  Modification to increase the height of an existing transmission tower shall be considered an outright permitted use in all other districts if the city approved an increase in the tower height, by the specific City Council use permit authorizing the transmission tower. The increase in height allowed under this paragraph (1) shall be limited to the specific height authorized by the specific City Council use permit. 
(2)  Specific City Council use permit. In all cases other than those listed in subsection (1), above, such construction or modification shall require a specific City Council use permit. No exceptions to the standards contained herein shall be permitted except as authorized by section 98-370. 
(3)  Prohibited zoning districts and locations. No new transmission tower shall be permitted in any residential zoning district (PD, R-1, R-2, and R-3). 
(4)  Site review. Such construction or modification shall be subject to site review approval provided that the antennae and ancillary facilities comply with the standards contained herein, and the color of the antennae blends in with the existing structure and surroundings. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. XI, § 6), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-367. - Application requirements. 
(a)  Collocation of antennae. In addition to standard required application material, an applicant for collocation of antennae shall submit the following information. Note: Additional application material is required, as specified in subsection (c) below, for applications requiring a site review or specific City Council use permit. 
(1)  A description of the proposed antennae location, design and height. 
(2)  Documentation demonstrating compliance with non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER) emissions standards as set forth by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) particularly with respect to any habitable areas within the structure on which the antennae are co-locating on or in structures directly across from or adjacent to the antennae. 
(3)  A statement documenting that placement of the antennae is designed to allow future collocation of additional antennae if technologically possible. 
(4)  Documentation that the ancillary facilities will not produce sound levels in excess of those standards specified in section 98-368, or designs showing how the sound is to be effectively muffled and reduced pursuant to those standards. 
(5)  Plans showing the connection to utilities/right-of-way cuts required, ownership of utilities and easements required. 
(6)  Documents demonstrating that necessary easements have been obtained. 
(7)  Plans demonstrating how vehicular access will be provided. 
(8)  Signature of the property owner(s) on the application form or a statement from the property owner(s) granting authorization to proceed with building permit and land use processes. 
(9)  If ancillary facilities will be located on the ground, a landscape plan drawn to scale indicating proposed and existing landscaping, including type, spacing, size and irrigation methods. 
(10)  Documents demonstrating that the FAA has reviewed and approved the proposal. Alternatively, when a site review or specific City Council use permit is required, submit a statement documenting that notice of the proposal has been submitted to the FAA. The site review or specific City Council use permit may proceed and approval may be granted for the proposal as submitted, subject to FAA approval. If FAA approval requires any changes to the proposal as initially approved, then that initial approval shall be void. A new application will need to be submitted, reviewed and approved through an additional site review or specific City Council use permit. No building permit application shall be submitted without documents demonstrating FAA review. 
(b)  Construction of transmission tower. In addition to standard required application materials, an applicant for a transmission tower shall submit the following information. Note: Additional application material is required, as specified in subsection (c) below, for applications requiring a site review or specific City Council use permit. 
(1)  A description of the proposed tower location, design and height. 
(2)  The general capacity of the tower in terms of the number and type of antennae it is designed to accommodate. 
(3)  Documentation demonstrating compliance with non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER) emissions standards as set forth by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). 
(4)  A signed agreement, as supplied by the city, stating that the applicant will allow collocation with other users, provided all safety, structural, and technological requirements are met. This agreement shall also state that any future owners or operators will allow collocation on the tower. 
(5)  Documentation that the ancillary facilities will not produce sound levels in excess of those standards specified in section 98-368, or designs showing how the sound is to be effectively muffled and reduced pursuant to those standards. 
(6)  A landscape plan drawn to scale showing proposed and existing landscaping, including type, spacing, size and irrigation methods. 
(7)  Plans showing the connection to utilities/right-of-way cuts required, ownership of utilities and easements required. 
(8)  Documents demonstrating that necessary easements have been obtained. 
(9)  Plans demonstrating how vehicular access to be provided. 
(10)  Signature of the property owner(s) on the application form or a statement from the property owner(s) granting authorization to proceed with building permit and land use processes. 
(11)  Documents demonstrating that the FAA has reviewed and approved the proposal. Alternatively, when a site review or specific City Council use permit is required, submit a statement documenting that notice of the proposal has been submitted to the FAA. The site review or specific City Council use permit may proceed and approval may be granted for the proposal as submitted, subject to FAA approval. If FAA approval requires any changes to the proposal as initially approved, then that initial approval shall be void. A new application will need to be submitted, reviewed and approved through an additional site review or specific City Council use permit. No building permit application shall be submitted without documents demonstrating FAA review. 
(c)  Site review and specific City Council use permit applications. In addition to the application requirements specified in subsections (a) and (b) above, application for site review or specific City Council use permits also shall include the following information: 
(1)  A visual study containing, at a minimum, a graphic simulation showing the appearance of the proposed tower, antennae, and ancillary facilities from at least five points within a three-mile radius. Such points shall be chosen by the provider with review and approval by the planning director to ensure that various potential view are represented. 
(2)  Evidence demonstrating collocation is impractical on existing tall buildings, light or utility poles, water towers, existing transmission towers, and existing tower facility sites for reasons of structural support capabilities, safety, available space, or failing to meet service coverage areas needs. 
(3)  A current overall system plan for the city, showing facilities presently constructed or approved and future expansion plans. 
(4)  A statement providing the reasons for the location, design and height of the proposed tower or antennae. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. XI, § 7), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-368. - Standards for transmission towers and antennae. 
    Installation, construction or modification of all transmission towers and antennae shall comply with the following standards, unless a variance is obtained pursuant to the provisions of section 98-370: 
(1)  Separation between transmission towers. No transmission tower may be constructed within 2,000 feet of any pre-existing transmission tower. Tower separation shall be measured by following a straight line from the portion of the base of the proposed tower that is closest to the base of any pre-existing tower. For purposes of this subsection, a tower shall include any transmission tower for which the city has issued a building permit, or for which an application has been filed and not denied. 
(2)  Height limitation. Transmission tower heights shall not exceed 199 feet. In no case shall a variance from this height limitation be granted. 
(3)  Collocation. New transmission towers shall be designed to accommodate collocation of additional providers: 
a.  New transmission towers of a height of 80 feet or more shall be designed to accommodate collocation of a minimum of two additional providers either outright or through future modification to the tower. 
b.  New transmission towers of a height of at least 60 feet and no more than 80 feet shall be designed to accommodate collocation of a minimum of one additional provider either outright or through future modification to the tower. 
(4)  Setbacks. The following setbacks from adjacent property lines and adjacent streets shall be required unless a variance is granted pursuant to the provisions of section 98-370: 
a.  In the I-1 zoning district, the setback from adjacent public streets, private streets or adjacent properties lines shall be minimum of 25 feet. 
b.  In all other zoning districts, transmission towers shall be set back from adjacent public streets, private streets or adjacent property lines a minimum of 50 feet from adjacent public streets. 
(5)  Buffering. In all zoning districts, existing vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In the I-1 zoning districts, no buffering is required. In all other zoning districts, landscaping shall be placed completely around the transmission tower and ancillary facilities located at ground level except as required to access the facility. Such landscaping shall consist of evergreen vegetation with a minimum planted height of six feet placed densely so as to form a screen. Landscaping shall be compatible with other nearby landscaping and shall be kept healthy and well maintained. 
(6)  Noise reduction. When the adjacent property is zoned for residential use or occupied by a dwelling, hospital, school, library, or nursing home, noise generating equipment shall be sound-buffered by means of baffling, barriers, or other suitable means to reduce sound level measured at the property line to 45 dB(A). 
(7)  Lighting. No lighting shall be permitted on transmission towers except that required by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
(8)  Color. The transmission tower and attached antennae shall be unpainted galvanized steel or painted neutral colors or such shades as are appropriate and compatible with the surrounding environment, as approved by the city. 
(9)  Display. No signs, striping, graphics or other attention getting devices are permitted on the transmission tower or ancillary facilities except for warning and safety signage with a surface area of no more than three square feet. Such signage shall be affixed to a fence or ancillary facility and the number of signs is limited to no more than two. 
(10)  Spacing of transmission towers from residential structures. Transmission towers shall be spaced from all residential structures at a minimum equal to 115 percent of the height of the transmission tower, measured from the base of the transmission tower to the nearest residential structure. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. XI, § 8), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-369. - Standards for ancillary facilities. 
    All ancillary facilities shall comply with the standards of section 98-368(5) and (6). 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. XI, § 9), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-370. - Variances. 
(a)  The city may grant a variance from the provisions of section 98-368(1) providing the applicant demonstrates that: 
(1)  It is technologically impossible to locate the proposed tower on available sites more than 2,000 feet from a pre-existing transmission tower and still provide the approximate coverage the tower is intended to provide; 
(2)  The pre-existing transmission tower that is within 2,000 feet of the proposed tower cannot be modified to accommodate another provider; and 
(3)  There are no available buildings, light or utility poles, or water towers on which antennae may be located and still provide the approximate coverage the tower is intended to provide. 
(b)  The city may grant a variance to the setbacks of section 98-368(4) upon finding that stealth design, proposed landscaping, configuration of the site, or the presence of mature trees obviates the need for compliance. 
(c)  If the proposed transmission tower or ancillary facility requires site review or a specific City Council permit, the request for variance shall be considered as part of the site review or specific City Council use permit process. If the proposed transmission tower or ancillary facility is an outright permitted use, the request for a variance shall be process by the board of adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. XI, § 10), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-371. - Removal of facilities. 
(a)  All transmission towers and antennae shall be removed by the person who constructed the facility, by the person who operates the facility, or by the property owner within six months of the time that the facilities have ceased being used to transmit, receive or relay voice and data signals to or from wireless communication devices. the city administrator may grant a six-month extension where a written request has been filed, within the initial six-month period, to reuse the tower or antennae. 
(b)  The city may require the posting of an open ended bond before building permit issuance to insure removal of the transmission tower, substructure or antennae after the facility no longer is being used. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. XI, § 11), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-372. - Maintenance of facilities. 
    Transmission towers, substructures and antennae must be maintained in compliance with the provisions of this article as well as all applicable municipal, state and federal regulations. Specifically, transmission towers, substructures and antennae shall be maintained in a manner that does not place the health, safety or welfare of the citizens of the city in jeopardy; this includes, but is not limited to, the requirement that all required landscaping is maintained in a healthy state, all telecommunication facility components are maintained in a good states of repair, that weathered transmission towers and substructures are repainted as needed and the transmission tower facility is kept free of trash or debris. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. XI, § 12), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 98-373. - Fees. 
(a)  The collocation application review fee shall be as prescribed in the most recent adopted fee schedule passed and approved by the City Council. The fee shall be non-refundable. 
(b)  The tower construction application review fee shall be as prescribed in the most recent adopted fee schedule passed and approved by the City Council. The fee shall be non-refundable. 
(c)  The fees noted in subsection (a) and (b) above are in addition to any necessary building permit, zoning or City Council use permit fees. Additionally any ordinance, code provision, rule or regulation to the contrary notwithstanding, the city administrator may require, as part of application fees for building or land use permits for telecommunication facilities, an amount sufficient to recover all of the city's costs in retaining consultants to verify statements made in conjunction with the permit application, to the extent that verification requires telecommunications expertise. None of the fees required by this section are subject to refund. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. XI, § 13), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 394, § 10, 2-12-2009) 
Secs. 98-374-98-400. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - AMENDMENTS, REZONING, AND VARIANCES 

Sec. 98-401. - Limitation on amendments; initiation of amendments. 
(a)  For the purpose of establishing and maintaining sound, stable, and desirable development within the territorial limits of the City, this Chapter shall not be amended except to correct an error in the Chapter, or because of changed or changing conditions in particular areas or in the City generally, or to rezone an area, extend the boundary of an existing zoning district, or change the regulations and restrictions thereof, all in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan. 
(b)  Subject to the limitations of Subsection (a), an amendment to this Chapter may be initiated by: 
(1)  The City Council on its own motion; 
(2)  The Planning and Zoning Commission; 
(3)  A petition, as hereafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. XII, § 1), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 491, § 1, 1-24-2013) 
Sec. 98-402. - Authority for changes and amendments. 
    The City Council, in accordance with applicable State Law, may from time to time amend, supplement, change, modify, or repeal the regulations, standards, and boundaries herein established. In addition, a comprehensive review of the Zoning Code text and map shall be made by the Planning and Zoning Commission for the purpose of keeping the City current with development patterns; innovative methods in zoning; and examining existing land uses and changes in land uses made by developers and builders within the City in order to ascertain where the patterns of development are changing. The Planning and Zoning Commission, at least every three years, shall file a report and recommendation thereon with the Mayor and City Council. The three-year time period shall commence upon the date of the adoption of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. XII, § 2), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 491, § 1, 1-24-2013) 
Sec. 98-403. - Application procedure. 
    For changes to the regulations and/or district map, the procedure shall be as follows: 
(1)  Application form; filing. Any person, firm, or corporation petitioning for a change in zoning shall do so upon a form titled "Application for Zoning Amendment or Change," provided for such purpose by the Development Services Department and all petitions for changes shall be filed with the Development Services Department, with a copy to the City Secretary. Notice shall also be given to the Development Services Department and the City Secretary if the application for change originates with any member of the City Council or Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(2)  Contents of petition. All petitions for amendments to this Chapter shall contain at least the following: 
a.  The petitioner's name, address, and interest in the petition, as well as the name, address, and interest of every person having a legal or an equitable interest in the land covered by the petition. 
b.  The nature and effect of the proposed amendment. 
c.  A fully-dimensioned map showing the following: 
1.  The land which would be affected by the proposed amendment. 
2.  A legal description of such land. 
3.  The present zoning classification of the land. 
4.  The zoning classification of all abutting zoning districts. 
5.  All public and private rights-of-way and easements bounding and intersecting the land under consideration. 
d.  If the proposed amendment would require a change in the zoning map, the owners of all land within the area to be changed and within 200 feet shall be identified by name and current mailing address. 
e.  The alleged error in this Chapter which would be corrected by the proposed amendment, together with a detailed explanation of such error in the Chapter which is alleged, and detailed reasons as to how the proposed amendment will correct the same. 
f.  The changed or changing condition(s), if any, in the area or in the municipality generally, that makes the proposed amendment reasonably necessary. 
g.  Evidence that the petition is in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan. 
h.  All other circumstances, factors, and reasons which the applicant offers in support of the proposed amendment. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. XII, § 3), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 491, § 1, 1-24-2013) 
Sec. 98-404. - Application fees. 
(a)  When an application is filed for change of zoning district boundaries or for any change of the Zoning Code or classifications, such application shall be accompanied by the fees in conformance with the City's fee schedule. The fees must be paid by certified or cashier's check, money order, or credit card payment made payable to the City, and be deposited with the Development Services Department at the time the application is filed. In the event such application is disapproved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the applicant has a right to make a written request for a hearing before the City Council within a 60 calendar-day period immediately following the hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(b)  No notice of any such application shall be issued and no hearing shall be had before the Planning and Zoning Commission or the City Council until the prescribed fees are paid. The Development Services Department shall keep and preserve an itemized record of all fees received and the disposition thereof. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. XII, § 4), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 491, § 1, 1-24-2013) 
Sec. 98-405. - Action by planning and zoning commission. 
(a)  Petitions shall be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission at its regularly-scheduled meeting or special meeting, as called by the City Administrator or Chairman of the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall schedule a public hearing providing written notice of proposed change in classification to all owners of real property lying within 200 feet of the property on which the change in classification is proposed. Such notice shall be given not less than ten (10) calendar days before the date for the hearing. Notice may be served by depositing the notice, properly addressed and postage paid, in the City post office. Owners shall be those of record on the last City tax roll. 
(b)  If, after review of the application or petition, the majority of the Planning and Zoning Commission agree by roll call vote that: 
(1)  Such requested change is not in keeping with the Comprehensive Plan of the City; 
(2)  There is no error in the original zoning of the property for which a change is requested; 
(3)  There has been no substantial change in the environment of the property for which a change is requested that could warrant a change since its original classification; and/or 
(4)  Granting of the request would create a spot zone where by the property would enjoy a special monopolistic privilege not enjoyed by nearby properties of equal or similar location factors; 
the applicant shall be advised in writing by the City Administrator or his/her designee that it is the opinion of the Commission that granting the requested change would not be in keeping with the objectives and proposes of the Comprehensive Plan, the Zoning Code, and/or the district map, and the particular request will not be recommended for amendment or change. The Planning and Zoning Commission will then transmit its recommendations to the City Council for final approval/disapproval. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. XII, § 1), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 491, § 1, 1-24-2013) 
Sec. 98-406. - Request for consideration by city council; action by city council. 
    The City Council shall not hold any public hearing or take action on any zoning matter until it has received the final report from the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(1)  If the Planning and Zoning Commission recommendation is for "disapproval" of the proposed change, the applicant has the right to make a written request for City Council consideration of the zoning matter; if, however, the applicant fails to make written request to the City Council within 60 calendar days after the Planning and Zoning Commission hearing the matter shall be terminated. 
(2)  If the Planning and Zoning Commission recommends "approval" or the applicant requests City Council consideration, as required above, the City Council shall, at the next regular or special session, as called by the Mayor: 
a.  Set a date for a public hearing before the City Council. 
b.  Cause to be published a notice giving notice to time, date, and place for such hearing in an official newspaper, or a newspaper of general circulation in the City. Notice must be published a minimum of 16 calendar days before date of hearing. 
c.  Hold a public hearing and vote on the matter with a roll call vote. 
(3)  If the Planning and Zoning Commission has recommended disapproval of a change of zoning, such amendment shall not become effective except by the affirmative vote of a simple majority of all members of the City Council. If there is a protest against any such change in classification of the zoning district of any property, and such protest is signed by the owner(s) of 20 percent or more either of the area of the lots included in such proposed change or of those within 200 feet, such amendment shall not become effective except by the affirmative vote of three-fourths (3/4 or 4 out of 5 members) of all members of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. XII, § 6), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 491, § 1, 1-24-2013) 
Sec. 98-407. - Resubmission of petition upon denial. 
    If a petition for zoning is recommended for "disapproval" by the Planning and Zoning Commission or is "denied" by the City Council, another petition for classification shall not be filed within a period of one year (365 calendar days) from the date of "denial," unless: 
(1)  A substantial change in conditions has taken place in the vicinity of the property sought to be rezoned or for which a specific use permit was requested; 
(2)  The applicant applying for rezoning seeks different relief; or 
(3)  The last final decision denying rezoning was predicated upon fraud, accident, or mistake. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. XII, § 7), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 491, § 1, 1-24-2013) 
Secs. 98-408-98-430. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT 

Sec. 98-431. - Established; applicability of state law. 
(a)  A Board of Adjustment of the City is created and established. 
(b)  The Board of Adjustment shall be subject to and shall follow the requirements and have the powers set out in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.008-211.011. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. XIII, § 1), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 491, § 1, 1-24-2013) 
Sec. 98-432. - Membership. 
(a)  The Board of Adjustment shall consist of five members who are residents of the City, each to be appointed for a term of two years and removable for cause by the City Council upon written charges and after a public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant. The Board of Adjustment shall also consist of four alternate members, each of whom shall possess equal qualifications and also be duly appointed for two-year terms and be removed for cause in the above manner provided by the City Council, and which designated alternate members of the Board shall serve in the absence of one or more regular members when requested to do so by the City Administrator. 
(b)  The City Council will consider for appointment to the Board of Adjustment only those persons who have demonstrated their civic interest, general knowledge of the community, independent judgment, interest in planning and zoning, and availability to prepare for and attend meetings. It is the intent of the City Council that members shall, by reason of diversity of their individual occupations, constitute a Board of Adjustment which is broadly representative of the City. 
(c)  The term of all members shall run in conjunction with the Mayor's term. Members shall be appointed and/or reappointed the first City Council meeting in June following the election of the Mayor in May. The members of the Board of Adjustment shall be identified by place numbers 1 through 5 and the alternate members of the Board of Adjustment shall be identified by place numbers 1a through 4a. Members and alternate members may be appointed to succeed themselves, and all members and alternate members of the Board shall remain in office after the expiration of their term until City Council appoints individuals to fill said positions. Duly appointed members shall be installed at the first regular meeting after their appointment. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. XIII, § 2), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 491, § 1, 1-24-2013) 
Sec. 98-433. - Meetings; election of officers; rules of procedure. 
    The Board of Adjustment shall elect a Chairman and a Vice-chairman from among its members before proceeding to any other matters of business at the first called meeting of each year. The Board of Adjustment shall select a Secretary and such other officers as it deems necessary either from its membership or from staff representatives assigned by the City Administrator of the City to work with the Board of Adjustment. The Board of Adjustment shall meet the second Monday of every month and shall designate the time and place of its meetings. Meetings of the Board shall be held as called by the City Administrator or Chairman and at such other times as the Board may determine. The Board Chairman, or, in his absence, the acting Chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Board of Adjustment shall be open to the public. The Board of Adjustment shall adopt its own rules of procedure, subject to the approval of the City Council, and keep a record of its proceedings consistent with provisions of this Chapter and the requirements of State Law. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. XIII, § 3), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 491, § 1, 1-24-2013) 
Sec. 98-434. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)  Jurisdiction. When, in its judgment, the public convenience and welfare will be substantially served and the appropriate use of neighboring property will not be substantially or permanently injured, the Board of Adjustment may, in specific cases after public notice and public hearing, and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, authorize and shall have the power to grant the following special exceptions to the regulations herein established. In granting such exceptions and regulations, the Board of Adjustment shall not permit within any district a use that is not permitted in that district and the district regulations as set forth in this Chapter. The Board of Adjustment shall not permit any variations or exceptions if the applicant has contributed to the cause of the unnecessary hardship of which he complains. 
(b)  Powers. 
(1)  The reconstruction of a building occupied by a nonconforming use, provided such reconstruction does not prevent the eventual return of such property to a conforming use. 
(2)  Modifications of yard, open space, parking lot area or lot width regulations as may be necessary to secure appropriate development of a parcel of land where such parcel was separately owned at the time of the passage of this Chapter and is of such restricted area where the shape of the lot is such that it cannot be appropriately developed without such modification. 
(3)  Reduce required off-street parking if it can be shown that the required minimum, as herein established, will not at any time be necessary because of the character of the proposed uses, and the probable limited quantity of employees, clients, customers or tenants. 
(4)  Decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in the order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Building Official or administrative officer in the enforcement of this Chapter. 
(5)  Special exceptions to the terms of the Chapter upon which such Board is required to pass pursuant to this Chapter. 
(6)  Decide matters specifically delegated to it by the City Council under appropriate standard set by the City Council. 
(7)  Upon appeal in specific cases, such variance from the terms of this Chapter will not be contrary to the public interest, where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of this Chapter shall be observed and substantial justice done. 
(8)  The concurring vote of 75 percent of the members of the Board (4 out of 5 Board members) is necessary to: 
a.  reverse an order, requirement, decision, or determination of an administrative official; 
b.  decide in favor of an applicant on a matter on which the Board is required to pass under the Zoning Code; or 
c.  authorize a variation from the terms of the Zoning Code. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. XIII, § 4), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 491, § 1, 1-24-2013) 
Sec. 98-435. - Application for special exception. 
(a)  All applications for special exceptions shall be in the form of an appeal to the Board of Adjustment. 
(b)  Application form; filing. Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be made by any person aggrieved, or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the City affected by any decision of the administrative officer. Such appeal shall be made by the aggrieved person by filing, within 30 calendar days of the rendering of the decision, a notice of appeal upon a form titled "Application to Board of Adjustment" provided for such purpose by the Development Services Department. The notice of appeal shall be filed with the Development Services Department, with a copy to the City Secretary, and shall specify the grounds thereof. The application shall not be considered as filed until information required on the prescribed application form and associated fees have been provided in full. The City Secretary shall forthwith transmit to the Board all papers constituting the record in the matter being appealed. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. XIII, § 5), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 491, § 1, 1-24-2013) 
Sec. 98-436. - Application fees. 
(a)  When an application is filed for a special exception or variance, such application shall be accompanied by the fees in conformance with the City's fee schedule. The fees must be in the form of a certified or cashier's check, money order, or credit card payment made payable to the City of Helotes, and be deposited with the Development Services Department at the time the application is filed and shall forthwith be credited to the General Fund of the City. 
(b)  No notice of any such application shall be issued and no hearing shall be presented before the Board of Adjustment until the prescribed fees are paid. The Development Services Department shall keep and preserve an itemized record of all fees received and the disposition thereof for each application. 
(Ord. No. 491, § 1, 1-24-2013) 
Sec. 98-437. - Stay of proceedings. 
    An appeal shall stay all proceedings in the matter, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies in writing to the Board of Adjustment that a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril of life or property. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. XIII, § 6), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008;Ord. No. 491, § 1, 1-24-2013) 
Sec. 98-438. - Hearing of appeals. 
    The City Administrator and City Staff shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an appeal and shall give notice to the parties of interest. In addition, at least 16 days advance notice shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City, stating the date, time, and place of the hearing, the parties appealing such matter, and the lot description of the land which the matter concerns. The City shall mail notices of such hearings to the petitioners and owners of property at any point within 200 feet of any point of land on which a variance or special exception is desired and to all other persons deemed by the City to be affected or to be parties in interest. Such owners and persons shall be determined according to the current tax roll of the City. In exercising its powers, the Board of Adjustment may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination of appeal, and may make such order, requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be made and to that end shall have all powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. The concurring vote of four members of the Board of Adjustment shall be necessary to reverse the order, requirement, decision, or determination of any Building Official or administrative officer. The concurring vote of four members of the Board of Adjustment shall also be necessary to decide in favor of an applicant on any matter upon which the Board of Adjustment is required to pass upon under this Chapter other than an appeal. All votes shall be made by roll call. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed with the City Secretary and shall be of public record. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. XIII, § 7), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 491, § 1, 1-24-2013) 
Sec. 98-439. - Court appeal. 
(a)  Presentation of petition. Any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Adjustment, or any taxpayer, or any officer, department, board, or bureau of the City, may present to a District Court, County Court, or County Court at Law, as provided by law, a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the Court within ten days after the filing of the decision of the Board of Adjustment with the City Secretary. 
(b)  Writ of certiorari. Upon the presentation of such petition, the Court may allow a writ of certiorari directed to the Board of Adjustment to review such decision of the Board of Adjustment and shall prescribe therein the time within which a return thereto must be made and served, which shall not be less than ten days and may be extended by the Court. The allowance of the writ shall not stay proceedings upon the decision appealed from, but the Court may, on application, on notice to the Board, and on due cause shown, grant an order that specifically grants a stay through a restraining order. 
(c)  Return of certified copies. 
(1)  The Board of Adjustment shall not be required to return the original papers acted upon by it, but it shall be sufficient to return certified or sworn copies thereof or of such portions thereof as may be called for by such writ of certiorari as provided for in subsection (b). Returned copies shall concisely set forth such other facts as may be pertinent and material to show the grounds of the decision appealed from and shall be certified. 
(2)  If upon the hearing it shall appear to the Court that testimony is necessary for the proper disposition of the matter, the Court shall take evidence, appoint a referee to take evidence as it may direct, and report the same with its findings of fact and conclusions of law, which shall constitute a part of the proceedings upon which the determination of the Court shall be made. The Court may reverse or affirm wholly or partly, or may modify, the decision brought up for review. 
(3)  Costs shall not be allowed against the Board of Adjustment, unless it shall appear to the Court that it acted with gross negligence, or in bad faith, or with malice in making the decision appealed from. 
(d)  Fee. In the event jurisdiction of the Board of Adjustment is found not to exist with regard to the issue brought to the Board, a partial reimbursement of the fee, as established by the fee schedule of the City, shall be refunded. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. XIII, § 8), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 491, § 1, 1-24-2013) 
Secs. 98-440-98-460. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 98-461. - Building permit and plan requirements. 
    No building or structure shall be erected, added to, or externally altered until a permit therefore has been issued by the Development Services Department. All applications for such permits shall be in accordance with the requirements of this Chapter and, unless upon written order of the Board of Adjustment, no such building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any building where said construction, addition, or alteration or use thereof would be in violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter. 
(1)  Information to accompany application. There shall be submitted with all applications for building permits two copies of a layout or plot plan drawn to scale showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the exact size and location on the lot of the building and/or accessory buildings to be erected and those already existing, and such other information as may be necessary to determine and provide for the enforcement of this Chapter. 
(2)  Issuance of permit. One copy of such layout or plot plan and approved building permit shall be returned to the submitter when approved by the Development Services Department and the receipt of the prescribed fee. 
(3)  Fee. The fee for issuance of a building permit shall be in accordance with the City fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. XIV, § 1), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 491, § 1, 1-24-2013) 
Sec. 98-462. - Effect of chapter on existing permits, agreements and rights; conflicting regulations. 
(a)  Existing permits and private agreements. This Chapter is not intended to abrogate or annul: 
(1)  Any permits issued before the effective date of this Chapter; 
(2)  Any easement, deed restriction, or other private agreement more restrictive than the provisions of this Chapter. 
(b)  Effect of other ordinances and regulations. Whenever higher or more restrictive standards are established by the provisions of any other applicable statute, ordinance, or regulations than are established by the provisions of this Chapter, the provisions of such other statute, ordinance, or regulations shall govern, but will not be enforced as a part of this Chapter. 
(c)  Offenses and liabilities preserved. All offenses committed and all liabilities incurred prior to the effective date of this Chapter shall be treated as though all prior applicable zoning ordinances and amendments thereto were in full force and effect for the purpose of sustaining any proper suit, action, or prosecution with respect to such offenses and liabilities. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. XIV, § 2), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 491, § 1, 1-24-2013) 
Sec. 98-463. - Certificate of occupancy. 
(a)  Required for certain uses. Certificates of occupancy shall be required for:) Required for certain uses. Certificates of Occupancy shall be required for: 
(1)  Occupancy and use of a building hereafter erected or structurally altered, other than those buildings located within a Single-Family Residential (R-1) District and intended to be used as a residence. 
(2)  Change in use of an existing building. 
(3)  Change in the use of land to a use of a different classification. 
(4)  Occupancy and use of vacant land. 
(5)  Any change in the use of a nonconforming use. 
(6)  All businesses located within the City. 
(b)  Nonconforming uses. A Certificate of Occupancy shall be required for all lawful nonconforming uses of land or buildings created by the adoption of this Chapter. A nonconforming use is any use which was lawfully operated in accordance with the provisions of any prior Zoning ordinance on the effective date of the ordinance from which this Chapter is derived; or on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this Chapter is derived was lawfully operated in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, but which use, by reason of amendment to this Chapter, or other governmental action, is not a permitted use in the district in which the use is located; 
(c)  Procedure. Written application for a Certificate of Occupancy for a new building or for an existing building which has been altered shall be made at the same time as the application for the building permit for such building. The Certificate shall be issued within ten days of completion of construction or alteration. Written application for a Certificate of Occupancy for the use of vacant land, or for a change in nonconforming use, as herein provided, shall be made to the Development Services Department. If the proposed use is in conformity with the provisions of this Chapter, the Certificate of Occupancy therefore shall be issued. The fee for such Certificate of Occupancy shall be in accordance with the City schedule of fees, to be paid to the City at the time the building permit is issued. Every Certificate of Occupancy shall state that the building or the proposed use of a building or land complies with all provisions of this Chapter. A record of all Certificates of Occupancy shall be kept on file with the Development Services Department. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. XIV, § 3), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 491, § 1, 1-24-2013) 
Sec. 98-464. - Enforcement officials; right of entry. 
(a)  Enforcement officials. The provisions of this Chapter shall be administered and enforced by the City Administrator or his/her designee, the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Building Official, and the Code Enforcement Officer. 
(b)  Right of entry. The Building Official, City Administrator or his/her designee, members of the Planning and Zoning Commission, Code Enforcement Officer, or any duly authorized person shall have the right to enter upon any premises at any reasonable time prior to the completion of the buildings for the purpose of making inspections of buildings or premises necessary to carry out his duties in the enforcement of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. XIV, § 4), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 491, § 1, 1-24-2013) 
Sec. 98-465. - Stop orders. 
    Whenever any building work is being done contrary to the provisions of this Chapter, the Building Official, Code Enforcement Officer, or City Administrator may issue a stop order to the owner or contractor doing or causing such work to be done, and any such person shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the Building Official, Code Enforcement Officer, or City Administrator to proceed with the work. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. XIV, § 5), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 491, § 1, 1-24-2013) 
Sec. 98-466. - Penalty; additional remedies. 
    If any person, firm, or corporation violates any of the provisions of this Chapter or fails to comply therewith, the City, in addition to imposing Class C misdemeanor penalties upon conviction, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings in Court to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about any land, and the definition of any violation of the terms of this Chapter as a misdemeanor shall not preclude the City from invoking the civil remedies given it by law in such cases, but same shall be cumulative of and in addition to the penalties prescribed for such violations. 
(Ord. No. 253, § 1(art. XIV, § 6), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 491, § 1, 1-24-2013) 
APPENDIX A. - SCHEDULE OF USES 
Schedule of Uses Planned Development District 
See PDD Agreement Old Town Helotes Special District 
See Sec. 98-72 Pre-Development District Office and Professional District Neighborhood Service District General Business District B-3 Overlay District 
See Sec. 98-69 Central Business Industrial District Zoning Classification PDD OTH 
SD PD B-1 B-2 B-3 B-3 OD B-4 I-1 Accessory Building X X X X X X Aerial Surveying CC CC CC CC CC Agriculture/Open Space X X X X X X Air Conditioning Sales, Retail, and Service (Completely Enclosed in B-2 and B-3) X X X X Airport (Non-Governmental) CC CC Alcoholic Beverage (Microbrewery) Manufacturer (With Food and On-premises Consumption) X X X X X Alcoholic Beverage (Retail) Sales (No On-premises Consumption) X X X X Ambulance Service X X Amusement Park CC CC CC Animal Shelter (Governmental) X X X X X Animal Shelter (Non-governmental) X X Antique Store (Completely Enclosed) X X X X X Apparel/Accessories/ Alteration & Repair (Retail) X X X X X Appliance Repair and Sales (Completely Enclosed in B-2 & B-3 Districts) X X X X Armory CC CC Art Gallery and/or Museum X X X X X Artisan, Artist, and Fine Arts Studio (No Outside Storage) X X X X X Auditorium (Governmental and Non-Profit) X X X X X Auditorium (Non-Governmental) X X X Automobile Car Wash X X X X Automobile Filling Station and/or Service (Service Completely Enclosed in B-2 & B-3 Districts) X X X X Automobile Glass Sales and Service (Completely Enclosed in B-3 District) X X X Automobile Paint and Auto Body Shop (Completely Enclosed in B-3 District) X X X Automobile Parking Lots or Garages (Commercial) CC CC X X X Automobile Part Sales (Completely Enclosed) (Retail) X X X X Automobile Rental (Rental Car Parking Area Completely Fenced with 6 ft. Opaque Fencing in B-2 and B-3 Districts) CC X X X Automobile (Incl. Motorcycles) Sales and Service (New and Used, When Used Incidental to New Sales) (Service Completely Enclosed in B-3 District) CC X X Automobile Upholstery Sales and Installation X X Bait Store X X X Bakery (Retail) X X X X X Barber and Beauty Equipment Sales (Retail) X X X X Barber and Beauty Shop X X X X X Bed and Breakfast X X X X Bicycle and/or Lawnmower Sales and Service (Completely Enclosed in B-2 and B-3 Districts) X X X X Blueprinting, Photostating/Reproduction/ 
Print Shop X X X X X Book and Stationery Store X X X X X Bowling Alley CC CC X X Building Hardware Sales (Completely Enclosed in B-2 and B-3 Districts) X X X X Building Lumber Sales CC X X Bus Passenger Station at Existing Business Other Than Busing Company X X X X Cabinet, Carpentry, or Upholstery Sales (Completely Enclosed in B-2 and B-3 Districts) X X X X Camera and Photographic Store X X X X X Candle Shop (Retail) (Completely Enclosed in B-2 & B-3 Districts) X X X X Carpet Sales, Service, and Cleaning (Completely Enclosed in B-2 and B-3 Districts X X X X X Catering Shop (Completely Enclosed in B-1 and B-2 Districts) X X X X X Confectionary and Nut (Retail) (Completely Enclosed in B-1, B-2, and B-3 Districts) X X X X X Church X X X X X X Civic Center X X X X X Club or Lodge (Governmental and Non-profit) X X X X X Club or Lodge (Non-Governmental) X X X X X Coffee Roasting (Retail) X X X X X Communications Tower and Associated Stations CC CC CC X X Contractor (Completely Enclosed in B-3 District) X X X Convenience Store (Completely Enclosed in B-2 and B-3 Districts) X X X X Dairy Equipment Sales and Service (Completely Enclosed in B-3 District) X X X Dairy Products (Retail) X X X X X Delicatessen X X X X X Department Store X X X Drag Strip CC CC Drug Sales (Retail) X X X X X Dry Cleaning Shop X X X X X Dry Goods (Retail) (Completely Enclosed in B-1, B-2, and B-3 District X X X X X Dwelling (Garden Home) Dwelling (Mobile Home) Dwelling (Single-family) X X X X X X Dwelling (Townhome) Dwelling (Two-family) Electric Power Generator (Primary Station) CC CC CC CC CC CC Electric Repair Shop (Completely Enclosed in B-3 District) X X X Electrical Substation (Completely Enclosed by an Opaque Fence; Minimum 6 ft. in Height) CC CC CC CC CC CC Elevator Maintenance and Service (Completely Enclosed in B-3 District) X X X Exterminator (Completely Enclosed in B-2 and B-3 Districts) X X X X Fabric or Needlework Shop X X X X X Fairgrounds, Baseball Park, and Stadium CC CC CC X X Farm Equipment Sales/Service (Completely Enclosed in B-3 District) X X X Farm/Ranch/Feed Supply (Completely Enclosed in B-2 District) X X X X Farmers Market X X X X X Financial Institution X X X X X Firearms and/or Ammunition Sales and Service X X X Fire Station X X X X X X Fish Market (Retail) (Completely Enclosed in B-2 and B-3 Districts) X X X X Flea Market CC Floor Covering Sales (Retail) (Completely Enclosed in B-2 and B-3 Districts) X X X X Floral Shop (Retail) X X X X X Food Products (Retail) X X X X X Funeral Home X X X X Furniture Sales, Service, and Repair (Retail) (Completely Enclosed in B-2 and B-3 Districts) X X X X Gas Utility Station CC CC CC CC CC CC Gift Shop (Completely Enclosed in B-1, B-2, and B-3 Districts) X X X X X Glass Sales and Service (Retail) (Completely Enclosed in B-2 and B-3 Districts) X X X X Golf Driving Range or Course (Consumption of Alcohol Permitted) CC X X X X X Greenhouse or Nursery (Retail and Wholesale) CC X X X X X Grocery (Retail) X X X X Gymnasium X X X X Hair and Nail Salon X X X X X Heavy Machinery Sales, Service, and Storage X X Hobby Supply Sales X X X X X Home Occupation X X X X X X Hospital CC CC CC X X Hotel (Other Than Motel or Motor Inn Where Patrons Access Rooms Via Parking Area) X X X Ice Cream Parlor/Store X X X X X Indoor Entertainment/Amusement X X X X Interior Decorator X X X X X Jewelry Sales and Service X X X X X Laboratory (Dental or Medical) (Completely Enclosed in B-1, B-2, and B-3 Districts) X X X X X Laboratory (Research, Testing, and Analysis) (Completely Enclosed in B-3 District) CC CC CC Laundry (Plant) X X Laundry (Retail) X X X X X Leather Goods or Luggage Store X X X X Library (Governmental and Non-Profit) X X X X X Library (Non-Governmental) X X X X X Local Utility Distribution Center or Lines CC CC CC CC CC CC Locksmith X X X X Machine and Welding Shop (Completely Enclosed in B-3 District) CC X X Machine Tools and Construction Equipment Sales and Service (Completely Enclosed in B-3 District) X X X Manufacturing, Light * CC X X Manufacturing, Heavy ** CC CC Marine Sales and Service (New and Used, When Used Incidental to New Sales) (Service Completely Enclosed in B-3 District) CC X X Massage Therapy X X X X X Medical Institution (Other Than Hospital) CC CC CC Medical Supply (Retail) X X X X X Milliner (Retail) (Completely Enclosed in B-2 and B-3 Districts) X X X X Millwork (Retail) (Completely Enclosed in B-3 District) X X X Mobile Home Sales and Service (New Mobile Homes Only) CC CC Moving Company (Completely Enclosed in B-3 District) CC X X Music Store X X X X X Newspaper Printer (Completely Enclosed in B-3 District) CC X X Newsstand X X X X X Nursery or Daycare X X X X X Nursing Home or Assisted Living X X X X X Office (General, Medical, and Professional Business) X X X X X Off-Street Parking, When Incidental to Main Use X X X X X X Office Supply Store (Completely Enclosed B-1, B-2, and B-3 Districts) X X X X X Open Storage CC CC Optometry Office and Optical Goods (Retail) X X X X X Oversized Vehicle Car Wash CC CC Oversized Vehicle Filling Station and/or Service CC CC Oversized Vehicle Rental CC CC Oversized Vehicle Sales and Service CC CC Paint and Wallpaper Store X X X X Park/Recreation Center (No Permanent Alcoholic Beverage Sales Permitted) CC X X X X X Pawnshop (Completely Enclosed in B-2 & B-3 Districts) X X X X Pet Shop and Supply (Completely Enclosed in B-2 and B-3 Districts) X X X X Picture Framing (Completely Enclosed in B-2 and B-3 Districts) X X X X Pipeline and Electrical Transmission Lines CC CC CC CC CC CC Playground Equipment Sales and Manufacturing (Completely Enclosed in B-3 District) X X X Plumber (Completely Enclosed in B-2 and B-3 Districts) X X X X Plumbing Fixture Sales and Service (Completely Enclosed in B-2 and B-3 Districts) X X X X Post Office X X X X X Radio or Television Broadcast Studio CC X X X Real Estate Sales Office X X X X X Recreational Vehicle Park X X X X X Recreational Vehicle Sales and Service (New and Used, When Used Incidental to New Sales) (Service Completely Enclosed in B-3 District) CC X X Restaurant (Alcoholic Beverages Incidental to Food Sales) X X X X X Restaurant with Drive Thru (Alcoholic Beverages Incidental to Food Sales) CC CC X X Riding Stable or Academy CC CC CC CC CC CC School, College CC CC CC X X X School, Elementary and Secondary CC X X X X X School, Trade CC CC CC X X X Sexually Oriented Business CC CC Sewerage Pumping Station CC CC CC CC CC CC Shoe Sales and Repair (Retail) X X X X X Sign Sales, Manufacturer, and Repair (Completely Enclosed in B-3 District) X X X Skating Rink (Completely Enclosed) X X X Sporting Goods Sales and Service (Completely Enclosed in B-2 and B-3 Districts) X X X X Stamp/Coin Sales (Retail) X X X X X Stone Cutting and Monument Sales/Service (Completely Enclosed in B-3 District) CC X X X Storage Building (Marine, Automobile, Home, Commercial) (Completely Enclosed in B-3 District) X X X Storage Building Sales and Service With Outside Display of Storage Buildings CC X X Swimming Pool (Community or Private) CC X X X X X Swimming Pool Sales and Service (Completely Enclosed in B-3 District) X X X Tanning Salon X X X X X Tavern (Completely Enclosed in B-2 and B-3 Districts) CC X X X Tavern With Outdoor Area For Patrons/Entertainment Purposes CC X X Taxidermist (Completely Enclosed in B-3 District) CC X X Temporary Field Construction Office (Allowed During Duration of Project) X X X X X X Theater (Completely Enclosed) (Consumption of Alcohol Permitted) CC CC X X X Theater (Completely Enclosed) (Consumption of Alcohol Not Permitted) CC X X X X Theater (Outdoor) (Consumption of Alcohol Permitted) CC CC CC X X Theater (Outdoor) (Consumption of Alcohol Not Permitted) CC CC X X X Tobacco Store X X X X Tool Rental, Sales, and Service (Completely Enclosed in B-2 and B-3 Districts) X X X X Tool Rental With Outside Storage (Outside Storage Completely Fenced with 6 ft. Opaque Fencing in B-3 District) CC X X Trailer (Towing) Manufacturer, Sales, and Service (No Mobile Homes) (Completely Enclosed in B-3 District) X X X Utilities, Utility Shops, Storage, Yards, and Buildings, Public or Private, Other Than Already Listed CC CC CC CC CC CC Utility Company Service Center (Completely Enclosed in PD, B-1, B-2, and B-3 Districts) CC CC CC X X X Veterinarian Office and Hospital X X X X Watch Sales and Service (Completely Enclosed in B-1, B-2, and B-3 Districts) X X X X X Water/Sewage Pumping Station, Overhead Storage, or Plant CC CC CC CC CC CC Well Drilling Contractor (Completely Enclosed in B-3 District) X X X Window Covering Assembling, Sales, and Service, Including Awnings (Completely Enclosed in B-2 and B-3 Districts) X X X X  
* Manufacturing, Light 
Light Manufacturing is defined as manufacturing, processing, service, storage, wholesale, and distribution operations with most operations contained within an enclosed building with limited outside storage. Light Manufacturing is typified by the fabrication of certain materials and products with limited production of noise, vibration, air pollution, fire hazards, or noxious emissions which would disturb or endanger neighboring properties. Light Manufacturing typically sells its goods to a wholesaler or directly to the end consumer. 
Light Manufacturing includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
Beverage Manufacturer, Apparel Wholesaler, Bakery Wholesaler, Confectionary Manufacturer, Blacksmith, Creamery, Dairy Manufacturer, Floral Wholesaler, Grocery Wholesaler, Millwork Manufacturer, Hatchery, Textile Manufacturer, Warehousing, Appliance Manufacturer and Wholesaler, Electrical Instrument Manufacturer and Wholesaler, Office Machine Manufacturer and Wholesaler, Machine Tool Manufacturer and Wholesaler, Pharmaceutical Manufacturer, and Food Product Manufacturer and Wholesaler, but not Animal Slaughtering, Curing, or Rendering of Fats. 
** Manufacturing, Heavy 
Heavy Manufacturing is defined as a type of business with high capital costs, high barriers to entry, and low transportability. The term "heavy" refers to items produced by "heavy industry," such as iron, coal, oil, ships, et cetera. Today, "heavy" also refers to industries that cause harm or disruption to the environment. 
Heavy Manufacturing is associated with heavy industrial development, including storage, major freight terminals, waste and salvage, resource extraction, processing, transportation, major utilities, and other related uses, particularly those that require large buildings, frequent heavy truck traffic for supplies or shipments, or that may require substantial mitigation to avoid sound, noise, electrical interference, and odor impacts on neighboring properties. 
Heavy Manufacturing typically sells its goods to other industrial customers, rather than to the end consumer. Heavy Manufacturing products tend to be a part of the supply chain of other products sold to the end consumer. 
Heavy Manufacturing includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
Automobile Component Manufacturing, Glass Manufacturing, Insulation Manufacturing, Poultry Farm, Paint Manufacturing, Wood Processing, Ammonia/Chlorine Manufacturing, Principal Storage of Flammable/Toxic/Explosive or Noxious Materials, Concrete Mixing or Batching Plants, Fertilizer or Pesticide Manufacturing, Petroleum or Asphalt Refining/Manufacturing, Paper Mill, Rubber Manufacturing, and Stockyards. 
X-Normal 
CC-City Council approval 
(Ord. 253, §1(app. A), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 269, §5, 10-28-2004; Ord. No. 278, §1,(app. A), 4-14-2005; Ord. No. 297, 1-26-2006; Ord. No. 310, §6, 6-22-2006; Ord. No. 408, §1(app. A), 7-23-2009; Ord. 450, §1, 8-11-2011; Ord. No. 539, 9-11-2014) 
Schedule of Uses Single-family Residential 
District Two-family Residential 
District Mobile Home Residential 
District Zoning Classification R-1 R-2 R-3 Accessory Building X X X Agriculture/Open Space X X X Church X X X Dwelling (Mobile Home) CC Dwelling (Single-family) X X X Dwelling (Two-family) X CC Dwelling (Garden Home) CC Dwelling (Townhome) CC Electric Power Generator (Primary Station) CC CC CC Electrical Substation (Completely Enclosed by an Opaque Fence; Minimum Six (6) ft. in Height) CC CC CC Fire Station CC CC CC Gas Utility Station CC CC CC Greenhouse or Nursery (Retail and Wholesale) X Home Occupation X X X Library (Governmental, Non-Profit, and Non-Governmental) CC CC CC Local Utility Distribution Center or Lines CC CC CC Nursery or Day Care (Maximum of Six (6) Children) X X X Nursing Home or Assisted Living CC CC CC Off-Street Parking, When Incidental to Main Use X X X Park/Recreation Center (No Permanent Alcoholic Beverage Sales Permitted) CC CC CC Pipeline and Electrical Transmission Lines CC CC CC Club or Lodge (Non-governmental) CC CC CC Recreational Vehicle Park X Riding Stable or Academy CC CC CC School, Elementary and Secondary CC CC CC Swimming Pool (Community or Private Club) CC CC X Utility Company Service Center CC CC CC Utilities, Utility Shops, Storage Areas and Yards, and Utility Buildings (Public or Private) (Other Than Already Listed) CC CC CC Water/Sewage Pumping Station, Overhead Storage, or Plant CC CC CC  
X-Normal 
CC-City Council approval 
(Ord. 253, §1(app. A), 4-8-2004; Ord. No. 269, §5, 10-28-2004; Ord. No. 278, §1(app. A), 4-14-2005; Ord. No. 297, 1-26-2006; Ord. No. 310, §6, 6-22-2006; Ord. No. 408, §1(app. A), 7-23-2009) 
