9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 1/362
City of Iowa Park
Code of Ordinances
Including Supplement No. 6
This code contains all ordinances deemed appropriate to be included in this Code of Ordinances as enacted
through Ordinance 1280 adopted 11/11/19.
HOME RULE
CHARTER
HOME RULE CHARTER*
PREAMBLE
We, the citizens of Iowa Park, Texas, in order to establish a Home Rule municipal government, provide for the
progress of our City, secure fully the benefits of local self-government, promote economic and cultural
prosperity, provide for the common welfare, insure health and safety, support municipal cooperation, and
encourage all citizens to participate in the process of self-governing, hereby adopt this Home Rule Charter, as an
expression of our city's purpose and in accordance with the statutes of the State of Texas; and we declare the
City of Iowa Park (hereinafter referred to as “City”), in Wichita County, to be a political subdivision of the State
of Texas with all powers, rights, privileges, authorities, duties and immunities of local self-government as are
provided and limited in this Charter.
ARTICLE I
City Council
SECTION 1.01 Governing Body
The governing body of the City shall be known as the “City Council” and shall consist of a Mayor and five (5)
Council members.
State law reference–References to municipal governing body and to members of municipal governing body, V.T.C.A., Local
Government Code, sec. 21.002.
SECTION 1.02 Elected Officers
(1) Members - The members of the City Council of the City, which include the Mayor and five (5) Council
members, shall be the only elected officers of the City, and they shall be elected and hold office and be
compensated as provided herein.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 2/362
(2) Terms - The Mayor and Council members shall be elected by the qualified voters of the entire City for a
term of two (2) years, or until a successor has been duly elected and qualified, but each Council member shall be
elected to and occupy an at-large, non-geographical place on the City Council, such places being numbered 1, 2,
3, 4, and 5, respectively.
(3) Transition Provisions - To establish staggered terms for the Mayor and Council members, the following
transition provisions shall be applied:
(a) Beginning with the May 2009 election, and in each odd numbered year thereafter, the Council
members for Place 1, Place 3 and Place 5 will be elected for a two (2) year term.
(b) In May 2010, and in each even numbered year thereafter, the Mayor and Council members for
Place 2 & Place 4 will be elected for a two (2) year term.
(c) Current Terms - The current terms of Council members in office when this Section takes effect
shall not be shortened by the transition provision in (3) above.
SECTION 1.03 Candidacy of the Mayor and Council members
Qualification - Each member of the city council, including the Mayor, shall meet the following qualifications:
(1) be a registered voter of the City; (2) shall have resided in the City for one (1) year before the date of the
election; (3) continue their residency in the City during the term of office; (4) not hold another public elective
office within the State; and, (5) not hold an appointed office of the City unless otherwise specifically permitted
by state law.
State law reference–Age and residence requirements for home-rule city office, V.T.C.A., Election Code, sec. 141.003.
SECTION 1.04 Election
A candidate running for Mayor or City Council shall be elected to the office for which the candidate is running if
the candidate receives more votes than any other candidate running for that office. (Amended by Ord. 1225 at an
election held on November 8, 2016)
SECTION 1.05 Judge of Election
(1) The City Council shall be the judge of the qualifications of its own members and of the Mayor, subject to
review of the courts in case of an election contest. The City Council shall, in accordance with State law, canvass
the returns for any election and declare the results of such election. Should a runoff election be necessary, such
election shall be held in accordance with the Texas Election Code and other applicable statutes.
(2) In the event of a tie vote between candidates, the respective candidates so tied may agree to cast lots to
determine who shall be the duly elected officer. In the event such tied candidates do not agree to determine the
results of the election by casting lots, a run-off election shall be called and the respective candidates so tied shall
cast lots to determine the order their names shall appear on the ballot for such run-off elections. The candidate
receiving the highest number of votes of the entire City cast at said run-off election shall be elected to such
office.
State law references–Canvassing elections, V.T.C.A., Election Code, ch. 67; runoff election, V.T.C.A., Election Code, sec. 2.021 et
seq.
SECTION 1.06 Dates and Conduct of Election
The regular municipal election of the City Council shall be held on the uniform election day in May, in
accordance with this Charter, and the same shall be conducted and the results canvassed and announced in
accordance with the laws of the State regulating all municipal elections and in accordance with the ordinances
adopted by the City Council for the conduct of elections.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 3/362
State law references–Date for election of officers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 26.042; election dates, V.T.C.A., Election
Code, ch. 41.
SECTION 1.07 Qualifying of Officers
The Mayor and Council members elected, and other officers appointed under this Charter shall qualify by taking
the oath prescribed by the Texas Constitution at the first meeting following the canvass. Each newly elected City
Council member shall, within twelve (12) weeks of their election, swear that he or she has read the City Charter,
the Code of Ordinances and the Texas Municipal League's Handbook for Mayors and Councilmembers of Home
Rule Cities.
State constitution reference–Oath of office, Texas Constitution, art. 16, sec. 1.
SECTION 1.08 Candidates Holding Special Positions with the City
(1) In the event any Council member shall become a candidate for the office of Mayor, or the Mayor or any
Council member shall become a candidate for election to any place on the City Council other than the office the
candidate is presently holding, the candidate may continue in the office the candidate holds until such time as the
candidate is elected to, and accepts, the new office sought. (Amended by Ord. 1123 at an election held on May
14, 2011, prop. 1)
(2) In the event any member of any body appointed by the City Council shall become a candidate for the
office of Mayor or Council member, such position on such board shall be considered vacated upon election and
qualification.
(3) Any City employee who shall become a candidate for the office of Mayor or Council member shall
immediately forfeit such position of employment and such ballot application shall be accompanied by said
Employee's written resignation, the acceptance of which shall require no further act.
SECTION 1.09 City Council Vacancies and Attendance
(1) If a vacancy occurs in the office of Mayor or any Council member from any cause whatsoever, each
vacancy or the vacancies shall be filled in the following manner:
(A) The City Council shall appoint a qualified person to fill each vacancy; and
(B) The City Council shall order an election to fill the unexpired term of the vacant office on the
next election date unless the term of the vacant office expires as of the next election date.
As used in this subsection: (i) the phrase “next election date” means the first uniform election date permitted by
state law following the date of the vacancy for which there is at least seven (7) days remaining from the date of
the vacancy on the deadline for candidates to file for a place on the ballot and (ii) the phrase “date of the
vacancy” means the date on which the City Council accepts a resignation or declares a vacancy in an office.
(Amended by Ord. 1123 at an election held on May 14, 2011, prop. 2)
(2) Any member of the City Council remaining absent for three (3) consecutive regular meetings of the City
Council, without first having obtained a leave of absence through City Council action at a regular meeting, such
office may be declared vacated by a majority vote of all the remaining members of the City Council. Any
member of the City Council remaining absent for six (6) consecutive regular meetings of the City Council shall
be deemed to have forfeited such office through City Council action.
(3) Any person elected to serve on the City Council, who, subsequent to taking office is convicted of a felony
or a crime of moral turpitude shall automatically be deemed to have forfeited such office.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 4/362
(4) In case of disaster when a legal quorum of the City Council cannot be assembled due to multiple deaths or
injuries, the surviving members of the City Council, or the highest surviving City official if no elected official
remains, must, within twenty-four (24) hours of such disaster, or as soon as practicable, take such action as to
ensure the basic health, safety and welfare of the citizens and undertake whatever action is necessary under the
laws of the State to call for a special election. Until such election is held and the City Council qualified, the
remaining members or highest ranking officer, if no elected official remains, shall only undertake those actions
necessary to protect the basic health, safety and welfare of the citizens which such action may be subsequently
ratified by the full City Council.
State law reference–Special election to fill vacancy generally, V.T.C.A., Election Code, sec. 201.051 et seq.
SECTION 1.10 Mayor Pro-Tem
(1) At the first regular meeting after each regular election of the city council members and/or mayor, City
Council shall select from among the Council members a Mayor Pro-Tem to serve at the pleasure of the City
Council.
(2) The Mayor Pro-Tem shall act as Mayor during the disability or absence of the Mayor and in this capacity
shall have the rights conferred upon the Mayor.
(3) During the disability or absence of the Mayor and the Mayor Pro-Tem, any Council member may be
appointed by the majority of the Council members to act as Mayor and in this capacity shall have the rights
conferred upon the Mayor.
SECTION 1.11 Compensation for the Mayor and Council members
The City Council shall establish by ordinance the standards and policies concerning reimbursement of
reasonable expenses incurred by the Mayor and Council members in the performance of their official duties.
State law reference–Compensation of officers in home-rule municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 141.004.
SECTION 1.12 Duties of Mayor
(1) The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the City Council and may vote only to break a tie.
(2) The Mayor shall perform such other duties consistent with the office as may be imposed by this Charter or
the ordinances and resolutions of the City.
(3) The Mayor shall sign all ordinances, resolutions, capital improvement contracts, conveyances made or
entered into by the City, all bonds issued under the provisions of this Charter, and such other documents as
authorized by the City Council.
(4) The Mayor shall be recognized as the official head of the City for all ceremonial purposes.
(5) The Mayor shall be recognized by the governor for the purpose of enforcing martial law. In time of danger
or emergency, the Mayor may, in accordance with State law and with the consent of the Council members, take
command of the police and govern the City by proclamation and maintain order and enforce all laws.
SECTION 1.13 Duties of City Council
All powers of the City and the determination of all matters of policy shall be vested in the City Council, except
as otherwise provided by this Charter. Without limitation of the foregoing powers of the City Council, the City
Council shall have the power to:
(1) Fix the compensation of all appointive officers and employees.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 5/362
(2) Adopt the budget of the City.
(3) Authorize the issuance of bonds by a bond ordinance.
(4) By majority vote of its membership, inquire into the conduct of any office, department or
agency of the City and make investigations as to municipal affairs. Nothing contained herein shall be
construed to prohibit an inquiry into an operational issue.
(5) Enact resolutions and ordinances.
(6) The City Council shall adopt a periodic fiscal reporting policy, with such policy not providing
for less than quarterly reporting.
(7) To appoint members of the planning and zoning commission, the zoning board of adjustments
and other such boards, committees, commissions and directors to corporations as may be authorized
by State law. Any member appointed to such board, committee, commission or corporation shall have
been a resident of the City of Iowa Park for a minimum of one (1) year at the time of their
appointment except that non-residents of the City may be appointed to boards, committees or
commissions where such appointment is specifically permitted by state law.
(8) Govern the affairs of the City in conformance with this Charter and the state and federal
constitutions and laws, and to determine by majority vote the best and most appropriate method and
manner of efficiently performing the functions and providing the services of the City, consistent with
the council-manager form of government; and, except as provided in this Charter with respect to
certain departments that must be maintained in effect, the City Council may after considering the
recommendation of the City Manager, create, change, merge, or abolish offices, departments or
agencies of the City, and may contract for services by interlocal agreement or otherwise as it deems
advisable to improve the services of the efficiency of government.
SECTION 1.14 Meetings of City Council
(1) The City Council shall hold at least one (1) regular meeting each month and as many additional meetings
as the City Council deems necessary to transact the business of the City. The City Council shall fix by ordinance
the date and time of the regular meetings.
(2) Special meetings of the City Council shall be held at the call of the Mayor or a majority of the Council
members upon provision of public notice in accordance with State law.
(2) [(3)] All meetings of the City Council, except those authorized by law to be closed to the public, shall be
open to the public.
State law reference–Open meetings, V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 551.
SECTION 1.15 Quorums of City Council and Minutes of City Council Meetings
(1) A majority of the City Council shall constitute a quorum to do business, and, unless otherwise provided by
law, the affirmative vote of a majority of a quorum shall be necessary to adopt any ordinance or resolution.
(2) Minutes of all proceedings shall be kept, to which any citizen may have access at all reasonable times and
which shall constitute one of the archives of the City. The vote on all ordinances and resolutions shall be
recorded and entered in the minutes; and, every ordinance or resolution, upon its final passage, shall be recorded
in a book kept for that purpose and shall be authenticated by the signature of the presiding officer. The minutes
of all meetings shall record the attendance of all members of the City Council present and those absent.
SECTION 1.16 Ordinances and Resolutions
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 6/362
(1) Enactment - Each proposed ordinance and resolution shall be introduced in written or printed form.
Ordinances or resolutions may be passed at any regular or special meeting called in accordance with State law.
(2) Captions - Each ordinance and resolution shall contain a brief caption of the subject matter of the
ordinance or resolution.
(3) Publication - A descriptive title or caption stating in summary the purpose of the ordinance and the penalty
for violation thereof, of each ordinance imposing a penalty, fine or forfeiture, shall after passage be published in
one issue of the official newspaper of the City and proof of such publication shall be made by the printer or
publisher of such paper making affidavit before some officer authorized to administer oaths. Such affidavit shall
be filed with the City Secretary and shall be prima facie evidence of such publication of such ordinance so
published; said ordinances shall take effect and be in full force and effect from and after the date of publication,
unless otherwise expressly provided. Ordinances not required to be published shall take effect and be in force
from and after the date of passage thereof unless otherwise provided.
(4) Current Ordinances and Resolutions - All ordinances and resolutions of the City now in existence and not
inconsistent with provisions of this Charter shall remain in full force and effect until altered, amended or
repealed by the City Council.
(5) Pleading - It shall be sufficient in all judicial proceedings to plead any ordinances of the City by caption
without embodying the entire ordinance in the pleadings, and all pleaded ordinance(s) or codes shall be admitted
as evidence in any suit and shall have the same force and effect as the original ordinances. Certified copies of the
ordinances may also be used in evidence in lieu of original ordinances.
(6) Codification - The Code of Ordinances of the City shall be codified and shall be revised at least annually
and kept up-to-date by causing any amendments to be published in the form of supplemental pages. An official
copy of the Code shall be maintained in the office of the City Secretary for public examination.
(7) Emergency - The City Council shall have the authority to pass such emergency ordinances and resolutions
as necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the City in accordance with State law.
(8) Miscellaneous - The City Council may adopt such other procedures that do not conflict with this Charter
or state law.
State law references–Ordinance, rule or regulation necessary to carry out other powers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec.
51.001; publication of ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 52.013; code of ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government
Code, ch. 53; enforcement of municipal ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 54.
SECTION 1.17 Official Newspaper
The City Council shall designate by resolution a newspaper of general circulation in the City as the official
newspaper of the City as provided by State law.
SECTION 1.18 Influence of Appointments, Removals and Administrative Matters
(1) Appointments and Removals - Neither the Mayor or the City Council nor any of its members shall, in any
manner, dictate the appointment or removal of any City administrative officer or employee whom the City
Manager or any of his subordinates are empowered to appoint. The City Council may, however, express its
views fully and freely, discussing with the City Manager anything pertaining to the appointment and removal of
such officers and employees. Nothing herein shall prevent the City Council from appointing the City Manager
and those department heads it is authorized to appoint pursuant to this Charter.
(2) Interference in Administrative Matters - Except for the purpose of inquiry or investigation, the Mayor and
City Council shall deal with administrative departments and the personnel of City departments solely through
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 7/362
the City Manager. Neither the Mayor, City Council nor any of its members shall give an order, either publicly or
privately, to any subordinate of the City Manager.
(3) Violations - Any violation of the foregoing provisions of this Charter by any member of the City Council
shall constitute official misconduct and shall authorize the City Council by a vote of a majority of its
membership to expel such offending member from the City Council if found guilty after a public hearing, and
thereby create a vacancy in the place held by such member.
SECTION 1.19 Public Comments
The opportunity for citizens of the City to provide public comment on any and all subjects regardless of the
agenda shall be provided at each regular meeting. This opportunity shall be called “Citizens' Input” and shall
begin prior to any vote at a regular meeting of the City Council. The City Council may provide reasonable
regulations to implement this provision.
SECTION 1.20 Code of Ethics
The City Council by ordinance shall establish a Code of Ethics governing the City Council and all city
employees which shall include at least the following: wrongful influence, wrongful interference, employees'
political activities, penalties, conflict of interest, and acceptance of gifts. Such Code of Ethics shall be
established within six (6) months of the date this charter is approved.
ARTICLE II
Form of Government and Boundaries
SECTION 2.01 Form of Government
(1) Pursuant to its provisions and subject only to the limitations imposed by the Constitution of the United
States, the Texas Constitution, the statutes of the State of Texas, and this Charter, all powers of the City of Iowa
Park shall be vested in an elected City Council and Mayor. The City Council and Mayor, where the Mayor is
permitted to do so by this charter, shall enact local legislation, adopt budgets, determine policies, and provide for
the adoption and execution of the laws of the City as provided in this Charter.
(2) The City Council shall appoint a City Manager who shall be responsible to the City Council for the
management and administration of the offices of the City, except as otherwise provided by this Charter.
State law reference–Form of government, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 26.021.
SECTION 2.02 Boundaries
The boundaries of the City of Iowa Park shall be the same as have been heretofore established and now exist as
recorded on the official City map as provided by this Charter. The citizens of the City of Iowa Park residing
within its corporate limits, as heretofore or hereafter established, are hereby constituted and shall continue to be
a municipal body politic and corporate, in perpetuity, under the name of the “City of Iowa Park”, in the State of
Texas, hereinafter referred to as the “State”, with such powers, privileges, rights, duties, authorities, and
immunities, as are herein provided.
State law reference–Municipal boundaries and annexation, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 41 et seq.
SECTION 2.03 Extensions and Alteration of Boundaries
(1) The boundaries of the City of Iowa Park may be enlarged and extended by the annexation of additional
territory or decreased by disannexation by ordinance adopted by the City Council in any manner and by any
procedure now or hereafter provided by law. The City shall, hereafter, by ordinance, amend the official map of
the boundaries to include such properties so annexed or disannexed.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 8/362
(2) Upon completion of the annexation procedure, the annexed territory shall become a part of the City, and
said land and its residents shall be entitled to all the rights and privileges provided by the City for its citizens and
shall be bound by the acts, ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the City.
(3) If, after the date of annexation, there exists land within and adjacent to the corporate limits of the City of
Iowa Park not receiving governmental or proprietary services of the city within the time required by the service
plan or Chapter 43 of Texas Local Government Code, or its successor statute, then a majority of the qualified
voters residing within this particular area may petition the city council to disannex the area as provided in
Chapter 43 of Texas Local Government Code, or its successor statute.
State law reference–Municipal annexation, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 43.
ARTICLE III
Powers of the City*
SECTION 3.01 Powers of the City
(1) The City shall have all the powers vested in home rule municipal corporations including all powers
required for the government, interests, health, welfare and good order of the City and its inhabitants, except as
may be limited by the Constitution of the United States, the Texas Constitution, and the statutes of the State.
(2) The rights and powers of the City under this Charter shall be construed liberally in favor of the City in the
event of conflict between the City and other governmental agencies or bodies, corporations, or individuals, and
the specific mention of particular rights or powers in this Charter shall not be construed as limiting in any way
the general rights and powers stated in this Article. In addition, should any phrase, clause, sentence, or provision
of this Charter be declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the validity and applicability of the
remainder of this Charter shall not be affected.
(3) The City may exercise any of its rights and powers or perform any of its functions, and may participate in
the financing thereof, either jointly or in cooperation, by contract or otherwise, with any one or more of the
States or any political subdivisions or agencies thereof, or with the United States or any agency thereof.
SECTION 3.02 Legislative Authority
The City by and through its City Council shall have the power to enact and enforce all ordinances and
resolutions necessary to protect health, life and property; and to prevent and summarily abate and remove all
nuisances; and preserve and enforce good government and order and security of the City and its inhabitants; and
to enact and enforce all ordinances and resolutions on any and all subjects which shall be consistent with the
provisions of this Charter.
SECTION 3.03 Municipal Court
(1) Establishment - The City shall have the power to create and establish a municipal court to be known as the
Municipal Court of the City of Iowa Park, Texas. The Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction, powers and duties
given and prescribed by Texas law. The City Council may, by ordinance, establish a municipal court of record in
accordance with applicable law. The City Council shall have the power to create and establish additional
municipal courts by ordinance.
(2) Judge - The city council shall appoint a Judge who shall be known as the “Judge of the Municipal Court”.
The Judge shall be appointed for a two- (2) year term. In order to be appointed the Judge must be a resident of
the State of Texas. The city council shall have the authority to remove the Municipal Judge for good cause as
determined by the city council. A hearing must be held, and removal shall require an affirmative vote of at least
four (4) members of the city council. If for any reason the Judge is unable to act, the city council shall either
declare the office vacant, or appoint a temporary Judge to serve until the Judge is able to act. If the office of the
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 9/362
Judge is declared vacant, it shall be filled by appointment by the city council in accordance with this Section.
Following appointment the Judge must meet all educational or other qualifications as prescribed by State law.
(3) Clerk - The Clerk of Municipal Court and such deputies as shall be appointed by the City Council, shall
have the power to administer oaths and affidavits, make certificates, affix the seal of the Municipal Court
thereto; and generally do and perform any and all acts usual and necessary by clerks of courts in issuing
processes of courts and conducting the business thereof.
(4) Expense and Fines - All special expense and fines imposed by the Municipal Court(s) shall be paid into
the City general fund for the use and benefit of the City, as may be consistent with present and future laws.
State law references–Municipal courts generally, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 29.001 et seq.; municipal courts of record,
V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 30.
ARTICLE IV
City Manager
SECTION 4.01 Appointment
The City Council by an affirmative vote of not less than 3 members shall appoint a City Manager who shall be
the chief executive officer of the City and shall be responsible to the City Council for the proper administration
of the offices of the City, except as otherwise provided by this Charter. The City Manager shall be chosen by the
City Council on the basis of executive and administrative training, experience and ability. The City Manager
shall be evaluated annually by the City Council and such evaluation shall be committed to writing.
SECTION 4.02 Compensation
The City Manager shall receive a salary, benefits and compensation as set by the City Council.
SECTION 4.03 Duties
The duties of the City Manager shall include the following:
(1) Provide that all laws and ordinances of the City are enforced.
(2) Appoint or hire all employees of the City, except as otherwise provided in this Charter.
(3) Suspend and remove, at will, employees, except as otherwise provided in this Charter.
(4) Provide for the efficient administration and operation of all departments, under the City
Manager's control including the maintenance of and public information request[s] for all records
thereof, except as otherwise provided in this Charter.
(5) Prepare and recommend to the City Council an annual operating budget and capital
improvement program, as provided by this Charter, and administer and execute the budget as adopted
by the City Council.
(6) Provide supervision and control over all departments and offices that are created by the City
Council and employees appointed by the City Manager, except as otherwise provided in this Charter.
(7) Attend all meetings of the City Council with the right to take part in the discussion.
(8) Make recommendations to the City Council as the City Manager may deem necessary and
expedient.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 10/362
(9) Provide written reports no less than quarterly of the current financial conditions and future
needs of the City to be presented orally at an open meeting of the City Council, and make such
recommendations concerning the affairs of the City, as the City Manager or the City Council deems
desirable or necessary.
(10) Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the Charter or which may be required by
ordinance or resolution of the City Council.
SECTION 4.04 Absence of the City Manager
The City Council shall designate a qualified city employee to exercise the powers and perform the duties of the
City Manager during the City Manager's temporary absence. To perform the duties of the City Manager during
the absence or disability exceeding thirty (30) days, the City Council may by resolution appoint an officer of the
City to perform the duties of the City Manager until the City Manager shall return or such disability shall cease.
In case of absence, disability, or illness exceeding thirty (30) days, where the duties of the City Manager could
not be performed properly, the City Manager's salary may be continued at the discretion of the City Council.
SECTION 4.05 Removal
The City Manager shall be removed, with or without cause, by an affirmative vote of four (4) members of the
City Council.
ARTICLE V
City Officers*
SECTION 5.01 Appointment
The City Council shall appoint the Chief of Police, Public Works Director, Economic Development Director,
Parks and Recreation Director and City Attorney by an affirmative vote of not less than 3 members of the City
Council. (Amended by Ord. 1123 at an election held on May 14, 2011, prop. 3)
SECTION 5.02 Duties of City Officers
In addition to any other duties which may be assigned by this charter, City officers appointed under this Article
shall have such duties as may be required by applicable law and such other duties as may be assigned by the City
Council or City Manager.
SECTION 5.03 Special Counsel
The City Council shall have the right to retain special counsel at any time that it may deem necessary and
appropriate to collect delinquent and ad valorem taxes and liens or for such purposes the City Council deems
appropriate.
SECTION 5.04 Official Bond of City Employees
The directors of all administrative departments whose duties include the handling of monies, and all employees
whose duties include the handling of monies belonging to the City shall, before entering upon the duties of their
office or employment, make bond in a responsible surety company, acceptable to the City Council for such
amount as the City Council may prescribe, the premium of such bond shall be paid by the City; the City Council
may also require any such surety bond to be further conditioned that the principal thereon will faithfully perform
and/or discharge the duties of said person's office and if there are provisions of State law bearing upon the
functions of said person's office under which the execution of a surety bond is required, it shall be further
conditioned to comply therewith.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 11/362
State law reference–Official bonds, V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 604.
ARTICLE VI
Financial*
SECTION 6.01 Audits and Examination of City Books and Accounts
At the close of each fiscal year, and at such other times as may be necessary, the City Council shall call for an
independent audit of all accounts of the City by a certified public accountant. The certified public accountant
selected shall have no personal interest, directly or indirectly, in the financial affairs of the City or any of its
officers. The written report of audit will be presented to and discussed by the City Council at a regular meeting.
The auditor's recommendations will be read into the record of the meeting. Copies of the audit shall be placed on
file as a public record with the City Secretary.
State law reference–Audit of municipal finances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 103.
SECTION 6.02 Budget
The fiscal year of the City shall begin on the first day of October and end on the last day of September of each
calendar year. Each year and in sufficient time to provide for all necessary hearings, the City Manager shall
prepare and submit to the City Council a budget to cover all proposed expenditures of the City for the
succeeding fiscal year. Such budgets shall be prepared and administered pursuant to the applicable general laws
of this state. In the event that the budget is not enacted prior to October 1, the preceding fiscal year budget shall
be deemed adopted, which may be amended or supplemented, as the City Council deems appropriate.
State law references–Municipal budget, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 102; general power to establish fiscal year, V.T.C.A.,
Local Government Code, sec. 101.022; city fiscal year, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 1.05.
SECTION 6.03 Taxes and Taxation
(1) Powers -
(A) The City Council may levy, assess and collect taxes of any type or character not prohibited by
state law. The maximum ad valorem tax rate shall be as provided in the Texas Constitution.
(B) The procedure, limitations and requirements for the levy, assessment and collection of any tax
or lien thereof shall be as established by State law; provided that, if not established by State law, such
procedures, limitations and requirements shall be established by ordinance.
(2) Office of Tax Collector - The City Council shall have the power to establish the office of City Tax
Assessor-Collector. This official shall be appointed by the City Council, and shall be responsible for the
assessment and collection of taxes. The city council may appoint an individual who is an officer or employee of
another governmental entity as tax collector by interlocal agreement with such governmental entity.
State law references–Texas Property Tax Code supersedes municipal charter, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 1.02; tax liens and personal
liability, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, ch. 32; local taxation, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, ch. 301 et seq.
SECTION 6.04 Designation of Depository for City Funds
The City Council shall select a depository for City funds in accordance with State law, and to follow all the
terms and provisions of State law.
State law reference–Depositories for municipal funds, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 105.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 12/362
ARTICLE VII
Bonds, Warrants and Other Evidence of Indebtedness*
SECTION 7.01 Authority to Issue
The City shall have the right and power to borrow money for public purposes by whatever method it may deem
to be in the public interest. The City shall have the right and power to issue tax bonds, revenue bonds, and any
other evidences of indebtedness for permanent public improvements or for any other public purpose not
prohibited by law or this Charter and to issue refunding bonds to refund outstanding evidences of indebtedness
previously issued. All such bonds or other evidences of indebtedness shall be issued in conformity with the laws
of the State applicable at the time of issuance of such obligations.
SECTION 7.02 Manner of Issuance
Bonds and warrants of the City shall be issued as provided by the General Laws of Texas applicable to cities and
towns.
ARTICLE VIII
INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM, AND RECALL
SECTION 8.01 Initiative
The voters shall have the power to propose any ordinance, except an ordinance related to the appropriation of
money or the authorization of the levy of taxes or one repealing such an ordinance, and to adopt or reject the
same ordinance at the polls such power being known as “initiative”. Any initiated ordinance may be submitted
to the city council by a petition signed by qualified voters equal in number to at least twenty (20) percent of the
votes cast in the last regular municipal election, but not less than one hundred (100) signatures. Such initiated
ordinance may be passed by the city council without change, or may be submitted to the voters at an election
called for that purpose.
SECTION 8.02 Referendum
The voters shall have power to require reconsideration by the city council of any adopted ordinance, excepting
those ordinances relating to the appropriation of money or levy of taxes, such power being known as
“referendum”. Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing in this Charter shall be construed to limit the right of
citizens to petition the City Council for a rollback election with respect to property taxes in accordance with
State law. In the submission of a petition for referendum, the number and qualifications of signers shall be the
same as required in this Charter for an initiative petition, except that referendum petitions must be filed with the
city secretary within sixty (60) days after the final passage of the ordinance that is the subject of the referendum,
or else the petition shall be barred by the lapse of time. When such petition has been certified as sufficient by the
city secretary, the ordinance specified in the petition shall not go into effect, or if it has gone into effect, further
enforcement or action thereunder shall be suspended unless and until such ordinance is approved by the voters as
provided herein.
SECTION 8.03 Recall
The voters shall have the power to recall any elected official of the City and may exercise that power by filing
with the city secretary a petition containing the same number of signatures and qualifications as required for an
initiative petition under this Charter. If the petition is certified by the city secretary to be sufficient, the city
council shall call an election to determine whether the official named in the petition shall be recalled. The
election shall be held no earlier than twenty-five (25) days or no later than sixty (60) days after the city council
receives the petition.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 13/362
SECTION 8.04 Results of Recall Election
If the majority of the votes cast in a recall election are for the recall of the officer named on the ballot, the city
council shall immediately declare that office vacant, and the vacancy shall be filled in accordance with the
provisions of this Charter.
SECTION 8.05 Limitation of Recall
No recall election shall be called against an elected official within six (6) months after taking office or within
three (3) months prior to the end of an elected official's term of office. No official shall be subjected to more
than one recall election during a term of office.
SECTION 8.06 Form of Petitions
All papers for any particular petition circulated for the purpose of an initiative, referendum, or recall shall be
uniform in size and style. Initiative petitions shall contain the full text of the proposed ordinance, and
referendum papers shall contain a description sufficient to identify positively the ordinance sought to be
repealed. The signatures to initiative, referendum, or recall petitions need not be appended to one paper, but all
pages that compose a single petition shall be assembled and given to the City Secretary as one instrument with
an attached affidavit. The affidavit attached to the petition shall be prepared by the person who files it, and shall
bear the stated number of signatures and a statement to the effect that all signatures appended to the petition are,
in his belief, the genuine signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be. Names and addresses of the
signers of such petitions shall be printed adjacent to their signatures.
SECTION 8.07 Filing, Examination, and Certification of Petitions
Petitions for initiative, referendum, or recall shall be filed with the city secretary. Within twenty (20) days after a
petition is filed, the city secretary shall determine whether the petition has been signed by a sufficient number of
qualified voters and whether it has a proper, attached affidavit of the person who filed the petition. After
completing an examination of the petition, the city secretary shall certify the results to the city council at its next
regular meeting. If the petition is insufficient, the city secretary shall certify the results to the city council at its
next regular meeting. If the petition is insufficient, the city secretary shall set forth in a certificate the reasons for
its defectiveness, and shall at once notify the person who filed it of the findings.
SECTION 8.08 Amendment of Petitions
An initiative, referendum, or recall petition may be amended at any time within ten (10) days after the notice of
insufficiency has been sent by the city secretary. Amendment in the form of a supplementary petition must be
signed and filed as provided for in the original petition. The same procedures established for an original petition
shall then be followed by the city secretary and city council. The findings of the insufficiency of a petition shall
not prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same purpose.
SECTION 8.09 Consideration by the City Council
Whenever the city council receives a certified initiative or referendum petition from the city secretary, it shall
proceed at once to consider such petition. A proposed initiative ordinance shall be read in each of two (2) public
hearings held by the city council. The city council shall take final action on the initiative ordinance at the second
public hearing and not later than thirty (30) days after the date on which it was submitted to the city council by
the city secretary. A referred ordinance shall be reconsidered by the city council twice, and its final vote after the
considerations shall be taken on the question: “Shall the ordinance specified in the referendum petition be
repealed?”
SECTION 8.10 Submission to Voters
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 14/362
If the city council fails to pass an ordinance proposed by initiative petition in the exact form proposed, or it fails
to repeal a referred ordinance, the proposed or referred ordinance shall be submitted to the voters no later than
the next uniform election date as allowed in the Texas Election Code following the date the city council takes its
final vote.
SECTION 8.11 Results of Election
When a majority of the votes cast on a proposed ordinance are favorable, it shall become an ordinance of the
City, upon certification of the election results. A referred ordinance shall be approved by a majority of the
voters. If conflicting ordinances are approved by the voters at the same election, the one receiving the greatest
number or [of] affirmative votes shall prevail to the extent of such conflict.
ARTICLE IX
Franchises*
SECTION 9.01 Ordinance Granting Franchise
No grant to use the public right-of-way or property under ownership of the City shall be granted for a term of
more than twenty (20) years from the date of the grant, renewal or extension of such franchise unless approved
by citizens in accordance with this article. The City Council may, by a majority vote, seek approval from the
voters by submitting all applications exceeding twenty (20) years to an election in accordance with State law.
The prospective franchisee, not the City, shall fund the cost of said election.
SECTION 9.02 Franchise Powers
(1) The City shall have full power, to the extent that is conferred by the State of Texas and the United States of
America, to own, operate, prohibit, regulate, and control any telegraph, telephone, electric power, railway, or gas
company; any cable television system, Internet system, waterworks or wastewater systems, and municipal
drainage utility; or any type of public utility operating within the limits of the City.
(2) The City shall also have power to establish the compensation and rental to be paid to the City by any
public utility for the use of City streets, highways, public grounds, and alleys. In addition to the City's power to
buy, construct, lease, maintain, operate, and regulate public utilities and to manufacture, distribute, and sell the
output from the operations of such utilities, the City shall have additional powers as may now or hereafter be
granted by law.
(3) The city council shall have the power by ordinance to grant, renew, and extend all franchises of public
utilities operating within the City and, with the consent of the franchise holder, to amend such franchises. All
ordinances granting, amending, renewing or extending franchises for public utilities shall be approved at two
separate regular meetings of the council and shall not be finally passed until twenty-eight (28) days after the first
consideration; and no such ordinance shall take effect until thirty (30) days after its final passage. Subsequent to
the first consideration of such ordinance but prior to the second consideration and public hearing, the full text of
such ordinance shall be posted on the City bulletin board. Prior to the second consideration and public hearing,
the full text, or its caption if permitted by city council, shall be published in the official newspaper of the City.
The expense of all such publications shall be borne by the proponent of the franchise. An affirmative vote of a
majority of the entire city council shall be required for final passage of the proposed ordinance.
(4) No grant or franchise to construct, maintain, or operate a public utility and no renewal or extension of such
grant shall be exclusive.
SECTION 9.03 Right of Regulation
In granting, amending, renewing and extending public service and utility franchises, the City reserves unto itself
all the usual and customary rights, including, but not limited to, the following rights:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 15/362
(1) To repeal the franchise by ordinance for failure to begin construction or operation within the
time prescribed, or for failure to comply with terms of the franchise;
(2) To require all extensions of service within the City limits to become part of the aggregate
property of the service and operate subject to all obligations and reserved rights contained in this
Charter. Any such extension is considered part of the original grant and terminable at the same time
and under the same conditions as the original grant;
(3) To require expansion and extension of facilities and services and to require maintenance of
existing facilities to provide adequate service at the highest level of efficiency and effectiveness;
(4) To require reasonable standards of service and quality of product and prevent rate
discrimination;
(5) To impose reasonable regulations and restrictions to insure the safety and welfare of the public;
(6) Examine and audit accounts and records and to require annual reports on local operations of the
public service or utility;
(7) To require the franchisee to restore, at franchisee's expense, all public or private property to a
condition as good as or better than before disturbed by the franchisee for construction, repair or
removal;
(8) To require the franchisee to furnish to the City, from time to time within a reasonable time
following request of the City, at franchisee's expense a general map outlining current location,
character, size, length, depth, height and terminal of all facilities over and under property within the
City and its extraterritorial jurisdiction; and
(9) To require compensation, rent or franchise fees to be paid to the City as may be permitted by
the laws of the State.
SECTION 9.04 Regulation of Rates
(1) The City Council has the power to fix and regulate the rates and charges of all utilities and public services,
consistent with State law.
(2) Upon receiving written request from a utility or public service requesting a change in rates, or upon a
recommendation from the City that rates for services provided by or owned by the City be changed, the City
Council shall call a public hearing for consideration of the change.
(3) The City, public service or utility must show the necessity for the change by any evidence required by the
City Council, including but not limited to, the following:
(A) Cost of its investment for service to the City;
(B) Amount and character of expenses and revenues connected with rendering the service;
(C) Copies of any reports or returns filed with any state or federal regulatory agency within the last
three (3) years; or
(D) Demonstration that the return on investment, if any, is within the state and federal limitations.
(4) If not satisfied with the sufficiency of evidence, the City Council may hire rate consultants, auditors and
attorneys to investigate and, if necessary, litigate requests for rate changes, the expense of which shall be
reimbursed to the City by the franchisee.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 16/362
SECTION 9.05 Transfer of Franchise
No public service or utility franchise is transferable, except with the approval of the City Council. However, the
franchisee real or personal property [sic] may pledge franchise assets as security for a valid debt or mortgage.
SECTION 9.06 Franchise Value Not to be Allowed
Franchises granted by the City are of no value in fixing rates and charges for public services or utilities within
the City and in determining just compensation to be paid by the City for property which the City may acquire by
condemnation or otherwise.
ARTICLE X
Legal Provisions
SECTION 10.01 Notice of Claim
The City shall not be held liable on account of any claim for the death of any person or injuries to any person or
damage to any property unless the person making such complaint or claiming such damages shall, within six (6)
months after the time at which it is claimed such damages were inflicted upon such person or property, file with
the City a written statement, under oath, stating the nature and character of such damages or injuries, the extent
of the same, the place where same happened, the circumstances under which the same happened and the
condition causing same, with a detailed statement of each item of damages and the amount thereof, giving a list
of any witnesses known by affiant to have seen the accident.
State law reference–Texas Tort Claims Act, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code, ch. 101.
SECTION 10.02 Service of Process Against the City
All legal process against the City shall be served upon the City Secretary.
SECTION 10.03 Construction of Terms
The construction of the provisions of this Charter shall comply with State law as amended.
SECTION 10.04 Charter Deemed Public Act
This Charter must be deemed a public act and judicial notice shall be taken thereof in all courts.
SECTION 10.05 Severability of Portions of Charter
If any provision of this Charter violates the Constitution of the United States, the Texas Constitution or any
statues [statutes] of the State, or if any court holds such provisions for naught for any reason, the remaining
provisions shall not be affected thereby and shall continue in effect.
SECTION 10.06 City Exempt from Appeal Bonds
It shall not be necessary in any action, suit, or proceeding in which the City is a party for any bond, undertaking,
or security to be executed on behalf of said City. All such actions, suits, appeal, or proceedings shall be
conducted in the same manner as if such bond, undertaking, or security had been given; and the City shall be
liable as if such obligation had been given and executed.
State law reference–Cities exempt from security for court costs, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code, sec. 6.002.
SECTION 10.07 Funds Not Subject to Garnishment
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 17/362
No funds of the City or within custody of the City or any of its officials in any official capacity shall be subject
to garnishment, and the City shall not be required to answer in any garnishment proceedings, except as required
by State law.
State law reference–Authority to provide that municipal funds not subject to garnishment, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec.
101.023.
SECTION 10.08 Nepotism
No person related within the second degree by affinity or within the third degree by consanguinity to the Mayor,
a City Council member, the City Manager or any of the city officers described in Article V of this charter shall
be employed by, or contracted with by, the City. This shall not apply to the following:
(1) Any person employed by the City prior to the person related in the above degree filing to run
for elective office or being nominated for an appointment; or
(2) Any person who is a seasonal employee or intern of the City
State law reference–Nepotism, V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 573.
ARTICLE XI
Adoption of Charter*
SECTION 11.01 Procedure
(1) This Charter shall be submitted to the qualified voters of the City for adoption or rejection on November 4,
2008, at which election, if a majority of the qualified voters voting in such election shall vote in favor of the
adoption of this Charter, it shall then immediately become the governing law of the City until amended or
repealed.
(2) It being impractical to submit this Charter by sections, it is hereby prescribed that the form of ballot to be
used in such election shall be as follows, to-wit:
FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE CHARTER
AGAINST THE ADOPTION OF THE CHARTER
(3) The present City Council of the City shall call an election in accordance with the provisions of the general
laws of the State governing such elections, and the same shall be conducted and the returns made and results
declared as provided by the laws of the State governing municipal elections, and in case a majority of the votes
cast at such election shall be in favor of the adoption of such Charter, then an official order shall be entered upon
the records of said City by the City Council of Iowa Park declaring the same adopted, and the City Secretary
shall record at length upon the records of the City, in a separate book to be kept in the City Secretary office for
such purpose, such Charter as adopted, and such City Secretary shall furnish to the Mayor a copy of the Charter
which copy of the Charter shall be forwarded by the Mayor as soon as practicable, to the Secretary of State
under the seal of the City together with a certificate showing the approval of the qualified voters of such Charter.
SECTION 11.02 Amendment of Charter
Amendments to this Charter may be framed and submitted to the qualified voters of the City as provided by the
Texas Constitution and the laws of the State as presently enacted or hereafter amended; but no more often than
once every two (2) years, as provided by the laws of the State.
SECTION 11.03 Council Review of Charter
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 18/362
The City Council shall review the Charter at least once every five (5) years to determine whether any
amendments are necessary.
SECTION 11.04 Certification of Charter and Submission to Voters
The undersigned members of the Charter Commission hereby certify that the above document is a true and
correct version of the proposed charter approved by the Charter Commission of the City of Iowa Park, Texas on
the 21st day of July, 2008.
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1.01 CODE OF ORDINANCES*
Sec. 1.01.001 Adoption
There is hereby adopted the Code of Ordinances of the City of Iowa Park, Texas, as compiled, edited and
published by Franklin Legal Publishing, Inc. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.002 Designation and citation of code
The ordinances embraced in this chapter and the following chapters, articles and sections shall constitute and be
designated the “Code of Ordinances, City of Iowa Park, Texas,” and may be so cited. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.003 Catchlines of articles, divisions and sections
The catchlines of the several articles, divisions and sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to
indicate the contents of the article, division or section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such
articles, divisions and sections, nor as any part of the articles, divisions and sections, nor, unless expressly so
provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such articles, divisions and sections, including the catchlines, are
amended or reenacted. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Headings of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.024.
Sec. 1.01.004 Definitions and rules of construction
In the construction of this code and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following
rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city
council:
Generally. Words shall be construed in their common and usual significance unless the contrary is clearly
indicated.
City and town. Each means the City of Iowa Park, Texas.
City administrator, city manager, city secretary, chief of police or other city officers. The term “city
administrator,” “city manager,” “city secretary,” “chief of police” or other city officer or department shall be
construed to mean the city administrator, city manager, city secretary, chief of police or such other municipal
officer or department, respectively, of the City of Iowa Park, Texas.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 19/362
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time
before any proceeding shall be had, the first day is excluded and the last day is included. If the last day of any
period is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the period is extended to include the next day that is not a
Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday.
State law reference–Computation of time, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.014.
Council. Whenever the term “council” or “city council” or “the council” is used, it shall mean the city council of
the City of Iowa Park, Texas.
State law reference–References to municipal governing body and to members of municipal governing body, V.T.C.A., Local
Government Code, sec. 21.002.
County. The term “county” or “this county” shall mean the County of Wichita, Texas.
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision of this Code of Ordinances requires or authorizes an officer or
employee of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize such officer or
employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the act or duty unless the terms of the
provision specifically designate otherwise.
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms,
partnerships, associations and corporations, as well as to males.
State law reference–“Gender” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(c).
Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three (3) or more officers or other persons shall be
construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared.
State law reference–Grants of authority, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.004.
May. The word “may” is permissive.
State law reference–Construction of word “may,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.016.
Month. The word “month” shall mean a calendar month.
State law reference–“Month” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Must and shall. Each is mandatory.
State law reference–Construction of words “must” and “shall,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.016.
Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural, and any word importing the plural
number shall include the singular.
State law reference–“Number,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(b).
Oath. The word “oath” shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the
words “affirm” and “affirmed.”
State law reference–“Oath,” “swear” and “sworn” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this code, they shall mean standard time or daylight
saving time, as may be in current use in the city.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 20/362
State law reference–Standard time, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.016.
Or, and. The word “or” may be read “and,” and the word “and” may be read “or,” as the sense requires it.
Owner. The word “owner,” applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in
common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or
land.
Person. The word “person” shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships,
organizations, business trusts, estates, trusts, and bodies politic and corporate, as well as to individuals.
State law reference–“Person” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.005.
Preceding, following. The terms “preceding” and “following” mean next before and next after, respectively.
Property. The word “property” shall mean and include real and personal property.
State law reference–“Property” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.005.
Real property. The term “real property” shall mean and include lands, tenements and hereditaments.
Sidewalk. The word “sidewalk” shall mean that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
Signature or subscription. A signature or subscription shall include a mark when a person cannot write.
State law reference–“Signature” and “subscribe” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
State. The term “the state” or “this state” shall be construed to mean the State of Texas.
Street. The word “street” shall have its commonly accepted meaning and shall include highways, sidewalks,
alleys, avenues, recessed parking areas and other public rights-of-way, including the entire right-of-way.
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present.
State law reference–“Tense,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(a).
V.T.C.S., V.T.P.C., V.T.C.C.P., V.T.C.A. Such abbreviations refer to the divisions of Vernon's Texas Statutes
Annotated.
Written or in writing. The term “written” or “in writing” shall be construed to include any representation of
words, letters, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
State law reference–“Written” or “in writing” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Year. The word “year” shall mean a calendar year.
State law reference–“Year” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.005 Severability of parts of code
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and
phrases of this code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this code shall be
declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such
unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 21/362
this code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in the code of
any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Severability of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.013.
Sec. 1.01.006 Repeal of ordinances
The repeal of an ordinance or any portion thereof shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive
any ordinance which has been previously repealed. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Effect of repeal of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.030.
Sec. 1.01.007 Amendments or additions to code
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature, and amendments to such ordinances, hereafter enacted or
presented to the city council for enactment, shall be drafted, so far as possible, as specific amendments of, or
additions to, the Code of Ordinances. Amendments to this code shall be made by reference to the chapter and
section of the code which is to be amended, and additions shall bear an appropriate designation of chapter,
article and section; provided, however, the failure to do so shall in no way affect the validity or enforceability of
such ordinances. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.008 Supplementation of code
(a) By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this code shall be prepared and printed whenever
authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the code shall include all substantive permanent and
general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period
covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the code. The pages of a supplement shall be so
numbered that they will fit properly into the code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become
obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the
code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement.
(b) In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of the code which have been repealed shall be
excluded from the code by omission thereof from reprinted pages.
(c) When preparing a supplement to this code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization
authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of
ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code.
For example, the codifier may:
(1) Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
(2) Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for articles, sections and other subdivisions
of the code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles;
(3) Assign appropriate numbers to articles, sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the
code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing article or section or other
subdivision numbers;
(4) Change the words “this ordinance” or words of the same meaning to “this chapter,” “this
article,” “this section,” “this subsection,” etc., as the case may be; and
(5) Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance
material inserted into the code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or
effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the code.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 22/362
Sec. 1.01.009 General penalty for violations of code; continuing violations
(a) Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be
unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor or whenever in this code or such ordinance the doing of any act is
required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the
violation of any such provision of this code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding
five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(b) A fine or penalty for the violation of a rule, ordinance or police regulation that governs fire safety, zoning
or public health and sanitation, including the dumping of refuse, may not exceed two thousand dollars
($2,000.00).
(c) Unless otherwise specifically stated in this code, any violation of this code or of any ordinance that is
punishable by a fine that does not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) does not require a culpable mental
state, and a culpable mental state is hereby not required to prove any such offense. Unless otherwise specifically
stated in this code, any violation of this code or of any ordinance that is punishable by a fine that exceeds five
hundred dollars ($500.00) shall require a culpable mental state.
(d) No penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or a similar offense under the
laws of the state.
(e) Unless otherwise stated in this code or in any ordinance, each day any violation of this code or of any
ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
(f) In the event that any such violation is designated as a nuisance under the provisions of this code, such
nuisance may be summarily abated by the city. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue
other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
State law references–Penalties for violations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 54.001; penalty for class C misdemeanor,
V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 12.23; requirement of culpability, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 6.02.
ARTICLE 1.02 ADMINISTRATION*
Sec. 1.02.001 Official newspaper
The official newspaper of the city was designated by the city council by ordinance, and is renewed annually by
resolution. (2004 Code, art. 1.03)
Charter reference–Official newspaper, sec. 1.17.
ARTICLE 1.03 MAYOR AND COUNCIL†
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 1.03.001 Composition; election of mayor and councilmembers
(a) Each candidate for the position of mayor shall so specify in their application. Each candidate for a
councilmember's position on the council shall specify the “place” they are seeking, and designate that “place” by
its number, in their application.
(b) Ballots shall:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 23/362
(1) State each office for which an election is required by applicable law and list those candidates
seeking the position of mayor under the heading “Candidates for Mayor” and identify those
candidates seeking a position as councilmember under the heading “Candidates for Place ___”, with
the blank being filled in to show the number of the place they are seeking; and
(2) Instruct the voter to vote for one (1) candidate for each office.
(2004 Code, sec. 1.05.002; Ordinance adopting Code)
Charter reference–Elected officers, sec. 1.02.
Sec. 1.03.002 Emergency powers of mayor–Power to summon special police force
Whenever the mayor shall deem it necessary, in order to enforce the laws and ordinances of this city, or to avert
danger, or to protect property, in case of riot or any other outbreak, or calamity, or public disturbance, or when
he or she has reason to fear any serious violation of law or order, or any other danger to this city, or the
inhabitants thereof, he or she shall summon into service as a special police force all or as many of the citizens as
in his or her judgment and discretion may be necessary and proper, and such summons may be by proclamation
or order, addressed to the citizens generally, or such summons may be by personal notification. Such special
police force, while in service, shall be subject to the orders of the mayor, shall perform such duties as he or she
may require, and shall have the same power while on duty as the regular police force of the city. Any person so
summoned and failing to obey, or appearing and failing to perform any duty that may be required, shall be fined
as provided in section 1.01.009. (2004 Code, sec. 1.05.004)
Sec. 1.03.003 Same–Power to close public places and order arrests
The mayor shall have authority in case of a riot or an unlawful assemblage, or with a view to preserve the peace
and good order in the city, to order and enforce the closing of any theater, ballroom, or any other place of resort,
or public room or building, and may order the arrest of any person violating, in his presence, the laws of the state
or any ordinance of this city. (2004 Code, sec. 1.05.005)
Secs. 1.03.004–1.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Meetings*
Sec. 1.03.031 Time and place; open meetings
(a) The regular meetings of the city council will be the second (2nd) and fourth (4th) Mondays of each month
at 7:00 p.m. in the council room, city hall building, at 103 North Wall, Iowa Park, Texas.
(b) Special meetings may be called as provided by law.
(c) Except as otherwise allowed by law, meetings of the council as such shall always be open to the general
public, and no vote or action shall ever be taken except at a regular meeting or at a lawfully called special
meeting or emergency meeting.
(2004 Code, sec. 1.05.003)
State law reference–Open meetings, V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 551.
Sec. 1.03.032 Rules of procedure
Robert's Rules of Order, Current Revised Edition, is adopted as the standard guidelines for determining the
conduct of business at all city council meetings. (2004 Code, sec. 1.05.001)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 24/362
Secs. 1.03.033–1.03.060 Reserved
Division 3. Expense Reimbursement Policy
Sec. 1.03.061 Purpose
This policy is intended to:
(1) Provide a clear and consistent understanding of the city council's travel and educational
expense reimbursement policy;
(2) Ensure compliance with applicable federal, state and local regulations; and
(3) Explain requirements that promote the reasonableness of costs incurred by members of the
council for educational and travel expenses.
Sec. 1.03.062 Definitions
For the purpose of this expense reimbursement policy, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings
ascribed to them by this section:
Advance. A request for travel or training related expenses prior to the travel or training event.
Councilmembers. The mayor, mayor pro tem and remaining four members of the city council.
Final reconciliation. A detailed report documenting the expenses, filed with the city's director of finance upon
return from the travel or training event.
Local travel. Traveling away from home to conduct business on behalf of the city that does not require the
councilmember to be away from home overnight.
Mileage allowance. A payment for personal vehicle expenses incurred on behalf of the city and paid at a flat rate
for local travel or travel away from home.
Off-site training expense reimbursement policy. A policy adopted by the city council on May 8, 2001, and
revised on November 26, 2001, that governs the city's reimbursement for employees' off-site training expenses.
Overnight travel. Any travel while on official city business requiring the councilmember to stay away from
home and outside the city overnight.
Per diem allowance. A payment that is made for meals and incidental expenses for business travel away from
home that is paid at the applicable per diem rate.
Training event. A conference, workshop, retreat, seminar, meeting or similar event whereby the councilmember
receives information beneficial to his or her leadership role with the city or its affiliated agencies/organizations.
Sec. 1.03.063 Allowable expenses
For purposes of educational training and travel for members of the council, the following expenses will be
reimbursed by the city:
(1) Conference, seminar or workshop registration fees;
(2) Transportation to, from and during the training event by use of one or more of the following:
(A) Personal vehicle;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 25/362
(B) Air, rail or bus by common carrier;
(C) Rental vehicle;
(3) Overnight lodging;
(4) Hotel and/or airport parking fees;
(5) Telephone calls, with personal calls being limited to one per day not to exceed $5.00 daily;
(6) Meals, including tips at the amounts dictated in the off-site training expense reimbursement
policy; and
(7) Conference, seminar or workshop instructional materials not included within the normal
registration fee.
Sec. 1.03.064 Non-reimbursable expenses
The following expenses are not reimbursable under this policy:
(1) Personal entertainment, including in-room movies;
(2) Alcoholic beverages;
(3) Upgrades in air travel, hotel stays or car rentals;
(4) Laundry or valet service;
(5) No-show charges;
(6) Personal grooming services;
(7) Personal telephone charges in excess of reasonable calls to home;
(8) Trip insurance;
(9) Mileage for persons gratuitously transported by another;
(10) Excess mileage beyond that required for city business;
(11) Personal automobile repairs;
(12) Meals, if a meal is included as part of a registration fee; and
(13) Tips and gratuities for baggage, maid service, meals, etc., paid above the per diem allowance
noted in the off-site training expense reimbursement policy.
Sec. 1.03.065 Responsibilities
(a) Councilmembers should spend city funds prudently; business travel expenses will be either paid or
reimbursed by the city if they are reasonable, necessary and in accordance with this policy. Councilmembers
who incur business travel expenses should neither gain nor lose personal funds as a result of their travel or
training exercise.
(b) The traveler is responsible for submitting all forms, bills or invoices related to his/her travel within twenty
(20) days of returning to the city.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 26/362
(c) Receipts for lodging, air/rail/bus fare, registration fees, materials fees and meals are always required for
reimbursement. Travel mileage fees for use of a personal vehicle will be paid per diem as dictated in the off-site
training expense reimbursement policy.
(d) The city will provide reimbursement to said traveler within fourteen (14) days from the date the traveler
provides all invoices, bills or forms to the city's director of finance.
Sec. 1.03.066 Expense advances
(a) The city encourages councilmembers to make use of its corporate credit card to pay for business and travel
expenses; however, there may be times when a cash advance for travel is required. Advances will be issued no
earlier than one week prior to the departure/training event date. Any advances will be deducted from the
councilmember's next submitted expense report.
(b) The maximum per diem rate for lodging, meals and miscellaneous expenses combined shall be two
hundred dollars ($200.00) per day.
(c) Receipts for lodging, meals, transportation, registration and other miscellaneous expenses are subject to
the requirements outlined in section 1.03.065(b).
Sec. 1.03.067 Applicability
The requirements and regulations outlined within this policy shall be applicable to councilmembers either
utilizing the city's corporate credit card or their personal funds with the expectation of being reimbursed
following the training event or travel period.
(Ordinance 1076 adopted 1/26/09)
ARTICLE 1.04 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 1.04.001–1.04.030 Reserved
Division 2. Planning and Zoning Commission*
Sec. 1.04.031 Created; membership
There is hereby created a planning and zoning commission for the city, which shall consist of six (6) members,
citizens of the city, appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council on the basis of their particular
fitness for their duty on the planning and zoning commission. (2004 Code, sec. 14.02.001)
Sec. 1.04.032 Term of members; vacancies; compensation
The appointed citizen members shall serve for staggered terms of three (3) years. Vacancies shall be filled by
appointments for unexpired terms only. All members of the commission shall serve without compensation
except that, if the city council deems it advisable, the secretary may receive such compensation as may be fixed
from time to time by the city council and provided for in the proper appropriation ordinance. (2004 Code, sec.
14.02.002)
Sec. 1.04.033 Organization; reports
Immediately following their appointment, the members of the planning and zoning commission shall meet,
organize, elect such officers as it may deem necessary, and adopt and later change or alter rules and regulations
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 27/362
of organization and procedure consistent with city ordinances and state laws. The commission shall keep written
records of its proceedings, which shall be open at all times to public inspection. The commission shall also file a
report with the mayor and city council, setting forth its transactions and recommendations, after each meeting.
(2004 Code, sec. 14.02.003)
Sec. 1.04.034 Powers and duties
The planning and zoning commission shall have the following powers:
(1) To prepare and recommend to the city council a comprehensive plan of public improvements,
looking to the present and future development and growth of the city. Such a plan after its adoption
by the city council will be known as the official plan. Such plan shall include reasonable
requirements in reference to streets, sidewalks, alleys, and public grounds and all development of
whatsoever nature, all buildings and structures, public or private, and all utility services of any and all
kinds within the corporate limits and in contiguous territory outside of and within its extraterritorial
limits as defined by statute, and not included in any other municipality, such requirements to be
effective whenever such lands shall be subdivided after the adoption of such plan.
(2) To prepare and recommend to the city council from time to time such changes in the plan or
any part thereof as may be deemed necessary by the city council or by the planning and zoning
commission.
(3) To prepare and recommend to the city council from time to time plans and/or recommendations
for specific improvements in pursuance of such official plan.
(4) To give aid to the city officials, charged with the direction of projects for improvements
embraced within the official plan, to further the making of such improvements, and generally to
promote the realization of the official plan.
(5) To arrange and conduct any form of publicity relative to its activities for the general purpose of
public understanding.
(6) To cooperate with municipal or regional planning and zoning commissions and other agencies
or groups to further the local planning program and to assure harmonious and integrated planning for
the area.
(7) To exercise such other powers germane to the powers granted by statute.
(2004 Code, sec. 14.02.004)
ARTICLE 1.05 CODE OF ETHICS*
Sec. 1.05.001 Purpose
Accepting a position as a public official and/or employee carries with it the acceptance of trust that the
official/employee will work to further the public interest; maintaining that public trust is critical to the continued
operation of good government. In addition, public decision-making should be open and accessible to the public
at large. To preserve the public trust, there are five principles to which public officials and/or employees should
adhere:
(1) A public official and/or employee [should] represent and work towards the public interest and
not towards private or personal interests;
(2) A public official and/or employee should accept and maintain the public trust to the degree that
preserves and enhances the public's confidence in their public officials and/or employees;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 28/362
(3) A public official and/or employee should exercise leadership in the form that consistently
demonstrates behavior that reflects the public's trust;
(4) A public official and/or employee should recognize the proper role of all government bodies
and the relationships between various government bodies; and
(5) A public official and/or employee should always demonstrate respect for others and for other
positions.
Sec. 1.05.002 Definitions
For the purpose of this code of ethics, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them
by this section:
Advisory board. A board, commission or committee of the city that functions only in an advisory or study
capacity.
Business entity. A sole proprietorship, partnership, proprietorship, firm, corporation, association, holding
company, joint stock company, receivership, trust or any other entity recognized by law.
Employee. Any person employed by the city, including those individuals on a part-time basis, but such term shall
not be extended to apply to any independent contractor.
Knowingly. A person acts knowingly, or with knowledge, with respect to the nature of his/her conduct or to
circumstances surrounding his/her conduct when he/she is aware of the nature of his/her conduct or that the
circumstances exist. A person acts knowing, or with knowledge, with respect to a result of his/her conduct when
he/she is aware that his/her conduct is reasonably certain to cause the result.
Officer. Any member of the city council, the planning and zoning commission, the board of adjustment, or the
governing bodies of the economic and community development corporations, and any member of a board,
commission, task force or committee established by ordinance, resolution, charter or state law that has final
approval authority over any application, permit, license or other city approvals; provided, however, no members
of an advisory board shall be deemed an officer of the city.
Substantial interest.
(1) A person has a substantial interest in the business entity if:
(A) The interest is ownership of ten percent (10%) or more of the voting stock or shares of
the business entity or ownership of either ten percent (10%) or more or five thousand dollars
($5,000.00) or more of fair market value of the business entity (see section 171.002, Texas
Local Government Code);
(B) Funds received by the person from the business entity exceed ten percent (10%) of the
person's gross income for the previous year (see section 171.002, Texas Local Government
Code);
(C) The person holds a position of member of the board of directors or other governing board
of the business entity;
(D) The person serves as an elected officer of the business entity;
(E) The person is a employee of the business entity;
(F) The person is a creditor, debtor or guarantor of the business entity in the amount of five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more; or
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 29/362
(G) Property of the person has been pledged to the business entity or is subject to a lien in
favor of the business entity in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more.
(2) A person does not have a substantial interest in a business entity if:
(A) The person has been designated by the city council to serve as a member of the board of
directors or other governing board of a business entity;
(B) The person receives no remuneration, either directly or indirectly, for his/her service on
such board; and
(C) The primary nature of the business entity is either charitable, nonprofit or governmental.
(3) A person has a substantial interest in real property if the interest is an equitable or legal
ownership interest with a fair market value of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) or more
(see section 171.002, Texas Local Government Code).
(4) A person has a substantial interest under this article if the person's spouse or a person related to
the person in the first degree by consanguinity or affinity has a substantial interest under this article
(see section 171.002, Texas Local Government Code). A person is related in the first degree of
consanguinity to his/her father, mother, brother, sister, son or daughter. A person is related in the first
degree of affinity to his/her father-in-law, mother-in-law, brother's spouse, sister's spouse, son-in-law
or daughter-in-law.
Sec. 1.05.003 Standards of conduct
No councilor, board member, officer or employee, directly or indirectly or by others on his/her behalf or his/her
request or suggestion, shall:
(1) Engage in any private business, transaction or employment, or have any substantial interest
therein, which is incompatible or in conflict with the proper and impartial discharge of his/her duties
on behalf of the city;
(2) Represent any private party before the public body on which the official sits or over which the
official has appointment or budgetary powers;
(3) Disclose without authorization, or use to further a personal interest, confidential information
acquired in the course of his/her official duties;
(4) Grant or influence the granting of any special consideration, advantage or favor, to any person,
group, firm or corporation, beyond that which is the general practice to grant or make available to the
public at large;
(5) With the exception of occasional, non-pecuniary gifts, accept anything of economic value such
as money, service, gift, loan, gratuity, favor or promise thereof, the purpose and intent of which is to
influence any such councilor, board member, officer or employee of the city in the exercise of his/her
official judgment, power or authority;
(6) Make personal use of staff, vehicles, equipment, materials or property of the city except in the
course of his/her official duties or as duly authorized by the proper city councilor, board member,
officer or employee;
(7) Participate in the appointment, vote for appointment or discussion of any appointment of an
immediate family member or business associate or use his/her position, directly or indirectly, to effect
the employment status of an immediate family member or business associate to any city office or
position, paid or unpaid;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 30/362
(8) Receive or have any financial interest in any sale to the city of any real estate when such
financial interest was received under circumstances which would lead a reasonable person to expect
that the city intended to purchase, condemn or lease said real estate.
Sec. 1.05.004 Ex-parte communications
In any such quasi-judicial matter (e.g., personnel decisions, condemnation proceedings, zoning rules, matters
involving the issuance of a permit or approval) or the award of a contract before the council, board, commission
or committee, a public councilor, board member or officer sitting on such council, board, commission or
committee shall not, outside of that council, board, commission or committee, communicate with or accept a
communication from a person for which there are reasonable grounds for believing to be a party to the matter
being considered, if such communication is designed to influence the councilor's, board member's or officer's
action on that matter. If such communication should occur, the councilor, board member or officer shall disclose
it at an open meeting of the council, board, commission or committee prior to its consideration of the matter.
Sec. 1.05.005 Disclosure of interest and recusal procedures
Whenever a matter comes before the council, board, commission or committee as to which any conflict of
interest standard, as prescribed in section 1.05.003 of this code of ethics, applies to one of its members, the
following provisions shall apply:
(1) A councilor, board member, officer or employee shall disclose the existence of any substantial
interest in a business entity or real property involved in any decision pending before such councilor,
board member, officer or employee, or the body of which the councilor, board member, officer or
employee is a member. To comply with this subsection, a councilor, board member or officer, prior to
any discussion or determination of the matter, [shall] either file an affidavit of disclosure as required
by section 171.004 of the Texas Local Government Code or, if not so required, shall publicly disclose
in the official records of the governing body, or to the city secretary, the nature of the interest. To
comply with this subsection, an employee of the city shall notify his/her superior in writing of the
nature of any substantial interest he/she may have in a business entity or real property that would be
affected by an exercise of discretionary authority by such employee and such superior shall assign the
matter to another employee.
(2) Following such disclosure, such councilor, board member or officer shall not participate in any
consideration, discussion or vote on the matter before the council, board, commission or committee.
If the councilor, board member or officer wishes to address the issue at an open public meeting, said
councilor, board member or officer may participate as a member of the public. During deliberation
and vote on the matter, the councilor, board member or officer may participate as a member of the
public. The councilor, board member or officer may attend an executive session to discuss the matter
at the invitation of the council, board, commission or committee, if such attendance complies with
the statutory requirements of the Open Meetings Act.
(3) The councilor, board member or officer shall not, during any part of the council, board,
commission or committee meeting pertaining to the matter requiring the disclosure, represent,
advocate on behalf of or otherwise act as the agent of the person or business entity in or with which
the councilor, board member or officer has such an interest or relationship.
(4) The foregoing shall not be construed as prohibiting the councilor, board member or officer
from testifying as to factual matters at a hearing of the city council, the planning and zoning
commission, the board of adjustment, either boards of the economic and community development
corporations or any other board, commission or committee.
Sec. 1.05.006 Advisory opinions
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 31/362
(a) Where any councilor, board member, officer or employee has a doubt as to the applicability of any
provision of this code of ethics to a particular situation, or as to the definition of terms used herein, he/she may
apply to the city attorney, by way of the city manager, for an advisory opinion. The councilor, board member,
officer or employee shall have the opportunity to present his/her interpretation of the facts at issue and of the
applicability of provisions of said code of ethics before such advisory opinion is made.
(b) Until amended or revoked, any advisory opinion shall be binding on the city, the city council and the city
attorney in any subsequent actions concerning the councilor, board member, officer or employee who sought the
opinion and acted on it in good faith, unless material facts were omitted or misstated in the request for the
advisory opinion. Such opinion shall not be binding in any action initiated by any private citizen.
Sec. 1.05.007 Reporting of ethics violations
(a) The city council shall have the primary responsibility for the enforcement of this code of ethics. Said
council may direct the city attorney to investigate or prosecute any apparent violation of this code or it may
employ or appoint any qualified attorney to investigate or prosecute any violation or series of violations of this
code by one or more persons. At the direction of the city council, the attorney shall have the power to investigate
any complaint, to initiate any suit and to prosecute any action on behalf of the city where such action is
appropriate.
(b) Any person who believes that a violation of any portion of the code of ethics has occurred may file a
complaint with the city council, who may then proceed as provided in subsection (a) above; however, nothing in
this code shall be construed to prevent complainants from instituting direct legal action through the appropriate
judicial authority.
Sec. 1.05.008 Ethics commission
(a) If the city attorney finds merit to the reported ethics violation and the measure does not call for prosecution
through civil or criminal court, the council may use an ethics commission to provide a recommendation on the
question if and what level of discipline should be applied to the offending councilor, board member, officer or
employee.
(b) The city ethics commission shall consist of five (5) members, all of whom shall be citizens of the city and
serve without compensation. The five-member commission shall be chosen by the city council in a manner that
ensures fair and unbiased representation from members of the general public who have no connection with the
person under investigation nor with the facts. The city attorney shall furnish the ethics commission whatever
legal assistance necessary in carrying out its functions. The ethics commission shall select one of its members as
a chairperson and one as a secretary; said secretary does not have to be one of the five appointed ethics
commission members.
(c) The ethics commission will report their recommendation for disposition to the city council.
(d) During all stages of any investigation or proceeding conducted under this section, the person whose
activities are under investigation shall be entitled to be represented by counsel of his own choosing.
(e) The person under investigation or his representative shall have an adequate opportunity to examine all
documents and records to be used at the hearing at a reasonable time before the date of the hearing as well as
during the hearing, to bring witnesses, establish all pertinent facts and circumstances and question or refute any
testimony or evidence.
(f) Upon conclusion of the hearing, the ethics commission shall file its recommendation within five (5)
working days in writing signed by all participating commission members and refer the matter to the city council
for its consideration.
Sec. 1.05.009 Violations; disciplinary actions
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 32/362
(a) Except where otherwise provided by state law, it is not the intent of this code of ethics that violations
thereof be subject to criminal penalties.
(b) Whenever the city council has determined that any councilor, board member, officer or employee has
violated any provision of said code of ethics, such councilor, board member, officer or employee shall be subject
to discipline.
(c) The city council may apply levels of discipline to the councilor, board member, officer or employee
ranging from private consultation, admonishment, censure and reprimand. The council may also choose to have
the board member or officer forfeit their seat; however, this level of discipline can not be used on elected
councilmembers.
(d) The city council may exempt from provisions of this code of ethics any conduct found to constitute a
violation by a councilor, board member, officer or employee if it finds that the enforcement of this code with
respect to such conduct is not in the public interest.
(e) Any contract or transaction which was the subject of an official act or action of the city in which there is an
interest prohibited by this code, or which involved the violation of a provision of this code, shall be voidable at
the option of the city council.
Sec. 1.05.010 Distribution of copies
The city secretary shall cause a copy of this code of ethics to be distributed to every councilor, board member,
officer and employee of the city within thirty (30) days after the enactment of said code. Each councilor, board
member, officer and employee thereafter elected or appointed shall be furnished a copy of said code of ethics
before entering upon the duties of his/her office or position and shall sign a written statement acknowledging
receipt of the copy of the code of ethics.
(Ordinance 1077 adopted 2/2/09)
ARTICLE 1.06 RECORDS MANAGEMENT*
Sec. 1.06.001 Definition of city records
All documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape,
electronic media, or other information-recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and
regardless of whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by
the city or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business are hereby
declared to be the records of the city and shall be created, maintained, and disposed of in accordance with the
provisions of this article or procedures authorized by it and in no other manner. (2004 Code, sec. 1.07.001)
Sec. 1.06.002 Additional definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Department head. The officer who by ordinance, order, or administrative policy is in charge of an office of the
city that creates or receives records.
Essential record. Any record of the city necessary to the resumption or continuation of operations of the city in
an emergency or disaster, to the re-creation of the legal and financial status of the city, or to the protection and
fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state.
Permanent record. Any record of the city for which the retention period on a records control schedule is given as
permanent.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 33/362
Records control schedule. A document prepared by or under the authority of the records management officer
listing the records maintained by the city, their retention periods, and other records disposition information that
the records management program may require.
Records liaison officers. The persons designated under section 1.06.010 of this article.
Records management. The application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance, retention,
preservation, and disposal of records for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of
recordkeeping. The term includes the development of records control schedules, the management of filing and
information retrieval systems, the protection of essential and permanent records, the economical and spaceeffective
storage of inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports, and
correspondence, and the management of micrographics and electronic and other records storage systems.
Records management committee. The committee established in section 1.06.006 of this article.
Records management officer. The person designated in section 1.06.005 of this article.
Records management plan. The plan developed under section 1.06.007 of this article.
Retention period. The minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording, or receipt of a record, or the
fulfillment of certain actions associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction.
(2004 Code, sec. 1.07.002)
Sec. 1.06.003 City records declared public property
All municipal records as defined in section 1.06.001 of this article are hereby declared to be the property of the
city. No municipal official or employee has, by virtue of his or her position, any personal or property right to
such records, even though he or she may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction,
removal from files, or use of such records is prohibited. (2004 Code, sec. 1.07.003)
Sec. 1.06.004 Policy
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient, economical, and effective controls over
the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use, and disposition of all municipal records through a
comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records from their creation to their
ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the Texas Local Government Records Act and accepted
records management practice. (2004 Code, sec. 1.07.004)
Sec. 1.06.005 Designation of records management officer
The city secretary shall serve as records management officer for the city. As provided by state law, each
successive holder of the office shall file his or her name with the director and librarian of the state library within
thirty (30) days of the initial designation or of taking up the office, as applicable. (2004 Code, sec. 1.07.005)
Sec. 1.06.006 Records management committee
A records management committee consisting of the city manager, city secretary, librarian, and city attorney is
hereby established. The committee shall:
(1) Assist the records management officer in the development of policies and procedures governing
the records management program;
(2) Review the performance of the program on a regular basis and propose changes and
improvements if needed;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 34/362
(3) Review and approve records control schedules submitted by the records management officer;
(4) Give final approval to the destruction of records in accordance with approved records control
schedules; and
(5) Actively support and promote the records management program throughout the city.
(2004 Code, sec. 1.07.006)
Sec. 1.06.007 Records management plan
(a) The records management officer and the records management committee shall develop a records
management plan for the city for submission to the city council. The plan must contain policies and procedures
designed to reduce the costs and improve the efficiency of recordkeeping, to adequately protect the essential
records of the municipality, and to properly preserve those records of the municipality that are of historical
value. The plan must be designed to enable the records management officer to carry out his or her duties
prescribed by state law and this article effectively.
(b) Once approved by the city council, the records management plan shall be binding on all offices,
departments, divisions, programs, commissions, bureaus, boards, committees, or similar entities of the city, and
records shall be created, maintained, stored, microfilmed, or disposed of in accordance with the plan.
(c) State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or recordkeeping requirements of a department head
do not exempt the department head or the records in the department head's care from the application of this
article and the records management plan adopted under it and may not be used by the department head as a basis
for refusal to participate in the records management program of the city.
(2004 Code, sec. 1.07.007)
Sec. 1.06.008 Duties of records management officer
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, the records management officer shall:
(1) Administer the records management program and provide assistance to department heads in its
implementation;
(2) Plan, formulate, and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards, and procedures;
(3) In cooperation with department heads, identify essential records and establish a disaster plan
for each municipal office and department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to
reestablish operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense;
(4) Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of
the municipality;
(5) Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies;
(6) Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and a forms design
and control system for the city;
(7) Provide records management advice and assistance to all municipal departments by preparation
of a manual or manuals of procedure and policy and by on-site consultation;
(8) Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the state library and
archives commission to determine if the records management program and the municipality's records
control schedules are in compliance with state regulations;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 35/362
(9) Disseminate to the city council and department heads information concerning state laws and
administrative rules relating to local government records;
(10) Instruct records liaison officers and other personnel in policies and procedures of the records
management plan and their duties in the records management program;
(11) Direct records liaison officers or other personnel in the conduct of records inventories in
preparation for the development of records control schedules as required by state law and this article;
(12) Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition of
the records of the municipality is carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the
records management program and the requirements of state law;
(13) Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved records control
schedules, the volume of records microfilmed or stored electronically, and the estimated cost and
space savings as the result of such disposal or disposition;
(14) Report annually to the city council on the implementation of the records management plan in
each department of the city, including summaries of the statistical and fiscal data compiled under
subsection (13); and
(15) Bring to the attention of the city council noncompliance by department heads or other city
personnel with the policies and procedures of the records management program or the Local
Government Records Act.
(2004 Code, sec. 1.07.008)
Sec. 1.06.009 Duties and responsibilities of department heads
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, department heads shall:
(1) Cooperate with the records management officer in carrying out the policies and procedures
established in the city for the efficient and economical management of records and in carrying out the
requirements of this article;
(2) Adequately document the transaction of government business and the services, programs, and
duties for which the department head and his or her staff are responsible; and
(3) Maintain the records in his or her care and carry out their preservation, microfilming,
destruction, or other disposition only in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records
management program of the city and the requirements of this article.
(2004 Code, sec. 1.07.009)
Sec. 1.06.010 Designation of records liaison officers
Each department head shall designate a member of his or her staff to serve as records liaison officer for the
implementation of the records management program in the department. If the records management officer
determines that in the best interests of the records management program more than one records liaison officer
should be designated for a department, the department head shall designate the number of records liaison
officers specified by the records management officer. Persons designated as records liaison officers shall be
thoroughly familiar with all the records created and maintained by the department and shall have full access to
all records of the city maintained by the department. In the event of the resignation, retirement, dismissal, or
removal by action of the department head of a person designated as a records liaison officer, the department head
shall promptly designate another person to fill the vacancy. A department head may serve as records liaison
officer for his or her department. (2004 Code, sec. 1.07.010)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 36/362
Sec. 1.06.011 Duties and responsibilities of records liaison officers
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, records liaison officers shall:
(1) Conduct or supervise the conduct of inventories of the records of the department in preparation
for the development of records control schedules;
(2) In cooperation with the records management officer, coordinate and implement the policies and
procedures of the records management program in their departments; and
(3) Disseminate information to department staff concerning the records management program.
(2004 Code, sec. 1.07.011)
Sec. 1.06.012 Records control schedules to be developed; approval; filing with state
(a) The records management officer, in cooperation with department heads and records liaison officers, shall
prepare records control schedules on a department-by-department basis listing all records created or received by
the department and the retention period for each record. Records control schedules shall also contain such other
information regarding the disposition of municipal records as the records management plan may require.
(b) Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended as needed by the records management
officer on a regular basis to ensure that it is in compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state
and that it continues to reflect the recordkeeping procedures and needs of the department and the records
management program of the city.
(c) Before its adoption, a records control schedule or amended schedule for a department must be approved by
the department head and the members of the records management committee.
(d) Before its adoption, a records control schedule must be submitted to and accepted for filing by the director
and librarian as provided by state law. If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule shall be amended to
make it acceptable for filing. The records management officer shall submit the records control schedules to the
director and librarian.
(2004 Code, sec. 1.07.012)
Sec. 1.06.013 Implementation of records control schedules; destruction of records under schedule
(a) A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted under section 1.06.012
shall be implemented by department heads and records liaison officers according to the policies and procedures
of the records management plan.
(b) A record whose retention period has expired on a records control schedule shall be destroyed unless an
open records request is pending on the record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending lawsuit,
or the department head requests in writing to the records management committee that the record be retained for
an additional period.
(c) Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records control schedule, authorization for the
destruction must be obtained by the records management officer from the records management committee.
(2004 Code, sec. 1.07.013)
Sec. 1.06.014 Destruction of unscheduled records
A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control schedule may be destroyed if its destruction
has been approved in the same manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the records
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 37/362
management officer has submitted to and received back from the director and librarian an approved destruction
authorization request. (2004 Code, sec. 1.07.014)
Sec. 1.06.015 Records center
A records center, developed pursuant to the plan required by section 1.06.007, shall be under the direct control
and supervision of the records management officer. Policies and procedures regulating the operations and users
of the records center shall be contained in the records management plan developed under section 1.06.007. (2004
Code, sec. 1.07.015)
ARTICLE 1.07 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT*
Sec. 1.07.001 Organization
(a) There exists the office of emergency management director of the city, which shall be held by the mayor in
accordance with state law.
(b) An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director.
(c) The director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management within the city
and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this article. He/she may delegate authority for
execution of these duties to the coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for such execution shall remain with the
director.
(d) The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the officers and
employees of the city so designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well as organized
volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such officers and
employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan.
Sec. 1.07.002 Powers and duties of emergency management director
The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following:
(1) Conduct an ongoing survey of actual or potential hazards that threaten life and property within
the city and an ongoing program of identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation
of measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a
disaster did occur.
(2) Supervision of the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the city,
and shall recommend for adoption by the city council all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary
for the implementation of such plan.
(3) Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The declaration may not be continued or renewed
for a period in excess of 7 days except by or with the consent of the city council. Any order or
proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt and
general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the city secretary.
(4) Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations or directives which are necessary for carrying
out the purposes of this article. Such proclamations, regulations, or directives shall be disseminated
promptly by means calculated to bring its contents to the attention of the general public and unless
circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or impede, promptly filed with the city secretary.
(5) Direction and control of the operations of the city's emergency management organization as
well as the training of emergency management personnel.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 38/362
(6) Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the
emergency management organization of the city.
(7) Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional or federal,
emergency management organizations.
(8) Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment and supplies from any department of the city
to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan.
(9) Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the
representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and
execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which said city is located and with
other municipalities within the county, for the countywide coordination of emergency management
efforts.
(10) Supervision of, and final authorization for the procurement of all necessary supplies and
equipment, including acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of
improving emergency management within the city.
(11) Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for
public shelter and other purposes.
(12) Survey of the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies and services which could
be used during a disaster, as provided for herein.
(13) Other requirements as specified in Texas Disaster Act 1975 (V.T.C.S. article 6889-7).
Sec. 1.07.003 Emergency management plan
A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be developed and maintained in a current state. The plan
shall set forth the form of the organization, establish and designate divisions and functions, assign
responsibilities, tasks, duties, and powers, and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of
this article. As provided by state law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the state
division of emergency management. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall
conform to the recommendations of the state division of emergency management. When approved, it shall be the
duty of all departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion
of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The emergency management plan shall be considered
supplementary to this article and have the effect of law during the time of a disaster.
Sec. 1.07.004 Interjurisdictional program
The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the county judge and the mayors of the other cities in said county in
the formation of an emergency management council for the county and shall have the authority to cooperate in
the preparation of a joint emergency management plan and in the appointment of a joint emergency management
coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a countywide program of emergency management
insofar as said program may affect the city.
Sec. 1.07.005 Override
At all times when the orders, rules, and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this article shall be in
effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules, and regulations insofar as the
latter may be inconsistent therewith.
Sec. 1.07.006 Liability
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 39/362
This article is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health,
and safety and neither the city, the agents and representatives of said city, nor any individual, receiver, firm,
partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out,
complying with or attempting to comply with, any order, rule, or regulation [promulgated pursuant to the
provisions of this article shall be] liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of said activity. Any
person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grant to
the city a license of privilege, or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part or
parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice
enemy attack or natural or manmade disaster shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly
liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license,
privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person.
Sec. 1.07.007 Commitment of funds
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management
activity authorized by this article without prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person have any right
to bind the city by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city council unless
during a declared disaster. During a declared disaster, the mayor may expend and/or commit public funds of the
city when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of health, life or property.
Sec. 1.07.008 Offenses; penalty
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency
management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article, or to do
any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this article.
(b) It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear carry or display any emblem, insignia or any other
means of identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the city, unless authority to
do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials.
(c) Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a warning signal, or
the termination of a warning, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this article and shall be subject to the
penalties imposed by this article.
(d) Convictions for violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable by fine not to exceed one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
(Ordinance 1201 adopted 9/28/15)
ARTICLE 1.08 FINANCIAL MATTERS AND PURCHASING*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 1.08.001 Fiscal year
The fiscal year for the city shall begin on the first (1st) day of October of each calendar year and shall terminate
on the thirtieth (30th) day of September of the next calendar year. (2004 Code, sec. 1.09.001)
Charter reference–Budget, sec. 6.02.
Sec. 1.08.002 Posting of bonds; type of security required
Every person required by ordinance or by this code to post bond shall post same with the city secretary and shall
post such bond either in cash or by filing with the city secretary a bond executed by a surety company authorized
to do business in the state. (2004 Code, sec. 1.09.021)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 40/362
Secs. 1.08.003–1.08.030 Reserved
Division 2. Purchasing*
Sec. 1.08.031 Compliance
The city manager is instructed and ordered by the city council to pay only statements or invoices presented to the
city for purchase of goods and materials and for the performance of services which comply with the purchase
procedure described in this division. (2004 Code, sec. 1.09.022)
Sec. 1.08.032 Authorization to approve purchases
(a) The purchase of goods and materials shall be approved by the city manager prior to placing an order. The
signature of the city manager on a completed purchase order shall constitute approval. (2004 Code, sec.
1.09.023)
(b) The city manager may delegate authority to department heads or supervisors to make purchases without an
approved purchase order where no single item costs more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and the total
purchase is less than fifteen hundred dollars ($1,500.00). This authority will only apply at stores where the city
normally carries an open account. (Ordinance 1237 adopted 10/23/17)
(c) Emergency purchases may be authorized by the department head or supervisor if the city manager is not
available.
(d) The city manager shall approve all hiring of individuals or firms to perform personnel services or
maintenance on equipment and facilities. The signature of the city manager on a completed purchase order,
showing the work to be accomplished, shall constitute approval. Purchase orders shall not be required for those
services where a contract has been signed or where the minutes of the city council meeting reflect concurrence
for the service to be provided.
(2004 Code, sec. 1.09.023)
(e) In no instance shall the city manager approve a purchase which exceeds an amount of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00). The city manager shall present to the city council for immediate consideration a request which
exceeds this amount. The city manager may seek the advice and consent of the city council for any purchase
request. (Ordinance 1237 adopted 10/23/17)
Sec. 1.08.033 Procedures
(a) Department heads and supervisors shall initiate a request for purchase or hire by personally contacting the
city manager. If verbal approval is given, then the information will be given to the city secretary for completion
of a purchase order. The purchase order must be signed before the order is placed.
(b) The city manager will furnish, in writing, to each department head or supervisor, a list of those stores
where purchases described under section 1.08.032(b) may be made.
(c) In case of an emergency purchase by a department head, the information will be provided to the city
secretary as soon as possible following the purchase so that a completed purchase order may be accomplished.
(d) The city manager shall cause the original copy of the purchase order to be delivered to the vendor. One
copy shall be placed in a vendor file, one copy in the suspense file for accounting and one copy to the
appropriate department.
(e) Upon receipt of the goods or services, the department head or supervisor will sign their copy and return it
to city hall as evidence of receipt of the goods or services.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 41/362
(f) All completed purchase orders and/or receipts for goods or services shall be turned in to the city secretary
on a daily basis.
(g) As to emergency repairs of fire department vehicles and equipment, section 1.08.034 shall be controlling.
(2004 Code, sec. 1.09.024)
Sec. 1.08.034 Emergency repairs of fire department equipment and vehicles
(a) The city manager will furnish the volunteer fire department with purchase orders for use in obtaining
emergency repairs to the fire trucks and equipment and place a distribution box in the fire meeting hall for
completed purchase orders.
(b) The city manager will insure that the distribution box is checked daily and all completed purchase orders
removed.
(c) The fire chief and/or his or her designated alternates will fill out a purchase order when emergency repairs
are required and place the pink copy in the distribution box. When the work is completed, the blue copy will be
signed and placed in the distribution box.
(d) The city manager will be responsible for the payment of all completed purchase orders removed.
(e) Supplies and/or equipment of a noncritical nature will be requisitioned through the city manager.
(2004 Code, sec. 1.09.025)
ARTICLE 1.09 LIBRARY
Sec. 1.09.001 Department created
A department is hereby created within the framework of the governmental organization of the city which shall
be known as the library department, and it shall function according to laws of the state and the provisions of this
article. (2004 Code, sec. 1.10.001)
Sec. 1.09.002 Designation as community library; participation in regional system
(a) The city hereby accepts the designation of a community library as authorized by the state library and
historical commission, pursuant to the authority vested in said commission by the Library Systems Act,
contained in V.T.C.A., Government Code, chapter 441, subchapter I (section 441.121 et seq.).
(b) Such community library as herein designated shall be a member of the Fort Worth System Major Resource
Center.
(2004 Code, sec. 1.10.002)
Sec. 1.09.003 Acceptance of gifts and donations
The city hereby accepts all gifts and donations of books and equipment heretofore made for the city public
library, with grateful thanks to the donors both of books and time, and such books and equipment, together with
such additions as may be made from time to time, shall constitute and form the books and equipment of the city
public library. (2004 Code, sec. 1.10.003)
Sec. 1.09.004 Detaining materials after due date; damaging materials
(a) Detaining materials after due date. No person shall, whether willfully or unknowingly, detain any book,
magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, manuscript, audio/visual material or other property belonging to the Tom
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 42/362
Burnett Memorial Library, for a length of time exceeding twenty (20) days from the due date of such materials.
(b) Damaging materials. No person shall willfully injure, damage or deface any library materials by writing,
marking, tearing, breaking or otherwise mutilating such materials or property belonging to the Tom Burnett
Memorial Library.
(c) Penalty. Whosoever violates any provision of subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be fined not more
than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Ordinance 1074 adopted 12/22/08)
ARTICLE 1.10 PARKS AND RECREATION*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 1.10.001–1.10.030 Reserved
Division 2. Park Rules
Sec. 1.10.031 Parks designated
The parks designated for all purposes in this division are as listed below:
(1) City Hall Park.
(2) Murphree Park.
(3) Hope Park.
(4) Rotary Park.
(5) Foley Park.
(6) Oscar Park.
(7) Will Burnett Park.
(8) Lake Iowa Park/George Hammons Park.
(9) Gary Compton Softball Field.
(10) Senior League Ball Field.
(11) David Kinssey Soccer Field.
(12) Pace Park.
(13) Tom Burnett Memorial Library and Grounds.
(14) Lake Gordon/Oscar Park.
(15) Guthrie Park.
(16) Hawk Haven Park.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 43/362
(2004 Code, sec. 1.11.011)
Sec. 1.10.032 Depositing garbage or rubbish
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit or leave any refuse, garbage, rubbish, or junk on any
park property owned by the city, regardless of the location of the property, except in containers provided for such
purpose.
(b) The definition of the terms in subsection (a) shall be the same as contained in section 6.02.001.
(2004 Code, sec. 1.11.001)
Sec. 1.10.033 Firearms and other weapons; hunting
(a) The discharge of any rifle, sidearm, handgun, crossbow, compressed air gun or air gun on any property
owned by the city is prohibited except for hunting as authorized herein. (2004 Code, sec. 1.11.002)
(b) Shotguns only may be used on lake property wholly owned by the city but located in the P-2 special public
use district for the taking of game birds during season and for shooting trap at the facility authorized in section
1.10.034 of this code. The taking of game birds shall be strictly in accordance with the general laws of the state,
as the same are or may be amended, as outlined by the state parks and wildlife commission. Shooting trap at the
designated range shall be strictly in accordance with general and safety rules, as the same are or may be
amended by the city or designated operators of the range. Discharge of shotguns, except as provided herein, is
strictly prohibited. (Ordinance 1239 adopted 11/13/17)
Sec. 1.10.034 Trap shooting range
A range for the shooting of trap is authorized on the city-owned property situated on the east side of Lake Iowa
Park at a site approved by the city. Authorized accessory improvements include picnic tables, outdoor cooking
grills to contain open fires, a building to provide restrooms and other comforts. This section is intended (and
should be interpreted) to give permission for improvements and reasonable activities of a recreational nature.
The city council shall be the final judge of the reasonableness of the activities conducted on the property. (2004
Code, sec. 1.11.007)
Sec. 1.10.035 Boating
(a) Rules of safety concerning speed, operation, lights, life preservers, size of craft, construction, etc., shall be
the same as provided by the laws of the state covering the operation of all watercraft.
(b) Boat racing and high-speed operation of boats on water under control of the city is prohibited except for
events sanctioned by the city council.
(c) No boats or boat trailers shall be allowed to remain unattended in the water.
(2004 Code, sec. 1.11.003)
Sec. 1.10.036 Fishing
The general laws of the state, as the same are or may be amended, save and except as specifically provided by
proper ordinance and regulations passed by the city council, shall control the taking of fish from lakes owned by
the city. All fishing in the lakes will be subject to the laws as outlined by the state parks and wildlife
commission, except that fishing is prohibited within the locations identified as being restricted areas. (2004
Code, sec. 1.11.004)
Sec. 1.10.037 Reward for arrest and conviction of persons vandalizing park property
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 44/362
The city hereby offers a reward of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the arrest and conviction of any persons
found guilty of committing the crime of theft, destruction or vandalism to park property and equipment. This
reward is a standing offer and shall be paid out of the general fund account of the city. (2004 Code, sec.
1.11.005)
Sec. 1.10.038 Motor vehicles generally; driving or riding animals
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or propel any motorized vehicle or drive or ride any animal in,
over, or through any park except upon designated drives, roads, streets, or parking areas.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or propel any motorized vehicle not currently and legally
licensed by the state for “on road” use on any city-owned property. This section shall be interpreted to include,
but not be limited to, parks inside and outside the city limits, lake property, and any other real estate which the
city may own at any time.
(c) The property owned by the city in conjunction with Lake Buffalo and Lake Iowa Park is expressly
included for all purposes within the scope of this division.
(2004 Code, sec. 1.11.006)
Sec. 1.10.039 Driving on dams
It shall be unlawful for any person(s) to drive or propel any motorized vehicle on any part of the dams at Lake
Iowa Park and the North Fork Buffalo Creek Reservoir. (2004 Code, sec. 1.11.008)
Sec. 1.10.040 Climbing on intake and overflow structures
It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized persons to climb upon the intake and overflow structures at Lakes
Gordon, Iowa Park and Buffalo. (2004 Code, sec. 1.11.009)
Sec. 1.10.041 Alcoholic beverages
It shall be unlawful to possess, transport, consume, sell or deliver any beer, wine, liquor or any other legal
intoxicating beverage in a city park except for Lake Iowa Park/George Hammonds Park. (Ordinance 1194
adopted 7/27/15)
Sec. 1.10.042 Wading, swimming, scuba diving or water-skiing in Lake Iowa Park or Lake Buffalo
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to wade, swim, bathe, scuba dive or water-ski outside of designated
areas in or upon Lake Iowa Park or Buffalo in the city at any time of the day or night.
(b) Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit wading while in the process of lawful fishing.
(2004 Code, sec. 1.11.012)
Sec. 1.10.043 Camping; fires
(a) It shall be unlawful to camp for more than ninety-six (96) consecutive hours on city-owned lakes or parks.
Furthermore, it shall be unlawful to camp more than twelve (12) days per month without a permit. Permits may
be obtained from the public works office for camping for twelve (12) consecutive days or longer.
(b) Open fires are allowed only in the properly designated camping areas and prohibited in all others.
(2004 Code, sec. 1.11.013; Ordinance adopting Code)
Secs. 1.10.044–1.10.070 Reserved
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 45/362
Division 3. Gordon Lake
Sec. 1.10.071 Purpose
The following rules and regulations are established for the government and protection of Gordon Lake in the city
and in the interest of the health, safety, welfare and convenience of the citizens of the city. (2004 Code, sec.
1.11.021)
Sec. 1.10.072 Penalty
Any person violating any provision of this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as
provided in section 1.01.009 of this code. (2004 Code, sec. 1.11.024)
Sec. 1.10.073 Wading, swimming or scuba diving
It shall be unlawful for any person to wade without protective shoes, swim, bathe or scuba dive in or upon
Gordon Lake in the city, at any time of the day or night. (2004 Code, sec. 1.11.022)
Sec. 1.10.074 Motorboats
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motorized boat with an internal combustion engine in or upon
Gordon Lake in the city, at any time of the day or night. (2004 Code, sec. 1.11.023)
Secs. 1.10.075–1.10.100 Reserved
Division 4. Lake Iowa Park*
Sec. 1.10.101 Purpose
The following rules and regulations are established for the government and protection of Lake Iowa Park and the
Lake Iowa Park Addition in the city and in the interest of the health, safety, welfare and convenience of the
citizens of the city. Nothing in this division shall be construed in such a way that would prohibit any city official
or employee from carrying out their duties. (2004 Code, sec. 1.11.041)
Sec. 1.10.102 Wading, swimming, scuba diving or water-skiing
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to wade, swim, bathe, scuba dive or water-ski outside of the designated
areas in or upon Lake Iowa Park in the city at any time of the day or night.
(b) Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit wading while in the process of lawful fishing.
(2004 Code, sec. 1.11.043)
Sec. 1.10.103 Camping; fires
(a) It shall be unlawful to camp for more than seventy-two (72) consecutive hours on the property of Lake
Iowa Park Addition. Furthermore, it shall be unlawful to camp more than twelve (12) days per month. It is the
intent of this section to allow camping for no longer than three (3) consecutive nights as would be defined by a
prudent individual using common definitions. Attempts to violate the spirit of the section shall be considered
violations.
(b) Open fires are prohibited except as authorized by the city council.
(2004 Code, sec. 1.11.044)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 46/362
CHAPTER 2
ANIMAL CONTROL
ARTICLE 2.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 2.01.001 Definitions
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them:
Abandon. To desert or to cease support of an animal owned or formerly supported, or to intentionally release or
turn loose a contained animal, without first making accommodations to provide for basic animal care.
Animal. Any non-human live creature, domestic or wild.
Animal control officers. City employees appointed by the chief of police to enforce animal control ordinances.
At large. Any animal not secured by a leash or lead, or not physically restrained within the vehicle or real
property limits of its owner.
Basic animal care. To provide the proper quantity of food, water, shelter and protection to an animal.
Bite. Breaking of the skin caused by teeth.
City animal control center. Any facility operated by a municipal agency, or its authorized agents, for the purpose
of impounding or caring for animals held under the authority of this chapter or state law.
Distance between structures. A straight line from the nearest point of the shed, barn, pen enclosure, fence, or
area in which the animal is contained, to the nearest point of a residence or building that is used by humans for
living or working purposes.
Feral animal. A descendant of a domesticated animal that is non-socialized or non-domesticated, born in the
wild, abandoned and no longer socialized, or is the offspring of a non-socialized, non-domesticated or
abandoned animal.
Fowl. Includes chickens, turkeys, pheasants, quail, guineas, geese, ducks, peafowl, and any other feathered
creatures that are not domestically confined within a residence.
Kennel. Any lot, building, structure, enclosure, or premises wherein three (3) or more animals, four (4) months
of age or older, are kept or maintained for the purpose of breeding, training, boarding, or raising for profit or
pleasure.
Inclement weather conditions. Actual temperatures or wind chill at or below 32 degrees Fahrenheit, actual
temperatures or heat index at or above 100 degrees Fahrenheit, or any severe weather warning issued by the
National Weather Service for the area where an animal is located.
Local rabies control authority (LRCA). An[y] person designated by the chief of police whose duties and
responsibilities are to investigate and file any and all possible rabies exposure cases with the state board of
health.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 47/362
Official notice. Written notice personally delivered or mailed by an animal control officer, police officer or court
clerk addressed to the last known address of the recipient.
Owner. Any person keeping, harboring, maintaining or having custody of one (1) or more animals or providing
food, water, shelter or veterinary care for an animal or allowing an animal to remain on or about the person's
premises for three (3) days or more.
Performing animal. Any animal used in a spectacle, display, act, or event.
Pet. Any animal kept for pleasure rather than utility.
(Ordinance 1208, sec. 1, adopted 4/11/16)
Pet registration tag (or license). A current unexpired official tag or license issued by the city to be worn by pet
as proof of registration with the city. (Ordinance 1236, sec. 1, adopted 10/23/17)
Public nuisance. Any animal, fowl or livestock which does any of the following:
(1) Molests passersby or passing vehicles;
(2) Attacks other animals without provocation;
(3) Trespasses on school grounds;
(4) Is at large;
(5) Damages private or public property;
(6) Barks, whines, or howls in an excessive, continuous, or untimely fashion; or
(7) Soils, defiles, urinates or defecates on property other than the owner.
Residence. Any place of human habitation at any time, day or night, including, but not limited to, any home, apartment,
duplex, convalescent center or nursing home.
Sterilization. In the male, a testectomy; in the female, an ovariectomy.
Vaccination. An injection of a biological agent to provide active acquired immunity to a particular disease,
approved and administered as required by state law. The rabies vaccination must be administered by a licensed
veterinarian.
Veterinary hospital. Any establishment maintained and operated by a licensed veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis
and treatment of diseases and injuries of animals.
(Ordinance 1208, sec. 1, adopted 4/11/16)
Vicious animal. Any animal, without provocation, that bites or attacks a human being or domestic animal, either
on public or private property, or that, in a vicious or terrorizing manner, approaches any person on a street,
sidewalk or other public place in an apparent attitude of attack; except, no animal shall be deemed vicious if the
bite, injury or damage was sustained by a person who at the time was committing a willful trespass upon the
premises occupied by the owner or provider of the animal, or by a person who has tormented or abused the
animal. (Ordinance 1236, sec. 1, adopted 10/23/17)
Wild animal. Any animal of the canine or feline species normally found in a wild state, and poisonous snakes,
raccoons, skunks, opossums, wolverines, badgers, bears, apes, hawks, falcons and alligators.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 48/362
Sec. 2.01.002 Penalty; additional remedies
(a) Any person violating any provision of this chapter, except section 2.02.002, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in section 1.01.009.
(b) If any violation is continuing, each day's violation shall be deemed a separate violation.
(c) If any person is found guilty by a court of violating any provision of sections 2.01.013 through 2.01.017,
or 2.06.006 through 2.06.008, his permit to own, keep, harbor, or have custody of such animals shall be deemed
automatically revoked and no new permit may be issued.
Sec. 2.01.003 City animal control center
The city animal control center is hereby designated as the impoundment and quarantine center for animals picked up by the
city.
Sec. 2.01.004 Enforcement officers; interference with enforcement
(a) The civil and criminal provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by those persons or agencies designated
by municipal authority.
(b) It shall be a violation of this chapter to interfere in any manner with or give false information to an animal
control officer, or local rabies control authority in the performance of their duties or to interfere with animal
control facilities or equipment.
(c) The animal control officers shall have authority to discharge an air rifle, rifle, shotgun, or pepper spray in
the performance of their duties.
(d) Nothing in this section shall be construed to diminish the authority of the police department in enforcing
any provisions of this chapter.
Sec. 2.01.005 City designated bird sanctuary
The entire area embraced within the city is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary.
Sec. 2.01.006 Hunting or injuring birds
It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, shoot or attempt to shoot or molest in any manner any bird or wild fowl or to rob bird
nests or wild fowl nests. Provided, however, if starlings or similar birds are found to be congregating in such numbers in a
particular locality that they constitute a nuisance or menace to health or property in the opinion of the proper health
authorities of the city, said health authorities shall meet with representatives of the Audubon Society, Bird Club, Garden
Club or humane society, or as many of said clubs as are found to exist in the city, after having given at least three (3) days'
actual notice of the time and place of said meeting to the representatives of said club. If as a result of said meeting no
satisfactory alternative is found to abate such nuisance, said birds may be destroyed in such numbers and in such manner
as is deemed advisable by said health authorities under the supervision of the chief of police.
State law reference–Protection of non-game birds, V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code, sec. 64.002.
Sec. 2.01.007 Offering animals as prize or inducement
No person shall give away any live animals as a prize for, or as an inducement to enter, any contest, game or other
competition, or as an inducement to enter a place of business, or offer such animal as an incentive to enter into any
business agreement whereby the offer was for the purpose of attracting trade.
Sec. 2.01.008 Duty of vehicle driver upon striking animal
Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic animal shall immediately report such injury or
death to the animal's owner; in the event the owner cannot be ascertained and located, such operator shall at once report the
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 49/362
accident to the appropriate law enforcement agency or to the local humane society.
Sec. 2.01.009 Running at large prohibited
The running or roaming at large of any dog, cat or other animal within the city is hereby declared a nuisance and positively
prohibited, and it is hereby made unlawful and deemed a class C misdemeanor for the owner or keeper of any dog, cat or
other animal to allow the same to run or roam at large within the city.
State law reference–Restraint, impoundment and disposition of dogs and cats, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.033.
Sec. 2.01.010 Livestock running at large
The running or roaming at large of horses, mules, jacks, jennets, cattle, sheep, goats, or hogs within the city is hereby
declared a nuisance, and positively prohibited, and it is hereby made unlawful for the owner or keeper of any such animals
to permit the same to run or roam at large within the city.
Sec. 2.01.011 Fowl running at large
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or controlling any chickens, guineas, geese, turkeys or other fowl to allow the
same to be at large within the city, except Antwerp messenger or homing pigeons commonly called carrier pigeons and
racing pigeons.
Sec. 2.01.012 Keeping swine prohibited
It shall at any time be unlawful for any person to keep any swine within the city.
(Ordinance 1208, sec. 1, adopted 4/11/16)
Sec. 2.01.013 Keeping wild, dangerous or vicious animals
(a) Any person who shall harbor or keep on or in or about his or her premises, or premises under his control,
any wild, dangerous or vicious animal, that whether gratuitously or for a fee, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction, shall be fined as provided in section 1.01.009, and each twenty-four (24) hour period that
such animal shall remain or be kept on any such premises shall constitute a separate offense. This section shall
not be construed to apply to zoological parks, performing animal exhibitions, or circuses.
(b) Any animal deemed to be wild, dangerous or vicious nuisance as defined in this chapter shall be
impounded immediately in the city animal control center for a minimum of thirty-six (36) hours or until the
violation has been corrected or other sections of this chapter have been met. The owner shall be required to pay
the city an impounding fee as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code for each animal so
redeemed.
(c) An owner of an animal that, without provocation, bites or injures a person or animal shall be liable for the
harm caused by such animal.
Sec. 2.01.014 Public nuisance
Any person who shall harbor or keep on his or her premises or in or about his or her premises, or premises under
his control, any animal, fowl or livestock which is a public nuisance as defined in this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined as provided in section 1.01.009, and each twenty-four (24)
hour period that such animal shall remain or be kept on any such premises shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ordinance 1236, sec. 2, adopted 10/23/17)
State law reference–Dangerous wild animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 822.101 et seq.
Sec. 2.01.015 Performing animal exhibitions
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 50/362
(a) Restrictions. No performing animal exhibition or circus shall be permitted in which animals are induced or
encouraged to perform for entertainment through the use of chemical, mechanical, electrical or manual devices
in a manner which will cause, or is likely to cause, physical injury or suffering.
(b) Equipment. All equipment used on a performing animal shall fit properly and be in good working
condition.
Sec. 2.01.016 Noisy animals
At any time when the bawling of a cow, the neighing of a horse, the bleating of a sheep or a goat, the crowing of a rooster
and the cackling of a hen or any like animals or fowl become a disturbing factor to persons who live in the area or vicinity
of such noise, it shall constitute a nuisance and is prohibited.
Sec. 2.01.017 Disposal of animal waste
The owner of every animal shall be responsible for the removal of any excreta deposited by his animals on public walks,
recreation areas or private property.
Sec. 2.01.018 Disposal of dead animals
The owner of any deceased animal shall be responsible for the removal of the animal from public right-of-way, recreation
areas or private property.
Sec. 2.01.019 Feeding feral animals and wildlife
It shall at any time be unlawful for any person to feed or provide food for any feral animals or wildlife, including
waterfowl or migratory birds, at any time during the year on public property.
Sec. 2.01.020 Releasing or abandoning animals
It shall be unlawful for any person to release, abandon or turn lose any animal within the city limits.
ARTICLE 2.02 DOGS AND CATS
Sec. 2.02.001 Confinement of female dogs in season
Owners of dogs shall securely confine their female dogs while in season within an enclosure in a manner that will prevent
the attraction of male dogs to the immediate vicinity.
Sec. 2.02.002 Barking dogs
Any person who shall harbor or keep on his or her premises or in or about his or her premises, or premises under his
control, any dog or animal of the canine species which, by loud or unusual barking or howling, shall cause the peace and
quiet of the neighborhood or the occupants of adjacent premises to be disturbed shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, shall be fined as provided in section 1.01.009, and each twenty-four (24) hour period that such dog shall
remain or be kept on any such premises shall constitute a separate offense.
Sec. 2.02.003 Maximum number of dogs and cats
(a) Limitation. It shall be unlawful for any person(s) within a single residence of the city limits to keep more
than three (3) dogs or three (3) cats, or any combination thereof, on or in his/her premises. Each animal over this
amount may constitute a separate offense.
(b) Exceptions. Exceptions to subsection (a) above are breeders, new litters, kennels, and groomers within the
city limits.
Sec. 2.02.004 Dangerous dogs
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 51/362
Dangerous dogs, as defined in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, section 822.041, shall be regulated in accordance with
the provisions of V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, chapter 822, subchapter D.
State law reference–Authority of city to regulate the keeping of dangerous dogs, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 822.041 et
seq.
Sec. 2.02.005 Dangerous wild animals
Dangerous wild animals, as defined in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, section 822.101, shall be regulated in accordance
with the provisions of V.T.C.A, Health and Safety Code, chapter 822, subchapter E, section 822.101 et seq.
Sec. 2.02.006 Registration required
No person shall own, possess or harbor a dog or cat 16 weeks of age or over without registering each animal with the city.
Sec. 2.02.007 Wearing of city registration tag
Failure of a dog to wear the city registration tag at all times while off the owner's property shall be prima facie evidence
that no animal license has been issued, constitutes a violation of this section by the dog's owner, possessor or harborer, and
subjects the dog to impoundment by animal control. The registration tag shall run concurrently with the rabies vaccination.
Sec. 2.02.008 Tethering animals restricted
No animal shall be tethered except in the following ways:
(1) Tethering shall only be done using a restraint system which allows the animal freedom of
movement and prevents entanglement in any way and allows access food, water, shelter and shade for
protection from the elements.
(2) Tethering shall be done only using a properly fitted collar or harness that is not pinch-type,
prong-type or choke-type.
(3) Tethering shall not weigh more than 1/16th of the dog's body weight and be at least five (5)
times the length of the animal's body measured from the tip of the nose to the base of the tail or ten
(10) feet whichever is greater. No extra weights shall be allowed on the chain at any time.
(4) No animal shall be tethered more than nine (9) consecutive hours. No animal shall be tethered
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. or during inclement weather.
Sec. 2.02.009 Minimum animal care required
An animal owner shall provide the animal with basic animal care, including:
(1) Sufficient amount and type of food suitable for the species, size and age of the animal to
maintain healthy body condition and wellness.
(2) Clean potable water available at all times, not exposed to the elements, and in a container that
cannot be emptied by the animal other than by ingestion.
(3) Shelter with at least three (3) sides and a roof, large enough for the animal to stand up and turn
around unencumbered, clean of debris, trash and feces, and maintained in such a way it does not
become offensive to the public or the animal.
(4) Sufficient shade to offer the animal protection from the sun and other natural elements.
ARTICLE 2.03 IMPOUNDMENT*
Sec. 2.03.001 Impoundment authorized
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 52/362
It shall be the duty of the city animal control officers or other employees designated by the chief of police to cause to be
taken up and impounded all dogs, cats and other animals loose and at large in violation of the terms of this chapter.
(Ordinance 1208, sec. 1, adopted 4/11/16)
Sec. 2.03.002 Disposition of impounded dogs and cats; redemption by owner; fees
(a) The owner of any dog or any cat impounded in accordance with section 2.03.001 shall have the right to
redeem the same upon payment to the city of an impounding fee as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of
this code for each animal so redeemed. In a case in which the owner of an animal voluntarily requests
impoundment, an impounding fee as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code shall be paid to the
city prior to acceptance of said animal. In addition to the impounding fees, the owner of the animal will pay the
city for any overtime associated with the animal control officer's enforcement of section 2.03.001 and this
section. An additional fee shall be assessed for vaccination costs for all dogs and cats in violation of section
2.04.001 and shall be subject to the provisions of section 2.03.003.
(b) It shall be the duty of the animal control officers to keep all impounded dogs or cats with a current pet
registration tag for a period of one hundred twenty (120) hours from the date of impounding, and all impounded
animals without such pet registration tag for a period of seventy-two (72) hours from the date of impounding.
Any impounded animal without pet registration which is not redeemed within seventy-two (72) hours, or any
impounded dog or cat with a current pet registration which is not redeemed within one hundred twenty (120)
hours from the date of impounding, shall become the property of the city.
(Ordinance 1236, sec. 2, adopted 10/23/17)
(c) Any animal which becomes the property of the city by abandonment, court order, or by any other means
may be destroyed or adopted out; provided, however, should an animal be destroyed it shall be the duty of the
animal control officers or other employee designated by the chief of police to supervise such destruction. All
animals so destroyed shall be destroyed by injection of a lethal drug or other humane method, but in no instance
by gunshot.
(d) Any person who desires to adopt an animal which has become the property of the city may submit an
adoption application to the city, and upon approval of the animal control officer or other employee designated by
the chief of police, submit a nonrefundable adoption fee as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this
code and execute a pet adoption agreement for each animal to be adopted.
(Ordinance 1271 adopted 6/10/19)
Sec. 2.03.003 Vaccination of impounded dogs and cats
Any dog or cat at the city animal control center must be vaccinated by a licensed veterinarian against rabies subject to the
provisions of section 2.04.001 and proof shall be presented to the city within seventy-two (72) hours of being redeemed.
ARTICLE 2.04 RABIES CONTROL*
Sec. 2.04.001 Vaccination of dogs and cats required
Except as otherwise provided by any rule promulgated by the state board of health, the owner of each dog or cat shall have
the dog or cat vaccinated against rabies at such time and at regular intervals thereafter as prescribed by rules of the board
of health. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog or cat to keep or maintain such dog or cat within the city without
compliance with the provisions of this section. Valid vaccination tag must be worn on collar or harness at all times. Failure
to be wearing the tag is prima facie evidence that no vaccination has been given.
State law reference–Rabies vaccinations, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.021 et seq.
Sec. 2.04.002 Quarantine or destruction of animal attacking person
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 53/362
(a) Any dog, cat, domestic ferret or other animal, regardless of its vaccination status, which bites, scratches or
otherwise attacks any person within the city, or in which there is probable cause that it has exposed a human to
rabies, shall be placed in quarantine as defined in the Texas Health and Safety Code and held for a period of ten
(10) days. In the event an owner of the subject animal has not been identified, the victim, at his or her option,
may elect to have the animal examined by a licensed veterinarian or have tissues submitted for laboratory
examination. The cost incurred will be borne by the victim.
(b) If such an animal cannot be safely captured, it may be destroyed, and the head submitted for examination.
In the event an animal's head is submitted for examination, the owner of the subject animal shall pay to the city a
fee as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code to cover expenses for the preparation to submit the
specimen. In the event the owner of the subject animal has not been identified, the preparation cost will be borne
by the victim.
State law references–Quarantine of animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.042; release or disposition of quarantined
animal, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.043; quarantine method and testing, Texas Administrative Code sec. 169.27.
ARTICLE 2.05 KENNELS
Sec. 2.05.001 License required
All kennels operating within the city limits are required to be licensed by the city through its animal control division.
Sec. 2.05.002 Zoning requirements
Kennels must be operated within the appropriate commercial district of the city as defined in chapter 14 of this code.
Sec. 2.05.003 Minimum distance from residences
No person shall keep, possess, operate or maintain within the city limits a kennel within three hundred feet (300') of any
residence or habitation for human beings other than the residence of the keeper, possessor, operator or owner of such
kennel.
ARTICLE 2.06 KEEPING LIVESTOCK, FOWL, PIGEONS OR OTHER ANIMALS
Sec. 2.06.001 Enforcement officers
This article shall be enforced by the animal control officers or other employee designated by the chief of police.
Sec. 2.06.002 Permit
(a) Required; issuance. It shall be unlawful, except as hereinafter provided, for any person to keep certain
animals, fowl or pigeons within the city who does not possess an unrevoked permit from the animal control
officer or other employee designated by the chief of police. Only persons who comply with the requirements of
this article shall be entitled to receive such a permit and then only after an inspection by proper authorities to
determine if the terms of this article have been met.
(b) Suspension or revocation. A permit may be temporarily suspended by the animal control officer or other
employee designated by the chief of police on violation by the holder of any of the terms of this article, or
revoked after an opportunity for a hearing by the animal control officer upon serious or repeated violations.
(c) Fee. The annual permit fee for the keepers of animals, fowl, or pigeons shall be as set forth in the fee
schedule in appendix A of this code. Money received from the issuance of permits shall be used to assist in the
cost of inspection service, and the printing of forms for same.
(d) Term. Permits shall be for all or any part of a year beginning on September 1 and ending on the following
August 31.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 54/362
Sec. 2.06.003 Exceptions
(a) No permit shall be issued to keep any swine within the city.
(b) Permits will not be required for the keeping of chickens or turkeys in a brooder or battery or for the
keeping of poultry within the business district for sale if said poultry areas are kept in accordance with the
sanitary code of the state and the ordinances of the city. Poultry in numbers larger than twenty-five (25) shall not
be kept in the city.
(c) Dogs and cats shall be excepted from the provisions of this article.
(e) Animals hospitalized under the care and supervision of a licensed doctor of veterinary medicine on the
premises of an approved veterinary hospital or clinic shall be excepted from the provisions of this article.
Sec. 2.06.004 Temporary permit for keeping infant or injured wild animal
The animal control officer may issue a temporary permit for the keeping, care and protection of an infant or injured animal
native to this area which has been deemed incapable of surviving on its own.
Sec. 2.06.005 Authority to order release of infant or injured wild animal
The animal control officer, with the advice and consent of the game management officers, shall have the power to release
or order the release of any infant or injured wild animal kept under temporary permit which is deemed capable of survival.
Sec. 2.06.006 Inspections
(a) At least once a year, the health officer and/or the animal control officer, or authorized representative, may
inspect every area or place for which a permit has been issued for the keeping of animals, fowl or pigeons. In
case such officer discovers the violation of any item of sanitation, he or she shall make a second inspection after
the lapse of such time as he or she deems necessary for the defect to be remedied, and the second inspection
shall be used in determining compliance with the requirements of this article. Any violation of the same item of
sanitation on such second inspection shall call for immediate suspension of the permit.
(b) The person keeping animals, fowl or pigeons within the city shall, upon the request of such officer or his
authorized representative, permit access to the area or places of keeping thereof.
Sec. 2.06.007 Keeping livestock
(a) Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to feed, breed, stable, pasture, or keep any cow, goat, horse,
sheep or any other animal of like species in or on any lot, pen, building, parcel of land, stable or other enclosure
within the city except: (1) as may be permitted by the zoning ordinance of the city (exhibit A to chapter 14); or
(2) with respect to any animal for which a permit has been obtained pursuant to this article. It shall be a defense
to any prosecution for violation of this section if the defendant can demonstrate that his keeping of livestock
commenced prior to the enactment of this section (February 25, 1974) or any predecessor ordinance of the city
prohibiting the keeping of livestock.
(b) Sanitation requirements; distance from occupied buildings. With respect to the keeping of any livestock
which is permitted by subsection (a) of this section, the following regulations, in addition to any other applicable
laws or regulations, shall govern the keeping of any livestock within the city:
(1) Any place of feeding, breeding, stabling, pasturing, or keeping of any cow, goat, horse, sheep
or any other animal of like species in or on any lot, pen, building, parcel of land, stable or other
enclosure in the city must be kept free of offensive odors, flies, rodents and other pests.
(2) Any place of feeding, breeding, stabling, pasturing, or keeping of any cow, goat, horse, sheep
or any other animal of like species in or on any lot, pen, building, parcel of land, stable or other
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 55/362
enclosure in the city must be so situated that any such animal must approach no closer than one
hundred (100) feet to any building occupied by any person any part of the day or night, other than
such building occupied by the owner of the animal.
(3) No individual, person, or corporation shall have grounds for complaint to any municipal officer
against the feeding, breeding, stabling, pasturing, or keeping of any cow, goat, horse, sheep or any
other animal of like species in or on any lot, pen, building, parcel of land, stable or other enclosure in
the city unless he or she can demonstrate a personal adverse effect caused by the object of his or her
complaint.
(4) Each lot, pen, building, stable or other enclosure in the city in or on which any of the abovenamed
animals or other species are kept, fed, bred, stabled, pastured or housed shall have a suitable
manure box or container which shall be securely screened or otherwise protected from flies, vermin
and rodents and shall be cleaned out and disinfected at least once a week. Manure from such boxes or
containers shall not be left in open stacks, but removed or buried.
Sec. 2.06.008 Keeping fowl, rabbits or pigeons
It shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the following:
(1) Keep, harbor, maintain or permit the presence on any lot or parcel of land within the city of any
poultry, fowl or rabbits, of any kind, sex or description, closer than one hundred (100) feet to any
building being occupied by humans, and then not more than one for every ten (10) square feet of
floor or ground area.
(2) Keep any poultry, fowl or rabbits within any structure in the city without scraping the floor of
the room, coop, box or compartment and thoroughly cleaning the area within which such fowl are
kept at least once every forty-eight (48) hours and so maintaining such structure or enclosure that no
offensive odors are emitted therefrom.
(3) Keep any chickens or turkeys within any structure the interior of which is not whitewashed at
least once every six (6) months and without spraying crude oil or some disinfectant on the roosting
places at least once in each calendar month to discourage insects, fleas, mites and flies.
(4) Keep any pigeons, the coop, pen, structure or enclosure of which is not kept clean and free of
offensive odors, or is less than a distance of fifty (50) feet measured in a straight line from the nearest
point of the pen, enclosure or other structure in which such pigeons are kept to the nearest point of
any residence, church, school, convalescent home or nursing home other than the residence of the
keeper, possessor or owner of said pigeons, or the loft space of which is less than twelve (12) cubic
feet per pigeon.
Sec. 2.06.009 Additional requirements for keeping pigeons
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to breed, raise or keep pigeons within the city, except Antwerp
messenger or homing pigeons commonly called carrier pigeons.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to keep or harbor on any lot or tract within the city more
than one hundred (100) pigeons. Every person who owns, controls, keeps, maintains or harbors any pigeons in
the city shall at all times keep them confined in proper cages or lofts; provided, however, Antwerp messenger or
homing pigeons may be released for exercise or performance upon the condition that the owner or person who
has possession of such pigeons shall not permit them to alight upon buildings or property of others without
consent; and provided further the Antwerp messenger or homing pigeon commonly called carrier pigeon shall
have upon its wing or tail or upon its leg a band or ring with the name of the owner or an identification or
registration number stamped thereon when being permitted to race or to fly for necessary exercise and training
and under restraint and control of its owner.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 56/362
(Ordinance 1208, sec. 1, adopted 4/11/16)
CHAPTER 3
BUILDING REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 3.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 3.01.001 Violations; penalty
(a) The following shall be unlawful, and the omission or commission of any of the following acts is hereby
declared a misdemeanor:
(1) The failure of any person to comply with any applicable provision of this chapter;
(2) The violation by any person of any provision of this chapter;
(3) Any action by any person which circumvents or defeats the purposes and requirements of [this
chapter];
(4) Any action which impedes, inhibits or restricts the ability of any official charged with a duty to
act under this chapter to carry out the duties imposed by this chapter.
(b) Upon conviction of any such offense, the person so convicted shall be fined in an amount determined
under section 1.01.009 of this code.
(2004 Code, sec. 3.01.014)
ARTICLE 3.02 TECHNICAL AND CONSTRUCTION CODES AND STANDARDS
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 3.02.001–3.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Building Code*
Sec. 3.02.031 Adoption
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the city secretary and the city, marked
and designated as the International Building Code, 2015 edition, including all appendix chapters, as published
by the International Code Council, Incorporated, is hereby adopted as the building code of the city for regulating
and controlling the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location,
relocation, replacement, addition to and use or maintenance of building systems in the city and providing for the
issuance of permits and the collection of fees therefor. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and
terms of the 2015 edition of the International Building Code, published by the International Code Council,
Incorporated, and on file in the office of the city secretary, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part
hereof as if fully set out in this division.
Sec. 3.02.032 Amendments
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 57/362
The following sections of the International Building Code, 2015 edition, published by the International Code
Council, Incorporated, are revised as follows:
Section 101.1. Title. These provisions shall be known as the International Building Code of the city and shall be
cited as such and will be referred to as “this code.”
Section 103.2. Appointment. The building official shall be the city manager or chief building official.
(Ordinance 1224, sec. 1, adopted 11/14/16)
Sec. 3.02.033 Eligibility for building permit
(a) Persons eligible to apply for and receive approved building permits for (i) new construction, and (ii)
repairs or renovations valued in an amount more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the valuation of the property
(not including land), are only those who qualify under one (1) or more of the following criteria:
(1) A contractor licensed and insured to do construction work as a “contractor” within the city.
(2) The owner of the property who certifies that the structure to be built or the structure on which
the repairs are to be performed is the single-family residential structure in which he lives.
(b) Persons eligible to apply for and receive approved building permits for repairs or renovations valued in an
amount less than or equal to twenty-five percent (25%) of the valuation of the property (not including land) are
only those who qualify under one (1) or more of the following criteria:
(1) A contractor licensed and insured to do construction work as a “contractor” within the city.
(2) The owner of the property.
(2004 Code, sec. 3.01.008)
Sec. 3.02.034 Interference; inspection tag
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere in any manner with any building being constructed on any
premises or in any building during construction. In inspecting the construction of any building or premises, the
building inspector shall leave a tag or notice attached to the building structure. This notice shall state clearly
whether the building is approved or is to be kept open for further inspection. No person shall lath, seal or in any
manner conceal any construction until such person has been informed that such has been approved by the
building inspector. The general contractor or owner shall be held responsible for any violation of this section and
shall be liable to the penalties provided. (2004 Code, sec. 3.01.009)
Sec. 3.02.035 Permit and inspection fees
Permit and inspection fees required under this division are as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this
code. (2004 Code, sec. 3.01.011)
Sec. 3.02.036 Licensing of contractors
(a) Requirements. No building permit shall be issued to any building contractor (as defined herein) or person
for work to be performed pursuant to a building permit unless such building contractor or person is registered
with the city manager in accordance with the following provisions:
(1) Application. Licensing as a building contractor shall be made upon forms provided by the city
manager, and all information requested shall be submitted by the applicant.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 58/362
(2) Renewal. Licenses must be renewed annually in order to acquire building permits or continue
work on currently issued building permits.
(3) Failure to maintain bond or insurance. Failure to keep the proper and valid bond or insurance in
force will result in termination of a license and invalidate any active building permits issued to the
building contractor or person. Should such bond or insurance expire, all fees, including all permit
fees, must be paid again upon renewal of licensing.
(4) Revocation or denial. Licenses may be revoked or rejected by the city manager for the
following reasons:
(A) Failure to obtain and keep in effect the required bond or insurance;
(B) Failure to fully complete the license form;
(C) Failure to pay any required fees;
(D) Refusal to correct any code violation after notice; or
(E) Continuous or repeated violations of this code.
(5) Exception for work by homeowner on own residence. No license shall be required for a
building permit for a residential structure to be issued to a homeowner who occupies the property as
his permanent residence or is constructing a new permanent residence and acts as the general
contractor for the work performed. This provision can only be used once every two years unless the
permit is issued on the same residence. Any subcontractor who performs work on said residence must
meet all city and state licensing requirements.
(6) Exception for volunteers. Volunteers, unpaid contractors, shall be exempt from the licensing
requirement.
(7) Fee. The annual license fee shall be as provided in appendix A to this code.
(2004 Code, sec. 3.01.013)
(8) Issuance of permits.
(A) No permit shall be issued for commercial construction unless the applicant is licensed as
a general contractor or is otherwise exempted under this section.
(B) No commercial construction work requiring a building permit shall be performed by any
building contractor, owner or any person without having first obtained a building permit from
the city. When any building contractor, owner or any person fails to obtain a building permit for
a job before commencing work on such job, such person becomes liable for a double charge for
the permit and other penalties as set out in this division.
(Ordinance 1203 adopted 12/14/15)
(9) Maintenance work. An owner or maintenance worker as defined in this section shall be exempt
from the licensing requirements of this section if the work to be performed is listed below in this
subsection. The work may be required to be permitted.
(A) Electrical maintenance work. Includes the repair, maintenance and replacement of
existing electrical apparatus, existing lighting fixtures, and existing plugs and switches.
Electrical maintenance work does not include changing of electrical service and the installation
of new breaker panels or wiring. Any person who erects, builds or installs electrical [work] not
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 59/362
already in existence may not be classified as an electrical maintenance worker. Such
maintenance person shall not engage in electrical work for the general public.
(B) Plumbing maintenance work. Includes the repair, maintenance and replacement of
existing potable water piping, existing sanitary waste and vent piping, existing plumbing
fixtures, and existing electrical water heaters. Plumbing maintenance work does not include
cutting into fuel gas plumbing systems and the installation of gas-fueled water heaters. A
person who erects, builds, or installs plumbing not already in existence may not be classified as
a plumbing maintenance worker. Such maintenance person shall not engage in plumbing work
for the general public.
(C) Air conditioning and refrigeration maintenance work. Includes any work required for the
continued normal performance of an environmental air-conditioning system, commercial
refrigeration system or equipment, or process cooling or heating system.
(D) Building maintenance work. Construction maintenance work that includes the repair,
maintenance and replacement of sheetrock, doors, siding, and windows of any existing
building. Building maintenance work does not include any new construction or structural
change of an existing building, or repair of any load-bearing or structural element of any
building. Such building maintenance worker shall not engage in construction work for the
general public.
(10) Exception for work on accessory building by owner of dwelling. No license shall be required
for a building permit to be issued to a non-occupied owner of a one- or two-family dwelling unit for
work on an accessory building. An accessory building includes carports, outbuildings and other
similar structures which do not include any livable area.
(11) Appeals. Any building contractor or person whose license has been revoked or rejected by the
city manager may appeal to the city council as follows:
(A) Written notice of the appeal must be made to the city council within ten calendar days of
the date on which the city manager rendered his decision.
(B) The city council shall hear the appeal within 30 calendar days from the notice of appeal
filed by the contractor. During the pendency of the appeal, the contractor shall not perform any
additional work without the approval of the city manager.
(C) The decision of the city council on any appeal taken under this section shall be final and
binding.
(12) Insurance.
(A) Any person or persons, firm, corporation or association required to be licensed pursuant
to this section and seeking to acquire any permit for the type of work identified below shall first
furnish the city administrator with a comprehensive general liability insurance certificate in the
following amounts: One hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for injuries or death to one
person, three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for injuries or death to more than one
person and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for the damage to property in any one event.
(B) The comprehensive general liability insurance required shall be per occurrence, including
coverage for bodily injury and property damage, with products liability and completed
operations coverage. The insurance coverage shall include a provision that, in the event such
coverage is canceled or reduced, the insurance carrier shall notify the city manager at least ten
(10) days prior to such cancellation or reduction in coverage.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 60/362
(C) Prior to issuance of any such permit, such applicant shall furnish the city manager with a
certificate of insurance evidencing the required insurance coverage.
(D) Any applicant's permit shall be automatically suspended during any period in which the
applicant fails to maintain in effect the required insurance.
(13) Proof of ownership or residency by homeowners. Prior to issuance of the type of permit
required under this chapter, the city manager shall require that homeowners show proof of ownership
and/or residency. Documents of proof may include but are not limited to the following: current
driver's license, property deeds, tax statements, or utility statements.
(b) Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth below:
Contractor. Any person or entity who undertakes to, attempts to, or submits a price or bid or offers to construct,
supervise, superintend, oversee, schedule, direct, or in any manner assume charge of the construction, alteration,
repair, improvement, movement, demolition, putting up, tearing down, or furnishing labor to install material or
equipment for any building, highway, road, railroad, sewer, grading, excavation, pipeline, public utility,
structure, project development, housing, housing development, improvement, or any other construction
undertaking. “Contractor” includes, but is not limited to, prime contractor, electrical contractor, or construction
manager of any kind whatsoever, including, but not limited to, residential construction manager, construction
consultant, architect, and/or engineer who conducts or provides any activity or service described herein other
than normal architectural or engineering services.
Excavation contractor. A contractor authorized to perform excavations in public rights-of-way.
General contractor. A contractor authorized to do commercial construction and residential construction.
Maintenance work. Repair work and all other work required for the continued normal performance of any
commercial property.
Maintenance worker. A regular bona fide employee of an owner, as opposed to an independent contractor, who
performs maintenance work.
Owner. Any person or entity who possesses legal title to the property, or such person or entity who may be the
operator or manager of the property by written authorization of the owner.
Paving contractor. A contractor authorized to pave sidewalks and/or approaches in public rights-of-way.
Paving/streets contractor. A contractor authorized to do street work.
Residential contractor. A contractor authorized to do residential homebuilding and remodeling.
(2004 Code, sec. 3.01.013)
Sec. 3.02.037 Identification on vehicles of contractors
Any person engaged in the contracting business in the city shall display in a permanent way on his or her trucks,
vans or any other vehicles used in transporting materials and tools to and from any job the correct name and
address of such person (or firm). Said display shall be in lettering no smaller than three (3) inches in height,
readily visible and clearly legible at all times. (2004 Code, sec. 3.01.003(a))
Sec. 3.02.038 Display of placard on building where work is being done
Any person engaged in the actual work authorized by a building permit (whether as an owner or contractor) shall
display a placard provided by the city on the front of the building where said work is being done. The sign must
be placed in a location attached to the front of the building where it is clearly visible from the street. It must be
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 61/362
affixed before work commences and must remain in place until removed by the building official after the final
inspection. (2004 Code, sec. 3.01.003(b))
Sec. 3.02.039 Asbestos requirements
(a) Definitions. Any terms used in this section, including “public building,” “renovate” and “demolish,” which
are defined in the Texas Asbestos Health Protection Act (chapter 1954, Texas Occupations Code) and the
regulations of the state department of health services (the “Texas Health Department”) promulgated pursuant to
Texas Asbestos Health Protection Act, the Clean Air Act including the National Emission Standards for
Hazardous Air Pollutants (42 U.S.C. §7401 et seq.) and the regulations of the Environmental Protection Agency
promulgated pursuant to the Clean Air Act shall have the meaning assigned to such terms in those laws or
regulations, as those laws and regulations may be amended, from time to time. These statutes and regulations
and the decisions of courts and agencies interpreting them are referred to in this section as the “applicable law.”
(b) Applicability to commercial or public buildings. The requirements of this section apply to any application
for a building permit for a project that involves demolition or renovation of a commercial or public building.
(c) Asbestos survey or certificate required. Prior [to] the issuance of a building permit for the renovation or
demolition of a commercial or public building, the applicant shall provide the city with the following with
respect to the structure or structures which is the subject of the building permit application:
(1) An asbestos survey meeting the requirements of applicable law by a person licensed to conduct
the survey pursuant to applicable law; or
(2) A certificate from a licensed engineer or architect that meets all of the requirements of
applicable law.
(d) If survey shows presence of asbestos. If an asbestos survey obtained by the applicant shows the presence
of any asbestos in the structure or structures which is or are the subject of the proposed project, then the
applicant shall execute a sworn addendum to applicant's application for a building permit certifying the presence
of asbestos and that the applicant will address the asbestos in a manner consistent with applicable law relating to
its abatement or removal. The addendum shall be on a form approved by the city manager which is consistent
with this subsection.
(Ordinance 1202 adopted 12/14/15)
Secs. 3.02.040–3.02.080 Reserved
Division 3. One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code
Sec. 3.02.081 Adoption
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the city secretary and the city, marked
and designated as the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2015 edition,
including all appendix chapters, as published by the International Code Council, Incorporated, is hereby adopted
as the residential building code for one- and two-family dwellings of the city for regulating and controlling the
design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation,
replacement, addition to and use or maintenance of residential one- and two-family dwelling systems in the city
and providing for the issuance of permits and the collection of fees therefor. Each and all of the regulations,
provisions, conditions and terms of the International Residential Code of One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2015
edition, published by the International Code Council, Incorporated, and on file in the office of the city secretary,
are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this division.
Sec. 3.02.082 Amendments
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 62/362
The following sections of the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2015 edition,
published by the International Code Council, Incorporated, are revised as follows:
Section R101.1 Title. These provisions shall be known as the International Residential Code for One- and Two-
Family Dwellings of the city and shall be cited as such and will be referred to as “this code.”
Section R103.2. Appointment. The building official shall be the city manager or chief building official.
(Ordinance 1224, sec. 2, adopted 11/14/16)
Secs. 3.02.083–3.02.130 Reserved
Division 4. Energy Conservation Code*
Sec. 3.02.131 Adoption
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the city secretary and the city, being
marked and designated as the International Energy Conservation Code, 2015 edition, as published by the
International Code Council, Incorporated, is hereby adopted as the code of the city for regulating and controlling
the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation,
replacement, addition to and use or maintenance of the building envelope, mechanical, lighting and power
systems in the city, and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such International
Energy Conservation Code, 2015 edition, published by the International Code Council, Incorporated, on file in
the office of the city secretary, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this
division. (Ordinance 1224, sec. 3, adopted 11/14/16)
Sec. 3.02.132 Amendments
The following section of the International Energy Conservation Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
101.1. Title. These regulations shall be known as the International Energy Conservation Code of Iowa Park,
hereinafter referred to as “this code.”
(2004 Code, sec. 3.11.002)
Secs. 3.02.133–3.02.180 Reserved
Division 5. Electrical Code*
Part I. In General
Sec. 3.02.181 Adoption
The minimum requirements for the installation and maintenance of electric wiring systems and apparatus shall
be those minimum standards and requirements set forth in the National Electrical Code, 2014 edition, published
by the National Electrical Code Committee, and on file in the office of the city secretary, which are hereby
referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this division. (Ordinance 1224, sec. 4, adopted
11/14/16)
Sec. 3.02.182 Standards for apparatus, materials and fixtures
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 63/362
It shall be unlawful for any person to install or use any electrical apparatus, material, appliances or fixtures for
use in connection with wiring of any kind in the city unless such apparatus, materials or fixtures meet the
requirements of the American Insurance Association and bear the Underwriters' label, or unless the board of
examiners issues a special qualification. (2004 Code, sec. 3.03.061)
Sec. 3.02.183 Conformance with standards of Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc.
All material and apparatus used in electrical installations shall conform with applicable standards of the
Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., and bear the Underwriters' label or have the approval of the board of examiners
of the city. (2004 Code, sec. 3.03.063)
Sec. 3.02.184 Loose or dangerous wiring
No person shall permit pieces of wire to be left on the surface of buildings, or in streets, alleys, or roadways, or
dead ends to dangle from poles or buildings, or in any manner leave old or new wire in a condition that is
dangerous to life and property. Anyone not correcting such situations within five (5) working days of written
notice shall be subject to service disconnection by the power company. The chief electrical inspector will request
disconnection by the power company in writing, and service will be disconnected by the power company within
twenty-four (24) hours of receipt of the notice. (2004 Code, sec. 3.03.064)
Sec. 3.02.185 Interference; inspection tag
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere in any manner with any electric wiring being installed on any
premises or in any building during construction. In inspecting the electric wiring of any building or premises, the
electrical inspector shall leave a tag or notice attached to the service entrance switch. This notice shall state
clearly whether the wiring is approved or is to be kept open for further inspection. No person shall lath, seal or in
any manner conceal any wiring until such person has been informed that such wiring has been approved by the
electrical inspector. The general contractor or owner shall be held responsible for any violation of this section
and shall be liable to the penalties provided herein. (2004 Code, sec. 3.03.065)
Sec. 3.02.186 Clearance to connect or reconnect service
It shall be unlawful for any person or any public service company serving the city to connect electricity to any
premises of any nature, kind or description without first obtaining a clearance from the electrical inspector's
office. Whenever service is discontinued to any building and/or premises (except private residences and duplex
apartments where service is carried over for a continuing occupancy), such clearance is required for
reconnecting. This shall mean that anytime a premises is vacated the electrical inspector must satisfy himself
that no code violation exists. There will be no charge made for a clearance covering such premises, and
clearance will be issued as often as necessary. (2004 Code, sec. 3.03.066)
Sec. 3.02.187 Contractors
(a) Registration required. Any person desiring to engage in the business of electrical contracting within the
city shall register with the city, in the city hall, the correct name, address and telephone number under which he
will be doing business.
(b) Master electrician required. Any person engaged in the electrical contracting business within the city shall
be or have continuously in his employment a qualified master electrician and shall file in the city hall the correct
name, address, and license number of such master electrician, which master electrician shall have actual
supervision of the installation, maintenance, and/or repair of any electrical wiring, device, material, and/or
equipment within the city, and shall be responsible for carrying out the provisions of this division in its entirety.
(1) Whenever a master electrician shall leave or be discharged from the employment of any person
who is required by this division to be or have in his employment a master electrician, a notice in
writing thereof shall be given immediately by both the person and the master electrician to the city
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 64/362
hall, and the permit privileges of such master electrician shall, without further order or action, stand
suspended, which suspension shall remain effective until both such master electrician and any other
person shall have first complied with the provisions of this division.
(2) Any electrical work in progress or contracted for by any person who is required to be or have in
his employment a master electrician shall, without further action or notice, stop immediately upon the
removal, by any means, of the qualifying master electrician, and the permit privileges of such person
shall, without further order or action, stand suspended, and shall not be resumed until both such
person and any other master electrician shall have fully complied with the provisions of this division.
(3) No master electrician shall represent or be employed as the qualifying master electrician for
more than one person at one time, nor shall he secure permits for any other than the person by whom
he is employed as the qualifying electrician.
(c) Display of identity on vehicles. Any person engaged in the electrical contracting business in the city shall
display, in a permanent way, on his trucks, vans or any other vehicles used in transporting materials and tools to
and from any electrical job, the correct name and address of such person (or firm). Such display shall be in
lettering no smaller than three (3) inches in height, readily visible and clearly legible at all times.
(d) Carrying of license; unlawful use of license. No person shall engage in the occupation of master or
journeyman electrician within the city without having his license in his possession at all times while supervising
work being performed or performing actual work related to the electrical industry. No person shall allow the use
of his master or journeyman electrician's license, directly or indirectly, by any other person for the purpose of
obtaining a permit to construct electrical installations or to actually perform construction of electrical
installations.
(2004 Code, sec. 3.03.041)
State law reference–Texas Electrical Safety and Licensing Act, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, ch. 1305.
Secs. 3.02.188–3.02.220 Reserved
Part II. Electrical Inspector
Sec. 3.02.221 Office created; qualifications; appointment
(a) Office created. There is hereby created the office of the chief electrical inspector of the city, within which
may be assistant electrical [inspectors].
(b) Qualifications. The chief electrical inspector and his or her assistants shall be competent persons of good
moral character; each shall have had adequate experience in the electrical field, such adequacy being established
by the board; each shall have adequate knowledge of current and approved methods and practices relating to
electrical installations; and each shall have passed the examination in the city for journeyman electrician or
master electrician.
(c) Appointment. The chief electrical inspector and the assistant electrical inspectors shall be appointed by the
chief executive officer with the approval of the governing body after examination by the examining board.
(2004 Code, sec. 3.03.021)
Sec. 3.02.222 Powers and duties generally
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 65/362
(a) The electrical inspector shall inspect all installations, alterations and repairs of electrical work in consumer
installations as hereinafter set out. He shall be allowed twenty-four (24) hours, Saturdays, Sundays and holidays
recognized by the city excluded, to make such inspection. For an approved installation, he shall attach a green
tag or card; for a disapproved installation, he shall attach a red tag or card and immediately notify the master
electrician performing work on said premises, in writing and by telephone, specifying the exact deficiency
existing, and shall allow a reasonable time, as determined by the electrical inspector, to correct said deficiency. It
shall be a violation of this division to remove, deface, damage or mutilate a tag or card which the electrical
inspector has attached to an installation. If this corrective action is not begun immediately or the deficiency is
not corrected within the prescribed time, the electrical inspector shall notify the owner or his agent by letter and
copy of previous notice to the master electrician and shall, if he believes public welfare endangered, in writing,
order the electric supply to the premises discontinued.
(b) When in the performance of his duties and as may be necessary for the performance of his duties, the
electrical inspector shall have the right to enter any consumer's premises at all reasonable hours for the purpose
of making tests or inspections of the electrical wiring, appliances, or apparatus contained therein. When on duty,
the electrical inspector shall have adequate identification with photograph, furnished by the city, to indicate his
position.
(c) The electrical inspector shall keep, or cause to be kept, a written record of all permits, licenses, and
inspections which are required under this division. He also shall keep a written record of all condemnations and
disconnects of electrical installations resulting from condemnations.
(d) The electrical inspector shall stop the installation, alteration, operation or repair of any electrical work on
or in any consumer's premises when in the inspector's opinion the work is being done in a reckless, careless, or
unsafe manner or in a manner which violates the provisions of this division. In the event a formal complaint is
necessary, it shall be filed by the chief electrical inspector.
(e) Upon determining that particular work should stop, the electrical inspector shall post a notice to that effect
on the consumer's premises and notify the permit holder in writing and by telephone. Thereafter, no person shall
proceed with the installation until the electrical inspector has cancelled the stop-work notice in writing and by
telephone.
(f) The electrical inspector shall turn over to the city all moneys and payments received by his office.
(2004 Code, sec. 3.03.022)
Sec. 3.02.223 Resignation required prior to taking examination for electrician's license
Should a full-time electrical inspector desire to take an examination for master electrician or industrial
electrician, he must resign his position and take the examination after the effective date of his termination. (2004
Code, sec. 3.03.023)
Sec. 3.02.224 Conflict of interest
Electrical inspectors shall not recommend any electrician or have any monetary interest in relation to any
electrician or have any monetary interest in relation to any electrical contractor or in any company, nor shall he
do any electrical work for any private party or any company at any time while he is in the employment of the
city. In an emergency, the city may contract with a master electrician to conduct electrical inspections during the
absence of the electrical inspector without creating a conflict of interest. Determination of conflict of interest
will be at the sole discretion of the chief executive officer of the city. (2004 Code, sec. 3.03.024)
Sec. 3.02.225 Inspection of wiring; order to repair defects
(a) The electrical inspector may at his discretion inspect and reinspect the wiring of all public premises (and
premises used by the public) and shall notify in writing the owner and occupant of such premises to repair such
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 66/362
defects as may be found, and any person refusing or failing to make such repairs within forty-eight (48) hours
after notification shall be subject to the penalties prescribed in this chapter.
(b) The electrical inspector is herein given authority to inspect and reinspect all house electrical wiring, and
when said electrical wiring is found to be in a condition dangerous to life and property, he shall notify the owner
thereof at once to replace all electrical wiring in a safe condition and at the same time have the electrical service
discontinued until same is repaired and placed in a safe condition.
(2004 Code, sec. 3.03.025)
Sec. 3.02.226 Police powers; deviation from minimum standards
The electrical inspectors shall be endowed with all the police powers necessary for the proper enforcement of
this division and shall be responsible for its strict enforcement. The electrical inspectors shall not deviate from
the minimum standards or rules and regulations contained herein without the written approval of the board of
electrical examiners. (2004 Code, sec. 3.03.026)
Sec. 3.02.227 Liability
The electrical inspectors shall not be liable for damage arising by reason of duties performed under the
provisions of this division. (2004 Code, sec. 3.03.027)
Secs. 3.02.228–3.02.250 Reserved
Part III. Permits and Inspections
Sec. 3.02.251 Permit required
(a) No person shall begin work on any electrical installation within the city without first securing a permit
from the office of the electrical inspector; provided, however, no permit shall be required for minor work such as
repairing flush switches, replacing fuses, or changing lamp sockets or receptacles. Permits will be issued to such
master electrician who qualifies under the provisions of this division or to his duly authorized representatives,
and to homeowners who qualify as set forth herein. When a qualified person or a homeowner fails to obtain a
permit before commencing work on such job, such person becomes liable for double charge for the permit
and/or other penalties as set forth in this division.
(b) In order to qualify as a duly authorized representative, a card must be on file at city hall signed by both the
master electrician and the authorized representative.
(c) No electrical installation work shall be done by a maintenance electrician without having first obtained a
permit from the office of the electrical inspector; provided, however, no permit shall be required for minor work
such as repairing flush switches, replacing fuses, or changing lamp sockets or receptacles or any work which
comes under the classification of maintenance work as described herein. When the holder of such a license fails
to obtain a permit for a job before commencing work on such job, such person becomes liable for a double
charge for the permit and other penalties as set out in this division.
(2004 Code, sec. 3.03.081)
Sec. 3.02.252 Issuance of permit
Homeowners and holders of licenses shall make application for a permit to the electrical inspector or to his
representative. Upon proper application for a permit and after payment of the required inspection fees, the
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 67/362
electrical inspector, or his representative, shall issue the applicant a permit for the proposed installation. (2004
Code, sec. 3.03.082)
Sec. 3.02.253 Homeowner's permit
(a) Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the issuance of permits to owners of single-unit dwellings for
repair work or additions in such single-unit dwellings, provided that said owner lives in the single-unit dwelling
and further that he complies with the provisions of this division and signs the required affidavit when applying
for a permit. However, nothing herein shall be construed to make mandatory the issuance of such permit if in the
opinion of the city manager it is not in the best interest of the city and general welfare to do so. If the city
manager denies such permit, the affected property owner may appeal to the city council within five working
days of the denial for a public appearance at the next regular meeting of the council to state his case and request
issuance of said permit. Such appeal must be in writing addressed to the mayor and city manager.
(b) In the case of a homeowner's permit, he shall also sign an affidavit showing ownership of the dwelling and
his bona fide intention to live therein. The affidavit shall also state that the homeowner will perform all of the
electrical construction without any physical assistance from anyone except members of his immediate family
living in his household. A homeowner's permit shall apply to single-unit residential property only and only then
if he lives in the unit. A homeowner shall not install wiring in any portion of a duplex, triplex, apartment,
commercial, retail, industrial or any rental property, excluding mobile home parks. The homeowner of a mobile
home residing in a mobile home park may install wiring up to the meter loop. Electrical work on the meter loops
and service drops in mobile home parks shall be treated as rental property, and all work performed therein shall
be done by a licensed electrician.
(2004 Code, sec. 3.03.083)
Sec. 3.02.254 Completion of stopped work
Whenever a permit holder desires to complete any work which has been stopped for any reason hereinbefore
listed and such permit holder has complied with the provisions of this division, then no additional fee will be
charged for that portion of the work for which a fee has been paid. (2004 Code, sec. 3.03.084)
Sec. 3.02.255 Permit for temporary service
(a) Permits may be granted for temporary services to any licensed master electrician for a predetermined and
limited time by application for a temporary permit and the payment of the proper inspection fee.
(b) The application shall state the time required for temporary service. Temporary service installations shall
generally conform to Drawing No. 1 on file in the electrical inspector's office. Any temporary service
installation that does not fully conform to code specifications shall not be approved by the electrical inspector.
Inspection fees shall be the same as for a standard installation.
(c) The electrical inspector may cause the electric supply company to disconnect any temporary service
promptly on the expiration date of each temporary permit after proper written notification.
(2004 Code, sec. 3.03.085)
Sec. 3.02.256 Adding work to permit
Additional work during construction and before final inspection may be added to the original permit as an addon
at the regular item price by obtaining and paying for an add-on permit. (2004 Code, sec. 3.03.086)
Sec. 3.02.257 Fees
Permit and inspection fees required under this division are as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this
code. (2004 Code, sec. 3.03.087)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 68/362
Sec. 3.02.258 Required inspections; notification that work is ready for inspection
(a) There shall be a rough-in inspection where required and a final inspection of each installation. For roughin
inspection, the permit holder whose installation is ready for inspection shall allow the electrical inspector's
office twenty-four (24) hours, Saturdays, Sundays and holidays recognized by the city excepted, before
proceeding with work or installation or concealing such work or installation.
(b) The same notice shall be given for a final inspection.
(2004 Code, sec. 3.03.096)
Sec. 3.02.259 Reinspections
(a) When any electrical work regulated by this division is reported to the electrical inspector as ready for final
inspection and upon such inspection the electrical work does not meet all requirements of this division, the
permit holder shall be notified by telephone and tag of the defects existing, and he shall correct such defects
promptly and request a reinspection by the electrical inspector. The permit holder shall pay an additional charge
for each reinspection required before final approval is given.
(b) If, for reason of faulty work, negligence or omission, changes or additions are required by the inspector, or
if an incorrect address is given on the permit necessitating an additional trip by the inspector, a reinspection
permit must be obtained and a charge will be made for each extra trip.
(c) This rule shall not apply where periodic inspection is required during the progress of construction.
(2004 Code, sec. 3.03.097)
Sec. 3.02.260 Concealment of work
(a) Where electric wiring or apparatus is to be hidden from view by permanent placement of parts of a
building or otherwise concealed, the permit holder shall notify the inspector and have an inspection made, and
such wiring or apparatus shall not be concealed by any person until it has been inspected and approved.
(b) In the event such wiring and apparatus have been concealed, the electrical inspector may require the
removal of such concealing parts for inspections and require a reinspection permit and fee.
(2004 Code, sec. 3.03.098)
Secs. 3.02.261–3.02.310 Reserved
Division 6. Mechanical Code*
Sec. 3.02.311 Adoption
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the city secretary and the city, marked
and designated as the International Mechanical Code, 2015 edition, including all appendix chapters, as published
by the International Code Council, Incorporated, is hereby adopted as the mechanical code of the city for
regulating and controlling the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair,
location, relocation, replacement, addition to and use or maintenance of mechanical systems in the city and
providing for the issuance of permits and the collection of fees therefor. Each and all of the regulations,
provision, conditions and terms of the International Mechanical Code, 2015 addition, published by the
International Code Council, Incorporated, and on file in the office of the city secretary, are hereby referred to,
adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this division.
Sec. 3.02.312 Amendments
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 69/362
The following sections of the International Mechanical Code, 2015 edition, published by the International Code
Council, Incorporated are revised as follows:
Section 101.1. Title. These provisions shall be known as the International Mechanical Code of the city and shall
be cited as such and will be referred to as “this code.”
Section 103.2. Appointment. The building official shall be the city manager or chief building official.
(Ordinance 1224, sec.5, adopted 11/14/16)
Sec. 3.02.313 Identification on vehicles of contractors
Any person engaged in the contracting business in the city shall display, in a permanent way, on his trucks, vans
or any other vehicles used in transporting materials and tools to and from any job, the correct name and address
of such person (or firm), which display shall be in lettering no smaller than three (3) inches in height, readily
visible and clearly legible at all times. (2004 Code, sec. 3.05.003)
Sec. 3.02.314 Interference; inspection tag
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere in any manner with any mechanical installation being installed on
any premises or in any building during construction. In inspecting the mechanical installation of any building or
premises, the mechanical inspector shall leave a tag or notice attached to a mechanical apparatus. This notice
shall state clearly whether the installation is approved or is to be kept open for further inspection. No person
shall lath, seal or in any manner conceal any mechanical installation until such person has been informed that
such installation has been approved by the mechanical inspector. The general contractor or owner shall be held
responsible for any violation of this section and shall be liable to the penalties provided herein. (2004 Code, sec.
3.05.004)
Sec. 3.02.315 Permit and inspection fees
Permit and inspection fees required under this division are as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this
code. (2004 Code, sec. 3.05.005)
Secs. 3.02.316–3.02.360 Reserved
Division 7. Plumbing Code*
Part I. In General
Sec. 3.02.361 Adoption
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the city secretary and the city, marked
and designated as the International Plumbing Code, 2015 edition, including all appendix chapters, as published
by the International Code Council, Incorporated, is hereby adopted as the plumbing code of the city for
regulating and controlling the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration,
repaired, location, relocation, replacement, addition to and use or maintenance of plumbing systems in the city
and providing for the issuance of permits and the collection of fees therefor. Each and all of the regulations,
provisions, conditions and terms of the International Plumbing Code, 2015 edition, published by the
International Code Council, Incorporated, and on file in the office of the city secretary, are hereby referred to,
adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this division.
Sec. 3.02.362 Amendments
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 70/362
The following sections of the International Plumbing Code, 2015 edition, published by the International Code
Council, Incorporated, are revised as follows:
Section 101.1. Title. These provisions shall be known as the International Plumbing Code of the city and shall be
cited as such and will be referred to as “this code.”
Section 103.2 Appointment. The building official shall be the city manager or chief building official.
(Ordinance 1224, sec. 6, adopted 11/14/16)
Sec. 3.02.363 Registration of contractors; bond or insurance
Each plumber who desires to conduct business within the city limits shall register with the city said desire and
post a five thousand dollar ($5,000.00) bond to guarantee faithful performance. A plumbing contractor may
furnish the city with an insurance certificate in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for
injuries or death to one person, three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for injuries or death to more than
one person or twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for the property damage in any one accident in lieu of
the bond. The insurance policy will include a provision that, in the event such coverage is canceled or reduced,
the insurance carrier will notify city hall at least ten (10) days prior to such cancellation or reduction in
coverage. (2004 Code, sec. 3.06.003)
Sec. 3.02.364 Identification on vehicles of contractors
Any person engaged in the contracting business in the city shall display in a permanent way, on his trucks, vans
or any other vehicles used in transporting materials and tools to and from any job, the correct name and address
of such person (or firm), which display shall be in lettering no smaller than three (3) inches in height, readily
visible and clearly legible at all times. (2004 Code, sec. 3.06.005)
Sec. 3.02.365 Denial of homeowner's permit
No provisions of the plumbing code of the city shall be construed to make mandatory the issuance of a permit to
a property owner performing construction, repair, replacement or other plumbing work on any structure
identified as his property, home, homestead, or intended place of residence if, in the opinion of the city manager,
denial of said permit is in the best interest of the city and general welfare in preserving the intent of the
plumbing code. In the event the city manager denies such permit, the affected property owner may appeal the
decision to the city council within five (5) working days of the denial for a public appearance at the next regular
meeting of the council to state his case and request issuance of said permit. Such appeal must be in writing
addressed to the mayor and city manager. (2004 Code, sec. 3.06.004)
Sec. 3.02.366 Interference; inspection tag
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere in any manner with any plumbing being installed on any premises
or in any building during construction. In inspecting the plumbing installation of any building or premises, the
plumbing inspector shall leave a tag or notice attached to a plumbing apparatus. This notice shall state clearly
whether the installation is approved or is to be kept open for further inspection. No person shall lath, seal or in
any manner conceal any plumbing until such person has been informed that such installation has been approved
by the plumbing inspector. The general contractor or owner shall be held responsible for any violation of this
section and shall be liable to the penalties provided herein. (2004 Code, sec. 3.06.006)
Sec. 3.02.367 Permit and inspection fees
Permit and inspection fees required under this division are as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this
code. (2004 Code, sec. 3.06.009)
Secs. 3.02.368–3.02.390 Reserved
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 71/362
Part II. Backflow Preventers*
Sec. 3.02.391 Installation in vaults
Vault installations of backflow preventers are limited to the double check valve type backpressure backflow
preventer. The backflow preventer shall not be buried and shall be so installed and located as to prevent any
relief opening or test cock from being submerged under water and/or dirt. A minimum of a ten (10) inch air gap
will be maintained at all times from the lowest test cock or relief opening to the bottom of the vault. All test
cocks must be plugged when not in use. (2004 Code, sec. 3.06.007)
Sec. 3.02.392 Testing
All backflow prevention devices shall be tested in accordance with the manufacturer's recommended
performance standards. Testing shall be conducted at the time of installation, then every three (3) years
thereafter. If the device is repaired or relocated. testing of the device shall be conducted at the time of the repair
or relocation and every three (3) years of service thereafter. Backflow prevention devices used in hazardous
applications shall be tested annually. All costs associated with the testing will be borne by the property owner
who will provide the city with an affidavit of the testing and certification of compliance. (Ordinance 1264
adopted 3/11/19)
Secs. 3.02.393–3.02.440 Reserved
Division 8. Gas Code*
Sec. 3.02.441 Adoption
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the city secretary and the city, marked
and designated as the International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 edition, including all appendix chapters, as published
by the International Code Council, Incorporated, is hereby adopted as the fuel gas code of the city for regulating
and controlling the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location,
relocation, replacement, addition to and use or maintenance of fuel gas systems in the city and providing for the
issuance of permits and the collection of fees therefor. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and
terms of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 edition, published by the International Code Council,
Incorporated, and on file in the office of the city secretary, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part
hereof as if fully set out in this division.
Sec. 3.02.442 Amendments
The following sections of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 edition, published by the International Code
Council, Incorporated, are revised as follows:
Section 101.1. Title. These provisions shall be known as the International Fuel Gas Code of the city and shall be
cited as such and will be referred to as “this code.”
Section 103.2. Appointment. The building official shall be the city manager or chief building official.
(Ordinance 1224, sec. 7, adopted 11/14/16)
Sec. 3.02.443 Contractors
Anyone doing any gas installation, repair or alteration other than on their personal residence owned and
occupied by same shall hold a valid plumbing license as required in the Plumbing License Law, V.T.C.A.,
Occupations Code, chapter 1301, and shall comply with the provisions in the plumbing code of the city in
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 72/362
division 7 of this article. This section shall not be interpreted to limit the operations of any franchised gas
company. (2004 Code, sec. 3.07.003)
State law reference–Plumbing License Law, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, ch. 1301.
Sec. 3.02.444 Denial of homeowner's permit
No provisions of the gas code of the city shall be construed to make mandatory the issuance of a permit to a
property owner performing construction, repair, replacement or other gas work on any structure identified as his
property, home, homestead or intended place of residence if in the opinion of the city manager denial of said
permit is in the best interest of the city and general welfare in preserving the intent of the gas code. In the event
the city manager denies such permit, the affected property owner may appeal the decision to the city council
within five (5) working days of the denial for a public appearance at the next regular meeting of the council to
state his case and request issuance of said permit. Such appeal must be in writing addressed to the mayor and
city manager. (2004 Code, sec. 3.07.004)
Sec. 3.02.445 Interference; inspection tag
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere in any manner with any gas installation being installed on any
premises or in any building during construction. In inspecting the gas installations of any building or premises,
the plumbing inspector shall leave a tag or notice attached to a plumbing apparatus. This notice shall state
clearly whether the gas is approved or is to be kept open for further inspection. No person shall lath, seal or in
any manner conceal any gas installation until such person has been informed that such installation has been
approved by the plumbing inspector. The general contractor or owner shall be held responsible for any violation
of this section and shall be liable to the penalties provided herein. (2004 Code, sec. 3.07.005)
ARTICLE 3.03 SUBSTANDARD OR DANGEROUS BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES*
Sec. 3.03.001 Definitions
The following terms, when used in this article, shall have the meanings set forth below:
Minimum standards. The criteria used for determining whether a building may be the subject of one or more of
the remedies provided in this article. The criteria are:
(1) A building does not meet the minimum standards (referred to herein as the “minimum
standards”) if any one or more of the following conditions exists with respect to that building or any
part thereof:
(A) It is dilapidated, substandard, or unfit for human habitation and a hazard to the public
health, safety, and welfare as defined in the definition of “substandard building” in this section;
(B) Regardless of its structural conditions, it is unoccupied by its owners, lessees, or other
invitees and is unsecured from authorized entry to the extent that it could be entered or used by
vagrants or other uninvited persons as a place of harborage or could be entered or used by
children; or
(C) It is boarded up, fenced, or otherwise secured in any manner if:
(i) The building constitutes a danger to the public even though secured from entry; or
(ii) The means used to secure the building are inadequate to prevent unauthorized entry
or use of the building in the manner described by subsection (B).
(2) A building or structure does not meet minimum standards if it is likely to endanger persons or
property.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 73/362
Structure. Any bulkhead, fence, shed, awning, or other structure, or any part of a structure.
Substandard building. A building is “dilapidated, substandard, or unfit for human habitation and a hazard to the
public health, safety and welfare” pursuant to subsection (1) in the definition of “minimum standards” above if
any one or more of the following conditions exist with respect to that building or any part thereof:
(1) Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit from a structure is not
of sufficient width or size or is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate means of exit, in case
of fire or panic, for all persons housed or assembled therein who would be required to, or might, use
such door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit.
(2) Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance of a building is likely to fall, or to become
detached or dislodged, or to collapse, and thereby injure persons or damage property.
(3) Whenever any portion of a structure, or any member, appurtenance or ornamentation on the
exterior thereof, is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in
place, as to be capable of resisting a normal wind pressure.
(4) Whenever any portion of a structure has settled to such an extent that the walls or other
structural portions have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case
of new construction.
(5) Whenever a building, or any portion thereof, because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, or
faulty construction, or because of the removal or movement of some portion of the ground necessary
for the purpose of supporting same, or some other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse,
or some portion of the foundation or underpinning is likely to fall or give way.
(6) Whenever for any reason whatsoever a building, or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for
the purpose for which it is used.
(7) Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members of a structure list, lean or
buckle to such an extent that a plumbline passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the
middle third of the base.
(8) Whenever a building, exclusive of the foundation, shows thirty-three percent (33%) or more
damage or deterioration to the member or members, or fifty percent (50%) or more damage or
deterioration of a nonsupporting enclosing or outside wall or covering.
(9) Whenever a building has been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake or flood or has become so
dilapidated or deteriorated as to become an attractive nuisance to children who might play therein to
their danger, or as to afford a harbor to vagrants, criminals or immoral persons, or as to enable
persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing a nuisance or unlawful or immoral acts.
(10) Any building which has been constructed or which now exists or is maintained in violation of
any specific requirement or prohibition, applicable to such building, of the building regulations and
the fire prevention code of the city, when so determined and reported by any law or ordinance of this
state or city relating to the condition, location or construction of such building.
(11) Any building which, whether or not erected in accordance with all applicable laws and
ordinances, has in any nonsupporting part, member or portion less than fifty percent (50%), or in any
supporting member less than sixty-six percent (66%), of the strength, fire-resisting qualities or
characteristics or weather-resisting qualities or characteristics required by law or ordinance in the
case of a newly constructed building of like area, height and occupancy in the same location.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 74/362
(12) Whenever a building, used or intended to be used as a dwelling, because of dilapidation,
decay, damage, or faulty construction or arrangement, or otherwise, is unsanitary or unfit for human
habitation or is in a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease, when so determined by the
health officer, or is likely to work injury to the health, safety or general welfare of those living within
or in areas near the building.
(13) Whenever a building, used or intended to be used as a dwelling, has light, air, and sanitation
facilities inadequate to protect the health, safety, or general welfare of the persons living within or the
persons who intend to occupy the dwelling.
(14) Whenever any building, by reason of obsolescence, dilapidated conditions, deterioration,
damage, electric wiring, gas connection, heating apparatus, or other cause, is in such condition to be a
fire hazard or is so situated as to provide a ready fuel supply to augment the spread and intensity of
fire arising from any cause.
(15) Whenever any building is likely to provide breeding places and habitat for snakes, rats, mice
and other vermin.
(16) Failure of a building to comply with any provision of the building code, the electrical code or
the fire prevention code of the city or any applicable statute or regulation of any governmental entity.
(17) Inadequate maintenance, neglect, decay, dilapidation, obsolescence or abandonment of a
building.
(2004 Code, sec. 3.02.001)
Sec. 3.03.002 Use or occupancy prohibited
No one may continue to use or occupy a building or any part thereof that does not comply with the minimum
standards. (2004 Code, sec. 3.02.002)
Sec. 3.03.003 Abatement procedure
(a) Order by city council. The city may, by order of the city council and in accordance with the procedures set
forth in this section:
(1) Require the vacation, relocation of occupants, securing, repair, removal, or demolition of a
building that does not meet the minimum standards; or
(2) Require the repair, removal or demolition of any structure when it finds that such structure is
likely to endanger persons or property.
(b) Complaint process. Any person, including any elected or appointed officer or employee of the city, may
file a complaint with the city requesting that a building or structure be declared in violation of the minimum
standards. The complaining party is permitted, but is not required, to contact the owner of the building or
structure and to engage in informal negotiations in an effort to reach an agreement which provides for the
abatement of such violation or violations prior to filing a complaint with the city. A complaint shall be heard,
and a determination on such complaint made, by the city council in open session.
(c) Notice of hearing. When a complaint is filed, the city shall provide written notice to the owner, lienholder
or mortgagee of the subject building or structure as follows:
(1) Contents. The notice must contain:
(A) An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the building or
structure and the property on which it is located;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 75/362
(B) A description of the violation of minimum standards that is present at the building or
structure;
(C) A statement that the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee will be required to submit at the
hearing proof of the scope of any work that may be required to comply with the minimum
standards and the time it will take to reasonably perform the work.
(2) Method of service to owner. The notice to the owner required by this subsection (c) shall be
sent as follows:
(A) If the owner has provided the city with an address for notices, the notice shall be sent to
that address.
(B) If the owner has not provided the city with an address for notices, the notice shall be sent
to the address for the owner shown in the latest property tax rolls of the city for the subject
building or structure and to the address of the subject building or structure if the owner's
address on the property tax rolls is different from the address of the subject building or
structure.
(C) All notices mailed to the owner shall be forwarded by certified mail, return receipt
requested. In addition, the notice shall be posted on the subject building or structure.
(D) In addition to the above, depositing notice in the United States mail to all lienholders and
mortgagees who can be determined from a reasonable search of instruments on file in the office
of the county clerk. If the required notice is mailed and the United States Postal Service returns
the notice as “refused” or “unclaimed,” the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice
shall be deemed as delivered.
(3) Method of service to lienholder or mortgagee. The city shall make a diligent effort to discover
each mortgagee and lienholder with respect to the subject building or structure and property by a
search of the records of the county clerk with respect to the property on which the subject building or
structure is located. Notice shall be sufficient if sent by the city to the mortgagee or lienholder or
servicing agent set forth in:
(A) The deed of trust or mortgage relating to the real property on which the subject building
or structure is located; or
(B) The latest transfer of lien or notice of assignment of such deed of trust or mortgage filed
in the records of the county clerk as of the date the notice is mailed.
This notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested.
(4) Timing of notice. The notice to the owner, lienholder or mortgagee required by this subsection
shall be mailed and posted at least seven (7) days prior to the date and time of the hearing.
(d) Hearing. The hearing shall be before the city council. At the hearing, the city council shall hear evidence
and determine whether the building or structure complies with the minimum standards. The owner, lienholder or
mortgagee has the burden of proof at the hearing to demonstrate the scope of any work that may be required to
comply with the minimum standards and the time it will take to reasonably perform the work.
(e) Contents of order.
(1) Action that may be required. After the public hearing, if a building or structure is found in
violation of the minimum standards, the city may order that the building or structure or any part
thereof be vacated, secured, repaired, removed, or demolished by the owner within a reasonable time
as provided by this subsection. The city may also order that the occupants be relocated within a
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 76/362
reasonable time. If the lienholder or mortgagee has been given notice and an opportunity to comment
at the hearing, the city council's order may specify an additional reasonable time for the building or
structure to be vacated, secured, repaired, removed, or demolished by the lienholder or mortgagee or
for the occupants to be relocated by the lienholder or mortgagee in the event the owner fails to
comply with the order within the time specified in the order for action by the owner.
(2) Thirty-day time limit for completing work. The city shall require the owner, lienholder, or
mortgagee of the building or structure within 30 days to secure the building or structure from
unauthorized entry or to repair, remove, or demolish the building or structure, unless the owner or
lienholder establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be performed within 30 days.
(3) Requirements if more than thirty days allowed to complete work. The city shall not allow the
owner, lienholder or mortgagee more than 30 days to repair, remove, or demolish the building or
structure unless the city by its order will establish a specific time schedule for the commencement
and performance of the work and shall, by its order, require the owner, lienholder or mortgagee to
secure the property in a reasonable manner from unauthorized entry while the work is being
performed.
(4) Requirements if more than ninety days allowed to complete work. The city shall not allow the
owner, lienholder or mortgagee more than 90 days to repair, remove, or demolish the building or
structure or fully perform all work required to comply with the order unless the owner, lienholder, or
mortgagee (i) submits a detailed plan and time schedule for the work at the hearing and (ii)
establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be completed within 90 days because of
the scope and complexity of the work. If the owner, lienholder or mortgagee is granted more than 90
days to complete the required work, the city shall require the owner, lienholder or mortgagee to
regularly submit progress reports to the city to demonstrate that the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee
has complied with the time schedules established for commencement and performance of the work.
The order may require that the owner, lienholder or mortgagee appear before the city council or its
designee to demonstrate compliance with the time schedules.
(f) Notice of entry of order.
(1) Filing of order with city secretary. Within 10 days after the date that the order is issued, the city
shall cause a copy of the order or the original order to be filed with the city secretary.
(2) Publication of notice. Within 10 days after the date that the order is issued, the city shall
publish in the official newspaper of the city a notice containing:
(A) The street address or legal description of the subject property;
(B) The date of the hearing;
(C) A brief statement indicating the results of the order; and
(D) Instructions stating where a complete copy of the order may be obtained.
(3) Mailing of copy of order. After the hearing, the city shall promptly mail by certified mail,
return receipt requested, a copy of the order to the owner of the building or structure and to any
lienholder or mortgagee of the building or structure. This mailing shall be sent to the address of the
owner and mortgagee or lienholder, respectively, determined in accordance with subsection (c)
above.
(4) Filing of notice with county clerk. In addition to the notice specified above, the city may also
file a notice meeting the requirements of subsection 214.001(e) of the Texas Local Government Code
in the official public records of the county clerk to provide notice to any subsequent grantees,
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 77/362
lienholders, or other transferees of an interest in the property who acquire such interest after the filing
of the notice with the county clerk.
(g) Action by city upon failure to comply with order; assessment of expenses; civil penalty.
(1) Notice of possible action. If the owner, lienholder or mortgagee does not fully and completely
comply with the order within the time allowed by the order, the city shall send a notice to the owner
and any lienholder or mortgagee that the city may, within 10 days of the date such notice is mailed,
take one or more of the following actions:
(A) Vacate, secure, remove, or demolish the building or structure or relocate the occupants at
its own expense and assess the costs incurred against the property on which the building or
structure is or was located; or
(B) Repair the building or structure at the expense of the city and assess the expenses on the
land on which the building or structure stands or to which it is attached; and/or
(C) Assess a civil penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 per day for each violation or $10.00 per
day for each violation if the owner shows that the property is the owner's lawful homestead.
(2) Request for hearing. The owner, lienholder or mortgagee may request a hearing for the purpose
of explaining any delay in complying with the order and to request additional time to comply with the
order. Any such request must be made not later than 10 days after the date the notice referred to in
subsection (g)(1) is mailed or sent. Upon receipt of such a request, the mayor shall schedule a hearing
before the city council at the earliest time practical.
(3) City's right to secure building or structure prior to hearing. Prior to the hearing, the city may
secure the subject building or structure in accordance with section 3.03.004 of this article.
(4) Action as result of hearing. Following the hearing, the city may take the following action:
(A) The city may grant the owner, lienholder or mortgagee additional time to complete the
work required by the order, and the revised order shall meet the following requirements:
(i) If the additional time granted and the time originally permitted exceeds the time
limits set forth in subsection (e)(2), (3) or (4), then the city's order shall contain the
requirements set forth in those subsections; and
(ii) The revised order shall specify that the city will have the right, in its sole discretion,
to take any one or more of the actions specified in subsection (g)(1)(A), (B) or (C) above
without further notice to the owner, lienholder or mortgagee.
(B) The city may deny the owner, lienholder or mortgagee additional time to complete the
work required by the order and the city may take any one or more of the actions specified in
subsection (g)(1)(A), (B) or (C) above.
(5) Notice of order. The city shall send notice of the order entered pursuant to subsection (g)(4) to
the owner, lienholder or mortgagee in the manner specified for sending notices pursuant to
subsections (c)(2) and (3) above. Other than securing the subject building, the city will take no action
until the expiration of 10 days from the date such notice is sent to the owner, lienholder or mortgagee.
(h) Restrictions on repairs by city. The city may repair a building under subsection (g) above only to the
extent necessary to bring the building into compliance with the minimum standards and only if the building is a
residential building with 10 or fewer dwelling units. The repairs may not improve the building to the extent that
the building exceeds the minimum housing standards set forth in the city's building code.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 78/362
(i) Interest on civil penalty or assessment. Any civil penalty or other assessment imposed under subsection (g)
above shall accrue interest at the rate of 10 percent per annum from the date of the assessment until paid in full.
(j) Lien for abatement costs. If the city incurs expenses in vacating, securing, removing or demolishing the
building or relocating the occupants, the city may assess the expenses on and shall have a lien against the
property on which the building is or was located, unless it is a homestead protected by the state constitution. The
lien arises and attaches to the property at the time the notice of the lien is recorded in the office of the county
clerk. The notice of lien shall contain the name and address of the owner if that information can be determined
with a reasonable effort, a legal description of the real property on which the building is or was located, the
amount of expenses incurred by the city and the balance due. This lien shall be a privileged lien subordinate only
to tax liens unless notice has not been given to the lienholder or mortgagee of the property.
(2004 Code, sec. 3.02.003)
Sec. 3.03.004 Securing of building by city
(a) Authority. The city may secure any building it determines:
(1) Violates the minimum standards; and
(2) Is unoccupied or is occupied only by persons who do not have a right of possession of the
building.
(b) Service of notice. Before the 11th day after the date the building is secured, the city shall give notice to the
owner by one or more of the following means:
(1) Personally serving the owner with written notice;
(2) Depositing the notice in the United States mail addressed to the owner at the owner's post
office address determined in the manner specified in section 3.03.003(c)(2);
(3) Publishing the notice at least twice within a 10-day period in the official newspaper of the city
if personal service cannot be obtained and the owner's post office address is unknown; or
(4) Posting the notice on or near the front door of the building if personal service cannot be
obtained and the owner's post office address is unknown.
(c) Contents of notice. The notice must contain:
(1) An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the building and the
property on which it is located;
(2) A description of the violation of the minimum standards that is present at the building;
(3) A statement that the city will secure or has secured, as the case may be, the building; and
(4) An explanation of the owner's right to request a hearing about any matter relating to the
municipality's securing of the building.
(d) Hearing. If, within 30 days after the date the city secured the building, the owner files with the city
secretary a written request for a hearing, the city will conduct a hearing. The hearing will be within 20 days after
the date the request is filed. At the hearing, the owner may testify or present witnesses or written information
about any matter relating to the city's securing of the building.
(e) Assessment of city's expenses; lien. If the city incurs expenses in securing a building pursuant to this
section, the city may assess those costs or expenses against the property, and shall have a lien against the
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 79/362
property, in the same manner provided in section 3.03.003(j).
(2004 Code, sec. 3.02.004)
Sec. 3.03.005 Preservation of building as historic property
(a) Applicability. This section shall be effective only if the city is designated as a certified local government
by the state historic preservation officer as provided by 16 U.S.C. section 470 et seq. at the time a complaint is
filed pursuant to section 3.03.003.
(b) Review by historic preservation board. In accordance with section 214.00111 of the Texas Local
Government Code, the city's historic preservation board may review any building which is the subject of a
complaint pursuant to section 3.03.003(b) of this code to determine whether such building can be rehabilitated
and designated: (i) on the National Register of Historic Places, (ii) as a recorded state historic landmark, or (iii)
as historic through a municipal historic designation. If the historic preservation board undertakes the review of a
building, the board shall submit a written report to the city council indicating the results of its review before the
public hearing described in section 3.03.003(d) of this article.
(c) Action by city following review. If the historic preservation board report determines that the building may
not be rehabilitated and designated as historic property, the city may proceed as provided in section 3.03.003 of
this article. If the historic preservation board report determines that the building may be rehabilitated as historic
property, the city may not permit demolition of the building for at least 90 days after the date the report is
submitted. During said 90-day period the city shall notify the owner and attempt to identify a feasible alternative
use for the building or locate an alternative purchaser to rehabilitate and maintain the building. If the city is
unable to locate the owner or if the owner does not respond within the 90-day period, the city may appoint a
receiver as provided by section 214.003 of the Texas Local Government Code.
(d) Demolition of building. The city may require the demolition of a building the subject of this section if,
after the expiration of the 90-day period, the city is unable to:
(1) Identify a feasible alternative use for the building;
(2) Locate an alternative purchaser to rehabilitate and maintain the building; or
(3) Appoint a receiver for the building as provided by section 214.003 of the Texas Local
Government Code.
(2004 Code, sec. 3.02.005)
Sec. 3.03.006 Penalty for failure to comply with order
Any person who fails to comply with an order issued pursuant to section 3.03.003(e) shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. This section relates to fire safety and/or public health and sanitation. (2004 Code, sec. 3.02.006)
ARTICLE 3.04 MOBILE HOMES AND TRAVEL TRAILERS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.04.001 Definitions
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them:
Dependent mobile home or trailer. A dependent mobile home or trailer shall refer to a mobile home or trailer
which does not have toilet facilities permanently connected to the public sewer system as required by this article.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 80/362
(2004 Code, sec. 3.09.001)
Manufactured home. Any HUD-code manufactured home built on or after June 15, 1976, as those terms are
defined in V.T.C.A. Occupations Code, chapter 1201.
Mobile home. Any mobile home built prior to June 15, 1976, as those terms are defined in V.T.C.A.,
Occupations Code, chapter 1201. It shall be unlawful for any mobile home as defined herein to be placed within
the city limits.
(Ordinance 1207, sec. 1, adopted 4/11/16)
Mobile home or trailer space. A section of ground in a mobile home or trailer park of not less than three
thousand two hundred (3,200) square feet of unoccupied space in an area designated as the location for only one
automobile and one mobile home or trailer or mobile home or trailer.
Mobile home park; trailer park. Any park, camp, court, site, lot, parcel, or tract of land designed, maintained or
intended for the purpose of supplying a location or accommodations for any mobile homes, house trailers or
trailers, or upon which any mobile homes, house trailers, or trailers are parked, and shall include all buildings
used or intended for use as part of the equipment thereof whether a charge is made for the use of the park and its
facilities or not. Mobile home or trailer park shall not include automobile or trailer sales lots on which
unoccupied mobile homes or trailers are parked for purposes of inspection and sale.
Owner. The person legally responsible for or owning a mobile home or trailer park.
Recreational vehicle. A travel trailer, motor home or pickup camper less than nine (9) feet in width used
principally for recreational purposes, with wheels, and used as a conveyance on highways or city streets and
propelled by its own or other motive power, not to be a permanent residence.
(2004 Code, sec. 3.09.001)
Sec. 3.04.002 Parking or storage outside of parks
(a) Emergency or temporary stopping or parking of mobile homes is permitted on any street, alley or highway
for not longer than five (5) hours, subject to any other and further prohibitions, regulations or limitations
imposed by the traffic and parking regulations for that street, alley or highway.
(b) No person shall park or occupy any mobile home or trailer on the premises of any dwelling or any lot
which is a part of the premises of any dwelling, either of which is situated outside of an approved mobile home
or trailer park; except, no more than one camping or travel trailer or hauling trailer per family living on the
premises shall be permitted, and said trailer shall not exceed twenty-four (24) feet in length or nine (9) feet in
width. A camping or travel trailer shall not be occupied permanently while it is parked or stored in any area
within the city limits, except in a mobile home or trailer park authorized under the ordinances of the city, except
as hereinafter provided. Commercial vehicles and mobile home trailers of all types may be displayed in such
commercial districts allowing sales of said vehicles or in such industrial districts allowing their manufacture;
provided, however, said vehicles may not be used for dwelling purposes either temporarily or permanently
except in a mobile home or trailer park authorized under the ordinances of the city.
(2004 Code, sec. 3.09.005)
Secs. 3.04.003–3.04.030 Reserved
Division 2. Parks
Sec. 3.04.031 Permit required; issuance; fees; renewal
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 81/362
(a) In the city and within its planning extraterritorial jurisdiction boundaries, any owner desiring to construct a
trailer or mobile home park will be required to obtain a permit, except no parks shall be allowed in the primary
fire zone. Upon application for a permit there will be an annual permit fee required as set forth in the fee
schedule in appendix A of this code, payable on or before January first (fee to be retained by the city). The fee
for transfer of such permit shall be as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code. Upon initial
application by said person, a complete plat by a licensed engineer shall be submitted to the planning and zoning
commission, showing location, space size (minimum 3,200 square feet), and number of spaces (minimum of
ten), and water, sewer and other utility connections on each space. Parks on arterial streets must have internal
(inside) streets with entrance-exit to the arterial street.
(b) Except as may be expressly modified by this article, all requests for permission to construct a mobile home
or trailer park will be administered in the manner specified in chapter 10, relating to subdivisions. Preliminary
plans and specifications will be reviewed by the planning and zoning commission, and at least one public
hearing held on the proposed plan upon determination by the commission that the preliminary plan meets all
requirements. Final development plans shall be submitted containing all revisions as requested by the
commission. If travel trailer or overnight facilities are to be provided, service facilities consisting of shower,
toilet and laundry facilities must be provided. The city secretary, at the direction of the city council, shall issue a
permit which shall be good for one year, at the end of which time, if the park operator is not in violation of the
terms of this article, a permit shall be renewed for one year upon payment of the required fee.
(2004 Code, sec. 3.09.002)
Sec. 3.04.032 Revocation of permit
The city council may revoke any permit issued under this article in case any of the provisions hereof are
violated. However, before said permit may be revoked the city council must give ten (10) days' notice to the
holder and hold a hearing thereon. After said permit has been revoked, a permit may be reissued if the reasons
for said revocation have been duly renewed or corrected. (2004 Code, sec. 3.09.003)
Sec. 3.04.033 Duties of owner and manager
(a) It is hereby made the duty of the attendant or person in charge, together with the permittee, to:
(1) Keep at all times a register containing a record of all mobile home or trailer owners and
occupants located within the park. The register shall contain the following information:
(A) The name and address of each mobile home occupant.
(B) The name and address of the owner of each mobile home or trailer and the motor vehicle
by which it is towed or transported, and motor home.
(C) The make, model, year and license number of each mobile home or trailer and motor
vehicle.
(D) The state, territory or country issuing such licenses.
(E) The date of arrival and of departure of each mobile home or trailer.
(F) Whether or not each mobile home or trailer is a dependent or independent mobile home
or trailer.
(G) The gross floor area and nominal dimensions of the mobile home or trailer.
The park shall keep the register available for inspection at all times by law enforcement
officers, public health officials, and other public officials whose duties necessitate
acquisition of the information contained in the register. The register record for each
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 82/362
occupant registered shall not be destroyed for a period of three (3) years following the
date of departure of a registrant from the park.
(2) Maintain the park in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition at all times.
(3) See that the provisions of this article are complied with and enforced and report promptly to the
proper authorities any violation of this article or any other violation of law which may come to his
attention.
(4) Report to the city health officer all cases of persons or animals infected or suspected of being
infected with any communicable disease.
(5) Prevent the running loose of dogs, cats or other animals or pets.
(6) Maintain in convenient places, approved by the fire department, hand fire extinguishers in the
ratio of not less than one to each four (4) trailer spaces. Fire extinguishers shall comply with all
ordinances of the city pertaining thereto.
(7) Prohibit the lighting of open fires on the premises.
(8) Prohibit the use of any mobile home or trailer by a greater number of occupants than that which
it is designed to accommodate.
(b) Each mobile home or trailer park owner, on January first of each year, shall report to the proper taxing
agency the number of mobile homes and trailers in said park along with names and addresses of owners. The
park owner will collect an amount of money equal to taxes due for the taxable year from each mobile home or
trailer owner and place it in an escrow account with taxing bodies.
(2004 Code, sec. 3.09.004)
Sec. 3.04.034 Additions to mobile homes or trailers
It shall be unlawful for any person operating a mobile home or travel trailer park or occupying a mobile home or
travel trailer to construct or permit to be constructed in such park or in connection with such mobile home or
travel trailer any additional structure or building or shelter in connection with or attached to a mobile home or
travel trailer; except, however, awnings of canvas or metal which are to be constructed may be attached to such
mobile homes or travel trailers as well as portable prefabricated temporary rooms for the express purpose of
increasing mobile home or travel trailer living area, commonly called “cabanas,” which meet the following
requirements:
(1) Double-wall, metal-covered, lined with sheetrock, fire-resistive wood or paneling, or metal.
(2) Strength of materials and structure to meet minimum standards of the building code.
(3) Capable of being dismantled when moved.
(4) Such rooms shall be completely dismantled and removed from the site at the time the mobile
home to which it is accessory is moved.
(5) Finish and appearance to be as near the same as possible to the mobile home or travel trailer to
which it is accessory.
(6) The length must not exceed the length of the mobile home or travel trailer to which it is
accessory.
(7) Only one (1) such room per mobile home or travel trailer shall be permitted.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 83/362
(2004 Code, sec. 3.09.006)
Sec. 3.04.035 Maintenance
Every person owning or operating a mobile home or travel trailer park shall maintain such park and any
facilities, fixtures and permanent equipment in connection therewith in a clean and sanitary condition and in a
good state of repair. All occupants of the park must be required to maintain the premises in a neat, clean and
orderly manner, and the operator of said park shall require compliance with this article or the operator and
occupant shall both be guilty of violation subject to the penalties provided herein. (2004 Code, sec. 3.09.007)
Sec. 3.04.036 Design standards; required facilities
(a) Drainage and site. Every mobile home or trailer shall be located on a well-drained area, free from marsh
and heavy or dense growth of brush or weeds, and the premises shall be properly graded so as to prevent the
accumulation of stormwater or other waters and so as to insure rapid drainage during and following rains.
(b) Location of spaces; driveways; entrances and exits. Mobile home or trailer spaces shall be clearly
designated and the park so arranged that all trailer spaces shall abut on a driveway or public street of not less
than twenty-five (25) feet in width, giving easy access from all trailer spaces to a public street or highway. Such
driveway shall be all-weather or paved to a standard at least equal to a two-course asphalt penetration treatment
and maintained in good condition, shall be well marked in the daytime and well lighted at night, and shall not be
obstructed. All entrances and exits shall be well marked and so arranged that they will be easily controlled and
supervised.
(c) Electrical outlets. Every mobile home or trailer space shall be furnished with an electric service outlet in
compliance with the city electrical code. Such outlet shall be equipped with an externally operated switch or fuse
of not less than thirty (30) amperes capacity, and a heavy duty outlet receptacle.
(d) Size of spaces; setbacks. Mobile home or trailer spaces are to be as follows in a trailer park:
(1) Sufficient room shall be provided for the mobile home structure itself, as well as
accommodations for storage and automobile outside of the yard and patio.
(2) Minimum space of thirty-two hundred (3,200) square feet required.
(3) Minimum distance between mobile homes and/or trailers of twenty (20) feet.
(4) Surrounding yard dimensions:
(i) Front yard setback, twenty-foot minimum.
(ii) Side yard, ten-foot minimum.
(iii) Rear yard, ten-foot minimum.
(iv) Setback from adjacent property line, fifteen-foot minimum.
(v) Setback from adjacent building, fifteen-foot minimum.
(e) Water supply. An adequate supply of potable, ablutionary and culinary water, furnished through a pipe or
distribution system meeting the requirements of the city plumbing code and connected directly with the city
water main, with a supply outlet located at each trailer space, shall be furnished.
(2004 Code, sec. 3.09.008)
(f) Sewage and refuse disposal.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 84/362
(1) Waste from showers, bathtubs, flush toilets, urinals, lavatories, slop sinks and laundries in
service and other buildings within the park shall be discharged into the public sewer system in
compliance with applicable ordinances.
(2) Each mobile home or trailer space shall be provided with a trapped sewer at least four (4)
inches in diameter, which shall be connected to receive the waste from the shower, bathtub, flush
toilet, lavatory and kitchen sink of the mobile home or trailer harbored in such space and having any
or all of such facilities. The trapped sewer in each space shall be connected to discharge the mobile
home or trailer waste into the public sewer system in compliance with applicable ordinances.
(2004 Code, sec. 3.09.008; Ordinance 1207, sec. 2, adopted 4/11/16)
(g) Sanitation facilities. Each park containing dependent mobile homes or trailers shall be provided with
toilets, baths or showers, and other sanitation facilities which shall conform to the following requirements:
(1) Toilet facilities for males shall consist of not less than one flush toilet and one urinal for each
fifteen (15) dependent mobile homes or trailers or any less number thereof.
(2) Toilet facilities for females shall consist of not less than one flush toilet for each ten (10)
dependent mobile homes or trailers or any less number thereof.
(3) Each sex shall be provided with not less than one lavatory and one shower with individual
dressing accommodations for each ten (10) dependent mobile homes or trailers or any less number
thereof.
(h) Service buildings.
(1) Service buildings housing sanitation and laundry facilities or any other such facilities shall be
permanent structures complying with all applicable ordinances and statutes regulating building,
electrical installations and plumbing and sanitation systems.
(2) The service buildings shall be well lighted at all times of the day and night, shall be well
ventilated with screened openings, and shall be constructed of such moisture-proof material,
including painted woodwork, as shall permit repeated cleaning and washing. The floors of the service
buildings shall be of material impervious to water and shall slope to a floor drain or drains connected
with the sewer system.
(3) Service buildings housing sanitation facilities shall be located not closer than fifteen (15) feet
nor farther than two hundred (200) feet from any mobile home or trailer space upon which a
dependent mobile home or trailer is located.
(4) All service buildings and the grounds of the park shall be maintained in a clean, sightly
condition and kept free of any condition tending to menace the health of any occupant or the public
or constitute a nuisance.
(2004 Code, sec. 3.09.008)
Sec. 3.04.037 Use of liquefied petroleum gas
Liquefied petroleum gas for cooking and heating purposes shall not be used at individual mobile home or trailer
spaces unless the containers are properly connected by copper or other suitable metallic tubing. Liquefied
petroleum gas cylinders shall be securely fastened in place, and adequately protected from the weather. No
cylinder containing liquefied petroleum gas shall be located in a mobile home or trailer, nor within five (5) feet
of ingress and egress thereof, and no such containers shall have the capacity in excess of twenty-five (25)
gallons. All such installations shall comply with all applicable ordinances of the city. (2004 Code, sec. 3.09.009)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 85/362
Sec. 3.04.038 Mobile home office
There shall be a designated office for every mobile home or trailer park located within the city limits in which
shall be located the office of the person in charge of such park. A sign must be conspicuously located within the
park specifying the address and telephone number of the office. A copy of the park permit and [a copy] of this
article shall be posted therein, and the park register shall at all times be kept in such office. (Ordinance 1207,
sec. 3, adopted 4/11/16)
Sec. 3.04.039 Manager
(a) Each mobile home or trailer park shall be under the direct management of the owner or his agent or
representative, for whose acts he shall be fully responsible.
(b) The name of the person entrusted with the direct management of the park shall be filed for reference with
the plumbing inspector, city secretary, and police department. Such person must be of good reputation and
character and shall satisfy the public authority as to his experience and capacity to supervise, manage, regulate,
control and maintain good order in the park.
(2004 Code, sec. 3.09.011)
Sec. 3.04.040 Billing for city utilities
(a) Each mobile home or trailer park owner shall be assessed the minimum water, trash, and sewer charge for
each space occupied, and for all water above the minimum at the regular rate. These charges are to be assessed
or charged to the park owner or operator. For this purpose one water meter shall be set by the city for each
separate park, or, if the park occupies more than one city block, one meter shall be set for each city block.
(b) The city may, upon the request of an owner of a mobile home or trailer park, authorize the placement of
individual water meters for each mobile home or trailer space. If such individual meters are authorized, each
occupant of a trailer or mobile home space must pay the then-applicable deposit for such utility services and will
be billed individually for water, trash and sewer services by the city at the then-prevailing rate. The city shall not
be required to permit individual meters and individual billing, as specified in this subsection, and the city may
condition its authorization for the placement of individual meters and the individual billing of occupants upon
such terms and conditions as it deems appropriate.
(2004 Code, sec. 3.09.012)
Sec. 3.04.041 Manufactured home or trailer setup
(a) Each manufactured home or mobile home shall be installed with stabilization devices in accordance with
the manufacturer's installation instructions and the Texas Department of Housing and Community Affairs
Manufactured Housing Rules (10 Texas Administrative Code chapter 8).
(b) Each manufactured home or mobile home shall be provided with proper stair and/or ramp, with proper rail
at each exterior door.
(c) Each manufactured home or mobile home shall be provided with proper skirting of solid wall material,
erected in a fashion not to create a fire hazard or harbor trash or rodents, with an access door and properly
vented in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions and the Texas Department of Housing and
Community Affairs Manufactured Housing Rules (10 Texas Administrative Code chapter 8).
(d) Any manufactured home or mobile home placed in a park and not completely set up and made suitable for
habitation within thirty (30) days from the date of placement will be deemed a substandard structure, occupancy
thereof will be prohibited, and abatement procedure may commence. Proper set up includes stabilization, stairs
and/or ramps, skirting, electrical connections, plumbing connections, and general compliance with all health and
safety regulations.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 86/362
(Ordinance 1207, sec. 4, adopted 4/11/16)
ARTICLE 3.05 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION*
Sec. 3.05.001 Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose and methods
(a) Statutory authorization. The legislature of the state has in its Flood Control Insurance Act, Texas Water
Code, section 16.315, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to
minimize flood losses; therefore, the city council does ordain as follows.
(b) Findings of fact.
(1) The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of
life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services and
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the
public health, safety and general welfare.
(2) These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which
cause an increase in flood heights and velocities and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses
vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated,
floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage.
(c) Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general
welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions
designed to:
(1) Protect human life and health;
(2) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(3) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally
undertaken at the expense of the general public;
(4) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric,
telephone and sewer lines and streets and bridges located in floodplains;
(6) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone
areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and
(7) Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
(d) Methods of reducing flood losses. In order to accomplish its purposes, this article uses the following
methods:
(1) Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood or
uses that cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities;
(2) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected
against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
(3) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers,
which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 87/362
(4) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage;
and
(5) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert waters or
which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
Sec. 3.05.002 Definitions
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted to give them the
meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application.
Alluvial fan flooding. Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates
at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows, active processes of erosion, sediment transport and
deposition, and unpredictable flow paths.
Apex. A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed
the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur.
Appurtenant structure. A structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be
insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure.
Area of future conditions flood hazard. The land area that would be inundated by the 1% annual chance (100-
year) flood based on future conditions hydrology.
Area of shallow flooding. A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH or VO zone on a community's flood insurance
rate map (FIRM) with a one percent (1%) or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to
three feet (1' to 3'), where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable
and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
Area of special flood hazard. The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent (1%) or
greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard
boundary map (FHBM). After detailed rate-making has been completed in preparation for publication of the
FIRM, zone A usually is refined into zone A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO,
AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE or V.
Base flood. The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Base flood elevation (BFE). The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and found in the
accompanying flood insurance study (FIS) for zone A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30 or VE that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a one percent (1%) chance of equaling or exceeding that
level in any given year, also called the base flood.
Basement. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Breakaway wall. A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended, through its
design and construction, to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
Critical feature. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood
protection provided by the entire system would be compromised.
Development. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to
buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 88/362
Elevated building. For insurance purposes, a non-basement building which has the lowest elevated floor raised
above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings or columns.
Existing construction. For the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the “start of construction”
commenced before the effective date of the FIRM, or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that
date. “Existing construction” may also be referred to as “existing structures.”
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either the final site grading or the pouring of concrete
pads).
Flood or flooding. A general or temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas
from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or
(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood elevation study. An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate,
corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e.,
mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards.
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). An official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable
to the community.
Flood insurance study (FIS). See “Flood elevation study.”
Flood protection system. Those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated
and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of
the area within a community subject to a “special flood hazard” and the extent of the depths of associated
flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These
specialized flood-modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
Floodplain or floodprone area. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see
definition of flooding).
Floodplain management. The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for
reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and
floodplain management regulations.
Floodplain management regulations. Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health
regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control
ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any
combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures
which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 89/362
Floodway. See “Regulatory floodway.”
Functionally dependent use. Any use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried
out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include
long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the
proposed walls of a structure.
Historic structure. Any structure that is:
(1) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(3) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation
programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(4) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified either:
(A) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(B) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Levee. A man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with
sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from
temporary flooding.
Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant
enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area
is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure
in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations.
Manufactured home. A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and
is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
“manufactured home” does not include a recreational vehicle.
Manufactured home park or subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Mean sea level. For the purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate
map are referenced.
New construction. For the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the “start of
construction” commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974,
whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management
purposes, “new construction” means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 90/362
effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
New manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at
a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either the final grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
Recreational vehicle. A vehicle which is:
(1) Built on a single chassis;
(2) Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
(3) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and
(4) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
Regulatory floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than a designated height.
Riverine. Relating to, formed by or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
Special flood hazard area. See “Area of special flood hazard.”
Start of construction. For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier
Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or
other improvement was within one hundred and eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation,
such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it
include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
Structure. For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to
its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred.
Substantial improvement. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of a structure, the
cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before “start of
construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,”
regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: (i) any project for
improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 91/362
necessary to assure safe living conditions, or (ii) any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a “historic structure.”
Variance. A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. (For full
requirements, see section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.)
Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain
management regulations. A structure or other development without an elevation certificate, other certifications
or other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4) or (e)(5) [of
the National Flood Insurance Program regulations] is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
Water surface elevation. The height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1998 (or other
datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
areas.
Sec. 3.05.003 General provisions
(a) Lands to which this article applies. This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the city, including its one-mile extraterritorial jurisdiction.
(Ordinance 1081, sec. 2, adopted 5/11/09)
(b) Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency in the current scientific and engineering report entitled “The Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) for Wichita County, Texas and Incorporated Areas,” dated February 3, 2010, with
accompanying flood insurance rate maps and/or flood boundary-floodway maps (FIRM and/or FBFM) dated
February 3, 2010, and any revisions thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this
article. (Ordinance 1081, sec. 2, adopted 5/11/09; Ordinance adopting Code)
(c) Establishment of development permit; fee. A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure
conformance with provisions of this article. There will be a charge as provided in appendix A to this code for
each floodplain development permit issued by the city.
(d) Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered or have its use changed without full
compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations.
(e) Abrogation and greater restrictions. This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions; however, where this article and another ordinance, easement,
covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(f) Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be:
(1) Considered as minimum requirements;
(2) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
(g) Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions
greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by man-made and natural causes. This
article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will
be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the community or any
official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative
decision lawfully made hereunder.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 92/362
Sec. 3.05.004 Administration
(a) Designation of floodplain administrator. The city manager is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator
to administer and implement the provisions of this article and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency
Management and Assistance, National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain
management.
(b) Duties and responsibilities of floodplain administrator. Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain
administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this
article;
(2) Review permit applications to determine whether to ensure that the proposed building site
project, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding;
(3) Review and approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of
this article;
(4) Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been
obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including section 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior
approval is required;
(5) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation;
(6) Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency, which is
the state water development board (TWDB), prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse,
and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency;
(7) Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any
watercourse is maintained;
(8) When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 3.05.003(b),
the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data
and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the
provisions of section 3.05.005.
(9) When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require
that no new construction, substantial improvements or other development (including fill) shall be
permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than
one foot (1') at any point within the community.
(10) Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in zones A1-30, AE and AH on
the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than
one foot (1'), provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by section
65.12.
(c) Permit procedures.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 93/362
(1) Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain
administrator, or his/her designated representatives, on forms furnished by said floodplain
administrator, and may include, but is not limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the
location, dimensions and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed
structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in
relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required:
(A) Finished elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement)
of all new and substantially improved structures;
(B) Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any nonresidential structure shall be
floodproofed;
(C) A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential
floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of subsection (c)(2) of this section;
(D) Description of the extent to which the watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or
relocated as a result of the proposed development;
(E) Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with subsection (b)(1) of this
section; and
(F) Dated photos of the front and back of the finished improvements located within the
floodplain.
(2) Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be
based on all of the provisions of this article and the following relevant factors:
(A) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(B) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect
of such damage on the individual owner;
(C) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
(D) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
(E) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency
vehicles;
(F) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including
maintenance and repair of streets and bridges and public utilities and facilities such as sewer,
gas, electrical and water systems;
(G) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the
floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected on the site;
(H) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; and
(I) The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the
proposed use.
(d) Variance procedures.
(1) The city's board of adjustment shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from
the requirements of this article.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 94/362
(2) The board of adjustment shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged
there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the floodplain administrator
in the enforcement or administration of this article.
(3) Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the board of adjustment may appeal such
decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction.
(4) The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall
report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
(5) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed
on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to
the procedures set forth in the remainder of this article.
(6) Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a
lot of one-half (1/2) acres in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in subsection (c)(2) of this
section have been considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half (1/2) acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(7) Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this article, the board of
adjustment may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further
the purpose and objectives of this article.
(8) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels
during the base flood discharge would result.
(9) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
(10) Prerequisites for granting variances:
(A) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum
necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief;
(B) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(i) Showing a good and sufficient cause;
(ii) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant; and
(iii) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood
heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create
nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local
laws or ordinances; and
(C) Any applicant to which a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the
structure will be permitted to be built to the lowest floor elevation below the base flood
elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
(11) Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements
and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 95/362
(A) The criteria outlined in subsections (d)(1) through (9) of this section are met; and
(B) The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages
during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
Sec. 3.05.005 Flood hazard reduction standards; penalty
(a) General standards. In all areas of special flood hazards, the following provisions are required for all new
construction and substantial improvements:
(1) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and
adequately anchored to prevent floatation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
(2) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and
practices that minimize flood damage;
(3) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant
to flood damage;
(4) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed
and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within components during
conditions of flooding;
(5) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(6) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and
(7) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during flooding.
(b) Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazards where the base flood elevation data has been
provided as set forth in section 3.05.003(b), section 3.05.004(b)(8), or subsection (c) of this section, the
following provisions are required:
(1) Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to two feet (2') above the base
flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect or land surveyor shall submit a
certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection, as proposed in section
3.05.004(c)(1)(A), is satisfied.
(2) Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any
commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated to two feet (2') above the base flood level or, together with attendant utility and
sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered
professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications and
plans for the construction and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in
accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such
certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such
structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 96/362
(3) Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements with fully enclosed areas below
the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(A) A minimum of two openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than one
square inch (1 sq. in.) for every one square foot (1 sq. ft.) of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided;
(B) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1') above grade; and
(C) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices
provided they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(4) Manufactured homes.
(A) Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on the community's
FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage.
For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to
resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not
limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition
to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
(B) Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones
A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM on sites: (i) outside of a manufactured home park
or subdivision; (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; (iii) in an expansion to an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park
or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as a result of
a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured
home is elevated to two feet (2') above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
(C) Require that manufactured homes being placed or substantially improved on sites in an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones A1-30, AH and AE on the
community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of subsection (4) of this subsection be
elevated so that either:
(i) The lowest floor of the manufactured home is two feet (2') or more above the base
flood elevation; or
(ii) The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation
elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six inches (36") in
height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
(5) Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30,
AH and AE on the community's FIRM either: (i) be on the site for fewer than one hundred and eighty
(180) consecutives days; (ii) be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or (iii) meet the permit
requirements of section 3.05.004(c)(1) and the elevation and anchoring requirements for
“manufactured homes” in subsection (d)(4) of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for
highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect
type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 97/362
(e) Standards for subdivision proposals.
(1) All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured home parks and
subdivisions, shall be consistent with section 3.05.001(a) through (d) of this article.
(2) All proposals for the development of subdivisions, including the placement of manufactured
home parks and subdivisions, shall meet the floodplain development permit requirements of sections
3.05.003(c) and 3.05.004(c) and the provisions of this section.
(3) Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed
development, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, which is
greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to
section 3.05.003(b) or section 3.05.004(b)(8) of this article.
(4) All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured home parks and
subdivisions, shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(5) All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured home parks and
subdivisions, shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
(f) Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones). Located within the areas of special flood hazard
established in section 3.05.003(b) are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood
hazards associated with flood depths from one to three feet (1' to 3') where a clearly defined channel does not
exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply:
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated to two feet (2') or more above the base flood elevation or the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's
FIRM.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures:
(A) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to two feet (2') or more above the
base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high at the depth number specified
in feet on the community's FIRM; or
(B) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base
specified flood depth in an AO zone, or below the base flood elevation in an AH zone, level the
structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with
structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads
and effects of buoyancy.
(3) A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain
administrator that the standards of this subsection, as proposed in section 3.05.004(c), are satisfied.
(4) Require within zones AH and AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
(g) Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 3.05.003(b) are designated
floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters, which carry
debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply:
(1) Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and
other development, within the adopted regulatory floodway, unless it has been demonstrated through
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 98/362
hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that
the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community
during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) If subsection (g)(1) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall
comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this section.
(3) Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory
floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first
completes all of the provisions required by section 65.12.
(h) Penalties for noncompliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations.
Violation of the provisions of this article by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations
of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any
person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be
fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and
expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city council from taking such other
lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ordinance 1081, sec. 2, adopted 5/11/09)
ARTICLE 3.06 SIGNS*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 3.06.001–3.06.050 Reserved
Division 2. Signs Adjacent to Highways
Sec. 3.06.051 Scope
This division shall apply to signs located within the city and within six hundred sixty (660) feet of the nearest
edge of the right-of-way of any federal-aid primary highway systems, being that highway designated as U.S.
287. (2004 Code, sec. 4.02.001)
Sec. 3.06.052 Definitions
As used in this division:
Erect. To construct, build, raise, assemble, place, affix, attach, create, paint, draw or in any other way bring into
being or establish, except when performed incidental to the change of an advertising message or to normal
maintenance or repair of an existing sign.
Main-traveled way. The through traffic lanes exclusive of frontage roads, auxiliary lanes and ramps.
Official signs. Directional and other official signs authorized by law, including signs pertaining to natural
wonders and scenic and historic attractions, and signs which have as their purpose the protection of life and
property.
On-premises signs. Signs advertising the sale or lease of the property on which they are located, and signs
advertising activities conducted on the premises upon which they are located.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 99/362
(2004 Code, sec. 4.02.002)
Political advertising signs. Signs advertising, by support or opposition, a candidate for nomination or election to
either a public office or an office of a political party or a measure often referred to as a ballot proposition.
(Ordinance 1159, sec. 1, adopted 6/10/13)
Right-of-way. A divided highway with full control of access.
Sign. An outdoor sign, light, display, device, figure, painting, drawing, message, placard, poster, billboard or
other thing which is designated, intended or used to advertise or inform.
Traveled way. That portion of the roadway used for the movement of vehicles, exclusive of shoulders and
auxiliary lanes.
(2004 Code, sec. 4.02.002)
Sec. 3.06.053 Standards
(a) Signs shall not imitate or resemble any official traffic sign, signal or device.
(b) Signs shall not be erected or maintained upon trees or painted or drawn upon rocks or other natural
features.
(c) No sign shall exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet in area.
(d) No sign shall exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height.
(e) No sign shall exceed sixty (60) feet in length.
(f) All dimensions include border and trim, but exclude supports.
(g) Double-faced, back-to-back, or V-type signs shall be considered as one (1) sign.
(h) Signs which exceed three hundred fifty (350) square feet in area may not be double faced (stacked or side
by side).
(i) Signs may not be located in such a manner as to obscure or otherwise interfere with the effectiveness of an
official traffic sign, signal or device, or to obstruct or interfere with the driver's view of approaching, merging or
intersecting traffic.
(j) Signs may not be located within five hundred (500) feet of any public park, public forest, public
playground or scenic area so designated by a governmental agency, which is adjacent to the highway.
(k) Signs may not be erected closer than one hundred (100) feet apart on the same side of the highway.
(l) Adjacent to freeways, signs may not be erected closer than five hundred (500) feet apart on the same side
of the freeway.
(m) Signs may be located closer than the spacing requirements established herein, provided such signs are
separated by buildings, natural surroundings or other obstructions so that only one sign located within the
specified spacing is visible at any one time.
(n) Signs which contain, include or are illuminated by any flashing, intermittent or moving light or lights are
prohibited, except those giving public service information such as time, date, temperature, weather or similar
information.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 100/362
(o) Lights which are not effectively shielded as to prevent beams or rays of light from being directed at any
portion of the traveled ways of the highways, and which are of such intensity or brilliance as to cause glare or to
impair the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle, or which otherwise interfere with any driver's operation of a
motor vehicle, are prohibited.
(p) No sign shall be so illuminated that it interferes with the effectiveness of or obscures an official traffic
sign, device or signal.
(2004 Code, sec. 4.02.003)
(q) No political advertising sign may be located upon city-owned property or upon public rights-of-way
within the corporate city limits. Political advertising signs can be placed on privately owned property with the
owner's permission.
(r) Political advertising signs must be made of lightweight material and be no larger than fifty (50) square feet.
(Ordinance 1159, sec. 2, adopted 6/10/13)
Sec. 3.06.054 Applicability; permitted districts
Signs shall not be located outside of the business and industrial zoning districts of the city. Every sign erected
within the city and within six hundred sixty (660) feet of the nearest edge of the right-of-way of U.S. 287 shall
comply with the standards established by this division, with the following exceptions:
(1) Official signs.
(2) On-premises signs.
(3) Signs which are not visible from any point on the main-traveled way viewed from a height of
not more than six (6) feet above any such point.
(2004 Code, sec. 4.02.004)
Sec. 3.06.055 Compliance with other regulations
Every sign regulated by this division shall also comply with the zoning ordinances, building codes and all other
applicable codes and ordinances of the city. (2004 Code, sec. 4.02.005)
Sec. 3.06.056 Building permit
The building official shall issue building permits for signs regulated by this division only to persons who hold
valid licenses issued by the state transportation commission pursuant to the provisions of the Texas Litter
Abatement Act. The minimum fee for said building permits shall be as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix
A of this code. (2004 Code, sec. 4.02.006)
Sec. 3.06.057 Existing signs
Every owner of every sign existing on January 24, 1973, which lies within the city, and within six hundred sixty
(660) feet of the nearest edge of the right-of-way of U.S. 287, with the exception of official signs and onpremises
signs, shall have applied for and obtained a license issued by the state transportation commission
pursuant to the provisions of the Texas Litter Abatement Act, authorizing the maintenance of said sign after
December 31, 1972. (2004 Code, sec. 4.02.007)
ARTICLE 3.07 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS*
Sec. 3.07.001 Building numbering
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 101/362
(a) All house or building numbers in the city shall be in accordance with the numbering system provided in
this section. Any variance from correct numbers assigned by the city or assignable by the city shall constitute a
violation of this code and shall be punishable by a fine as provided in section 1.01.009, and each warning after
noncompliance with this section shall constitute a separate violation, subject to a similar fine.
(b) Thirty (30) days after notice shall be allowed to each property owner or resident to put up correct house
numbers.
(c) Wall Street shall be the dividing line east and west, and West Daisy and East Pasadena streets the dividing
line north and south. Uneven (odd) numbers shall be on the east side and south side of the streets. Even numbers
shall be on the west side and north side of the streets. Each lot shall be numbered; that is, if the lots are twentyfive
(25) feet, then each such lot shall have a number; if the lots are fifty (50) feet or more, then each such lot
shall have a number.
(2004 Code, sec. 3.10.001)
Sec. 3.07.002 Drains under driveways
The director of public works, or his or her duly authorized agent, is authorized and empowered to determine and
fix the size of drain pipes or culverts to be placed under private drives connecting with public thoroughfares and
regulate the manner of installation thereof, as well as make all inspections relating thereto, at all such places
within the city as may be necessary from time to time. All costs relating to the installation of such drainage pipes
or culverts to be thus installed, as well as the engineering therefor and inspection thereof, shall be borne by the
person making such installation and to benefit thereby. (2004 Code, sec. 3.10.002)
Sec. 3.07.003 Street openings; surfacing of dedicated streets; street improvements in subdivisions
(a) The cost of opening any dedicated street which has not been opened to traffic prior to adoption of this
section (July 8, 1985) shall be the sole responsibility of the abutting property owners.
(b) Half streets will not be permitted. The street must be opened to its entire length and width at one time.
(c) If property owners on opposite sides of a street cannot agree upon opening the street, then, upon
submission of a petition, the city may undertake the opening of the street and assessment of the property owners,
subject to the following requirements:
(1) The petition requesting the street be opened must be signed by owners of seventy-five percent
(75%) of the frontage on the street.
(2) Property owners signing the petition must put the full amount of their share of the cost of
opening the street in escrow with the city, prior to work commencing on the street.
(3) The city will finance up to the remaining twenty-five percent (25%) of the cost and assess this
cost to the remaining property owners, allowing them five (5) years in which to pay the cost plus
twelve percent (12%) interest.
(4) Costs will be assessed to the property owners on a front-footage basis with the corner property
owners bearing the cost of any intersections.
(d) If, at any time, the city council determines the opening of a street to be in the public interest, it may have
the street opened and the fronting property owners assessed. In this case, the city will bear one-third (1/3) the
cost of opening the street and the remainder will be assessed to fronting property owners on a footage basis, and
all property owners would be allowed a five-year payout on the assessment.
(e) A dedicated street which has been opened to traffic prior to passage of this section (July 8, 1985), but
which has not been hard surfaced, may be surfaced by the city, subject to the following conditions:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 102/362
(1) Owners of all of the property fronting on the street petition for the street to be hard surfaced.
(2) When required by the city, each property owner will install curb and gutter along his or her
property, prior to the city commencing any paving work.
(3) The cost of all materials and engineering costs will be assessed to the adjoining property
owners on a front-footage basis.
(4) The city may contribute the equipment and labor necessary to pave the street, or may contract
the construction to a private contractor at the expense of the property owners.
(5) In the event of voluntary assessments, the city reserves the right to negotiate repayment terms.
(f) Subdividers shall pay the total cost of all street improvements, including adjacent street intersection, and
including all excavations, drainage facilities, curbs and gutters, subgrade, flexible base, asphalt pavement,
special bases or pavements, and a two-year maintenance bond.
(g) Unpaved or unopened streets must be opened in accordance with this section before building permits will
be issued for a block.
(2004 Code, sec. 3.10.003)
Sec. 3.07.004 Street specifications
(a) Generally; approval of plans. All streets shall be constructed to city specifications, and plans and
specifications for street construction shall be submitted to and approved by the planning and zoning commission
before any work is started.
(b) Width. All streets shall be of a width as agreed upon between the planning and zoning commission and the
developer, but in no case less than the minimum widths specified in the subdivision ordinance.
(c) Drainage facilities. All drainage facilities, such as storm sewer, culverts, bridges, etc., shall be installed to
city requirements as set out by the planning and zoning commission. Normally, as a minimum requirement,
drainage ditches will be required to be concrete lined.
(d) Curb and gutter. All streets, including frontage and side, shall have concrete curb and gutter to details,
lines and grades as approved by the planning and zoning commission.
(e) Finished grades; subgrade. Excavation shall be performed so as to provide finished street grades as
approved by the city. Any unstable subgrade shall be removed and replaced with suitable and stable materials, or
shall be stabilized with admissible materials, such as cement or asphalt, all as approved by the city.
(f) Flexible base. The minimum thickness of all flexible bases shall be six (6) inches after thorough
compaction. Flexible base material shall be approved by the city and shall be crushed conglomerate, crushed
limestone or sandstone. Base materials shall be placed, spread, wet, rolled and finished so that the entire
thickness of the material is thoroughly compacted, and that the surface is smooth and hard and to true grades,
crown, etc. All bases shall be inspected by the city before any pavement is started.
(g) Special bases or pavements. Where certain streets are expected to carry exceptionally heavy traffic or
exceptional amount of drainage, special bases or pavements may be required by the city.
(h) Maintenance bond. Each developer performing street work, together with his or her paving contractor,
shall be required to post a maintenance bond with the city guaranteeing his or her work against all defects for a
period of two (2) years.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 103/362
(i) Grade stakes and survey markers. Grade stakes and survey markers must be set by a registered engineer in
the state and the cost of engineering work borne by the developer or individuals owning property fronting on the
street if it was previously dedicated.
(j) Exceptions. Homeowners who live on existing dirt or ground streets as of the date of this section (July 8,
1985) and who petition for improvement of their street may request a waiver of the curb and gutter requirement
if the adjoining streets do not have curb and gutter. The planning and zoning commission is authorized to grant
this waiver.
(2004 Code, sec. 3.10.004)
Sec. 3.07.005 Utility trenches and bore cuts
(a) All utilities requiring trenches and/or bore cuts shall install mains and services that will be under paved
areas prior to the construction of any base or pavement.
(b) No one may cut a ditch, excavate a trench or bore cut on, across or along any existing street, alley or
dedicated right-of-way without first obtaining a utility construction permit from the city.
(c) Application for a utility construction permit shall be addressed to the city secretary and made on a form
furnished for that purpose, stating the extent, dimensions, character and purpose of the excavation or bore cut to
be made, the location, by street and number if possible, where the work is to be done and the time in which it is
to be completed. The application form shall be accompanied by maps of the existing facilities in the area, to the
extent available, and the location of the proposed utilities, methodology of construction and proposed start and
completion dates.
(d) Anyone requesting a utility construction permit to cut a ditch, excavate a trench or bore cut on, across or
alongside the streets, alleys and/or dedicated easements of the city shall present to said city a bond in the amount
of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per permitted project to guarantee that the holder of the permit will repair
all damages and to hold the city harmless from any and all damages caused by the utility construction work. In
lieu of the afore mentioned bond, any person or persons, firm, corporation or association required to obtain a
utility construction permit pursuant to this section may furnish the city secretary with a comprehensive liability
insurance certificate in the following amounts:
(1) One hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for injuries or death to one person;
(2) Three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for injuries and death to more than one person;
and
(3) Fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for the damage to property in any one event.
(e) Once issued a utility construction permit, the contractor shall make a request for all utility locates not more
than fourteen (14) days and not less than forty-eight (48) hours prior to the commencement of the proposed
excavation or bore cut project. Such request shall be made to the state one-call center, shall be made by
telephone or facsimile and shall include the date, location, extent and reason for such proposed excavation or
bore cut.
(f) The contractor shall mark the proposed excavation or bore cut site with paint and/or flags in colors
established by the one-call system. The markings should be placed a distance of not less than five feet (5') in all
directions from the outside boundary of the site to be excavated or bore cut.
(g) The director of public works or his designee reserves the right to limit the size of the excavation or bore
cut site in order that city crews have ample time to perform municipal utility locates in advance of the
construction project.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 104/362
(h) All excavations or bore cuts shall commence within fourteen (14) days of the date of the utility locate. In
the event that the contractor fails to commence work within fourteen days or the utility locate marks are not
visible at the time of excavation or bore cut is scheduled to commence, the contractor is required to request a
new utility locate.
(i) All utility construction sites will be adequately protected and marked utilizing the defined standards
outlined in the most current edition of the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices (TMUTCD).
(j) All utility ditches or trenches shall be backfilled with approved materials and tamped pneumatically to full
compaction and density. On asphalt pavement cuts, a six inch (6") thick concrete slab being six inches (6") wider
on each side of the trench shall be poured and then a minimum of two inches (2") of hot-mixed asphaltic
concrete shall be placed on top of said concrete, thoroughly compacted and finished smooth with the pavement.
If specifically approved by the director of public works, instead of concrete, the top nine inches (9") of the
trench may be filled with hot-mixed asphaltic concrete and thoroughly compacted to full density.
(k) The contractor shall complete pavement restoration of the excavation area within thirty (30) days on all
streets and paved alleys within the corporate city limits, unless a greater time is approved by the director of
public works. Contractor shall perform the work with a minimum disturbance to existing utilities and shall
coordinate all work in or near existing utilities with said utilities' owners.
(l) A contractor shall maintain their repairs in the public right-of-way, alley or dedicated easement for the life
of the street, alley or easement.
(m) The city manager or his/her designated representative may revoke any utility construction permit issued
under this section in the event any of the provisions herein stated are violated. After said permit has been
revoked, a permit may be reissued if the reasons for said revocation have been duly renewed or corrected. A
permit may be denied, revoked or suspended for the following reasons:
(1) Failure to provide proof of surety bond or liability insurance acceptable to the city.
(2) Failure to secure a state contractor's license or any other required license.
(3) Failure to perform in accordance with the requirements of the provisions outlined in this
section.
(4) The proposed traffic-control devices or warning equipment do not comply with the
requirements of the TMUTCD or requirements of the director of public works.
(5) The proposed construction activity would violate a city ordinance or state or federal statute.
(6) The permit application contains false or misleading information.
(7) The activity would cause a public health or safety hazard.
(8) The contractor is in violation of this section relative to work in progress.
(n) Failure on the part of the contractor, contractor's employee(s), their representatives or their
subcontractor(s) to perform any act or acts required in this section shall constitute a violation of the provisions of
this code and are punishable with the city's general penalties outlined in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(o) Permit fees required under this section are as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A, section A3.009 of
this code.
(Ordinance 1169, sec. 1, adopted 10/14/13)
ARTICLE 3.08 STORMWATER RUNOFF REGULATIONS
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 105/362
Sec. 3.08.001 Purpose
The purpose of this article is to diminish threats to the public health and safety and property caused by the runoff
of excess stormwater; to minimize movement of soils resulting from development, to reduce the possibilities of
hydraulic overloading of the stormwater drainage system, to reduce economic losses to individuals and the
community at large as a result of erosion and the runoff of excess stormwater, and to protect and conserve land
and water resources, while at the same time ensuring orderly development. The provisions of this article are
specifically intended to supplement and shall not repeal or diminish the existing regulations in this code with
respect to the following:
(1) The subdivision, layout, and improvement of lands located within the city pursuant to chapter
10 of this code;
(2) The excavating, filling, and grading of lots and other parcels or areas;
(3) The construction of buildings, including related parking and other paved areas, and the
drainage of the sites on which those structures and their related parking and other paved areas are
located including those regulations set forth in this chapter; and
(4) The design, construction, and maintenance of erosion control and stormwater drainage facilities
and systems.
Sec. 3.08.002 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions are adopted:
Base flood elevation. The elevation delineating the flood level having a one-percent probability of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year (also known as the 100-year flood elevation), as determined from flood insurance
rate maps (FIRMS) or the best available information.
Channel. A natural or manmade open watercourse with definite bed and banks which periodically or
continuously contains moving water, or which forms a connecting link between two bodies of water.
City. The City of Iowa Park.
City engineer. The city engineer or his designee.
City manager. The city manager or his designee.
Conduit. Any channel, pipe, sewer, or culvert used for the conveyance of movement of water, whether open or
closed.
Control elevation. Contour lines and points of predetermined elevation used to denote a detention storage area
on a plat or site drawing.
Design standards for public improvements. Standards on file in the city's offices to which all designs and the
resulting public improvements, must conform.
Detention facility. A facility constructed or modified to restrict the flow of stormwater to a prescribed maximum
rate, and to concurrently detain the excess waters that accumulated behind the outlet.
Detention storage. The temporary detaining or storage of stormwater in storage basins, on rooftops, in streets,
parking lots, school yards, parks, open space, or other areas under predetermined and controlled conditions, with
the rate of drainage there from regulated by appropriately installed devices.
Discharge. The rate of outflow of water from any source.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 106/362
Drainage area. The area from which water is carried off by a drainage system, i.e., a watershed or catchment
area.
Excess stormwater runoff. The rate of flow of stormwater discharged from an urbanized drainage area which is
or will be in excess of that volume and rate which represented or represents the runoff from the property prior to
the date of this article.
Floodplain. The special flood hazard lands adjoining a watercourse, the surface elevation of which is lower than
the base flood elevation and is subject to periodic inundation.
Hydrograph. A graph showing, for a given point on a stream or conduit, the runoff flow rate with respect to
time.
Land disturbance. Any manmade change to improve or unimprove real estate including but not limited to
building structures, filling, grading, excavation, clearing, or removal of vegetation.
One-hundred year storm. A precipitation event of 24-hours' duration, having a one-percent chance of occurring
in any one year.
Peak flow. The maximum rate of flow of stormwater at a given point or in a channel or conduit resulting from a
predetermined storm or flood.
Sediment. Any particulate matter that can be transported by fluid flow, and which eventually is deposited.
Stormwater drainage facility. Any element in a stormwater drainage system which is made or improved by man.
Stormwater drainage system. All means, natural or manmade, used for conducting stormwater to, through, or
from a drainage area to the point of final outlet including, but not limited to, any of the following: open and
closed conduits and appurtenant features, canals, channels, ditches, streams, swales, culverts, streets, and
pumping stations.
Stormwater runoff. The waters derived from precipitation within a tributary drainage area flowing over the
surface of the ground or collected in channels or conduits.
Time of concentration. The elapsed time for stormwater to flow from the most distant point in a drainage area to
the outlet or other predetermined point.
Two-year storm. A precipitation event having a fifty percent chance of occurring in any one year.
Two-year storm runoff. The stormwater runoff having a fifty percent probability of occurring in any one year.
Unprotected channel. A channel which receives stormwater discharge and which is not paved, rip-rapped, or
otherwise improved by addition of manmade materials so as to reduce the potential for erosion.
Upland area. Any land whose surface drainage flows toward the area being considered for development.
Urbanization. The development, change, or improvement of any parcel of land consisting of one or more lots for
residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, recreational, or public utility purposes.
Waterbody. Any natural or artificial pond, lake, reservoir, or other area which ordinarily or intermittently
contains water and which has a discernable shoreline.
Watercourse. Any natural or artificial stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain,
waterway, gully, ravine, street, roadway, swale, or wash in which water flows in a definite direction, either
continuously or intermittently, and which has a definite channel, bed, or banks.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 107/362
Wet bottom detention basin. A basin designed to retain a permanent pool of stormwater after having provided its
planned detention of runoff during a storm event.
Sec. 3.08.003 Permit; coordination with other regulations; fees
(a) Before initiating any activity regulated by this article, an applicant shall be required to obtain a permit
from the city which indicates that the requirements of this article have been met.
(b) A final plat will not be approved or a building permit issued until all provisions of this article have been
satisfied or provisions for compliance with this article have been made.
(c) The city shall charge a permit fee in an amount determined by the city council, from time to time, which
fee shall be listed in the fee schedule attached to this code. In addition, an applicant shall reimburse the city for
its reasonable and necessary engineering costs incurred in analyzing the application and its consistency with the
regulations adopted in this article.
Sec. 3.08.004 Other requirements
In addition to meeting the requirements of section 3.08.003 and the more specific requirements of sections
3.08.005–3.08.029 of this article and before starting any activity regulated by this article, an applicant shall
comply with the requirements set forth in all other related ordinances and state statutes and regulations.
Sec. 3.08.005 Specific requirements; general
Sediment shall be maintained on site and excess stormwater runoff shall be detained in connection with any new
construction, development, redevelopment, or land use change occurring within the city in accordance with the
requirements set forth in this article. Notwithstanding the foregoing, exceptions to this requirement are as
follows:
(1) For stormwater detention, the development of any subdivision of five or less single-family lots.
(2) For stormwater detention, the development of commercial or industrial property in which the
increase in run-off is less than ten percent (10%) of the predevelopment runoff rate and less than five
(5) cubic feet per second.
(3) A determination by the city that the excess stormwater runoff from the proposed construction,
development, redevelopment, or land use change will be insufficient to adversely affect the carrying
capacity of the receiving body or watercourse. In this connection, should the city's determination of
insufficient adverse effect be sought, the developer shall make available to the city such hydraulic or
hydrologic computations as will support the requested exception.
(4) In the event it is determined to the city manager's satisfaction, after consultation with
appropriate engineering consultants, that the goals of this article will be better met by the owner or
developer of the site paying to the city an amount equal to the cost of the detention pond(s) required
herein. Such cost shall be determined by the actual construction cost amount, if known, or as
estimated by the design engineer and approved by the city. This agreement and payment will be
completed before the city's approval of the development's construction plans.
Sec. 3.08.006 Discharge rate
The peak discharge rate after full development resulting from the proposed development shall not exceed the
corresponding peak discharge rate prior to development during storms of 2-year, 5-year, 10-year, 25-year, 50-
year, and 100-year return frequencies.
Sec. 3.08.007 Flood elevation
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 108/362
There shall be no detrimental effect on the floodway or the flood elevation during a 100-year storm upstream or
downstream of the proposed development area as a result of the proposed development.
Sec. 3.08.008 Allowable detention facilities
The increased stormwater runoff resulting from proposed development shall be detained by providing for
appropriate detention storage as required by this article. Where streets or parking areas are used for temporary
storage of stormwater runoff all manholes for sanitary sewers shall be of a type which prevent the infiltration of
water. Where streets or parking areas are used for the temporary storage of stormwater runoff, in no case shall
the maximum design depth exceed twelve (12) inches.
Sec. 3.08.009 Detention storage
Designs for detention storage and related appurtenances shall be submitted to the city for approval. Upon
submittal of designs of detention storage the city shall make a determination as to whether any or all of the
facilities proposed are to become part of the public drainage system. The city shall, at the same time, in the case
of a proposed subdivision make a determination as to those control elevations that shall be entered on the final
plat or make a determination as to the necessity for deed restrictions on any particular lot in said subdivision
requiring the preservation of mandatory drainage facilities. Where a nonsubdivided parcel of land is proposed
for development, the city shall make a determination as to the need for covenants to maintain responsibility for
mandatory drainage facilities. All of said facilities shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the city
specifications, and shall be subject to continuing inspection during the construction period in the same manner as
any other improvement regulated under this article. Detention facilities associated with residential subdivisions
shall be in a separate lot that shall be deeded to the city after 75% of the lots in the subdivision are occupied and
the lot soil stabilized. Prior to acceptance of the detention facility the city and the developer will inspect the
facility to assure it meets all of the requirements of this article. If any deficiencies are found, the developer will
be responsible to make the necessary changes at his expense. Wet bottom detention basin, shall be aerated or
designed to drain within 60 hours.
Sec. 3.08.010 Sizing of detention storage and outlet
Detention storage shall meet the requirements recommended by the city's engineer for a particular project.
Sec. 3.08.011 Discharge velocity
The discharge velocity from detention facilities shall not exceed three feet per second unless it is determined by
the city that greater velocities will not be harmful to the receiving watercourse. Where the city's determination is
requested, the developer shall make available such hydraulic or hydrologic computations as will adequately
support the course of action being requested.
Sec. 3.08.012 Emergency spillway
Emergency spillways shall be provided to permit the safe passage of runoff generated from rainfall events in
excess of the 100-year rainfall event.
Sec. 3.08.013 Freeboard
Detention storage areas shall have adequate capacity to contain the storage volume of tributary stormwater
runoff with at least one foot of freeboard above the water surface during the 100-year rainfall event unless it is
determined by the city that less freeboard will not be harmful to the detention storage area and receiving
watercourse. Where the city's determination is requested, the developer shall make available such hydraulic or
hydrologic computations as will adequately support the course of action being requested.
Sec. 3.08.014 Joint development of control system
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 109/362
Stormwater control systems may be planned in coordination by two or more property owners as long as the
potential for damage from stormwater is not increased at intervening locations.
Sec. 3.08.015 Early installation of control systems
Stormwater control measures shall be installed prior to undertaking other grading of site and a schedule of
construction for this purpose shall be submitted by the owner(s)/developer(s) prior to construction in the city.
Sec. 3.08.016 Flows from upland areas
The total drainage area must be used in calculating the allowable release rate. The required storage volume will
be based on the project area only, with extraneous flows from upland areas being bypassed or discharged via
overflow spillways or other devices. Where storm sewers are required they shall be of such size as will provide
sufficient capacity to receive the flow generated by a ten-year storm from upland areas. As to the latter and
regardless of whether it has occurred in fact, such upland area shall be deemed to have been fully developed for
all purposes of this requirement.
Sec. 3.08.017 Land disturbance of five acres or more
The developer shall comply with the state commission on environmental quality or TPDES and federal NPDES
permit for stormwater discharges associated with construction activity and provide a copy to the city prior to
starting construction.
Sec. 3.08.018 Land disturbance of more than two acres and less than five acres
The developer shall submit to the city a sediment and erosion control plan that meets the requirements of the
state commission on environmental quality or codes and federal NPDES permit for stormwater discharges
associated with construction activity prior to starting construction.
Sec. 3.08.019 All land disturbances
Land disturbances associated with any new construction, development, redevelopment, or land use change on
any site of 2,500 square foot or larger or requiring a building permit shall incorporate into the development plan
the following elements as minimum:
(1) Stone construction entrance.
(2) Silt fence or other sediment retaining device on the low side of the site.
(3) Temporary seeding of disturbed areas remaining open more than three weeks.
(4) Immediate removal of soil tracked into the public right-of-way.
(5) Permanent turf established. A copy of the development plan shall be submitted to the city prior
to starting construction.
Sec. 3.08.020 Preliminary plats
Information indicating the manner in which the provisions of this article are to be met shall be submitted with
the preliminary plats.
Sec. 3.08.021 Requirements for construction plans
Information indicating the manner in which the provisions of this article are to be met shall be submitted with all
construction plan submissions or any other plan for improvements which falls under the requirements of section
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 110/362
3.08.005. All computations, plans, and specifications shall be prepared and sealed by a professional engineer
registered in the state.
Sec. 3.08.022 Requirements for final plats
The easements or separate lots required for detention facilities shall be shown on the final plat. The control
elevation for each detention facility shall be shown on the plat near the detention facility.
Sec. 3.08.023 Drainage and detention design requirements
All subdivisions and other proposed improvements which are subject to the provisions of section 3.08.005 shall
incorporate such design features as are required in this article. Variation from these requirements shall require
the approval of the city planning commission whose action shall be conditioned upon the following:
(1) That a petition be submitted describing in detail the rationale for the proposed design change.
(2) That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the property under consideration
such that strict compliance with the provisions of this article would deprive the applicant of the
reasonable use of his land.
(3) That the variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right
of the proprietor.
(4) That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare
or injurious to other property in the territory in which said property is located.
Sec. 3.08.024 Maintenance
Designs of detention facilities will incorporate features which facilitate their inspection and maintenance. The
designer shall submit an operation and maintenance (O&M) plan for any detention facility prior to its approval
by the city. All privately owned detention facilities may be inspected by representatives of the city at such times
as they deem necessary. If deficiencies, or conditions creating nuisances, are found, the owner shall be required
to initiate the necessary corrections within fourteen (14) days, and all deficiencies shall be corrected within
forty-five (45) days.
Sec. 3.08.025 Safety features
Designs of detention facilities shall incorporate safety features, particularly at inlets, outlets, on steep slopes, and
at any attractive nuisances. These features shall include, but not be limited to, fencing, handrails, lighting, steps,
grills, signs, and other protective or warning devices so as to restrict access.
Sec. 3.08.026 Responsibility
The administration of this article shall be the responsibility of the city.
Sec. 3.08.027 Interpretation
In the interpretation and application of this article, the provisions expressed herein shall be held to be the
minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the city.
Sec. 3.08.028 Appeals
The city council is hereby designated as the appeals board for disputes arising from the application of this
article. The council's responsibility shall be to hear appeals where it is alleged by an appellant that there is error
in any order, requirement, decision, grant or refusal made by the city in the enforcement of the provisions of this
article.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 111/362
Sec. 3.08.029 Penalties
(a) General. Any person, firm, organization, association, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
article, including violation of any variances granted under the authority of this article, shall be deemed guilty of
a violation of a municipal ordinance and each such person or other entity shall be deemed guilty of a separate
offense for each and every day or portion thereof that any violation of any of the provisions of this code is
committed, continued or permitted, and upon conviction of such violation, such person or other entity may be
punished by a fine of not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00).
(b) Additional corrective actions. Any building or structure constructed in violation of the provisions of this
article or any use carried on in violation of this article is hereby declared to be a nuisance per se, with any court
of competent jurisdiction having the authority to determine that the owner or developer is guilty of maintaining a
nuisance per se and to order such nuisance abated. In this connection, the city is hereby authorized to institute
any appropriate action or proceeding in any appropriate court to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate any violations
of this article.
(Ordinance 1200 adopted 8/24/15)
ARTICLE 3.09 RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 3.09.001–3.09.030 Reserved
Division 2. Requirement for Network Providers
Sec. 3.09.031 Purpose
The purpose of this division is to:
(1) Assist the city in the competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory management of the physical
use, occupancy and maintenance of its public rights-of-way by wireless network providers;
(2) Secure fair and reasonable compensation for the physical use and occupancy of the public
rights-of-way by wireless network providers in a nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral
manner; and
(3) Assist the city in protecting the public health, safety, and welfare.
Sec. 3.09.032 Governing law
This division shall be construed in accordance with chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government Code (“the
Code”) to the extent not in conflict with the Constitution and laws of the United States or of the state.
Sec. 3.09.033 Definitions
For the purpose of this division, the definitions found in the city design and construction standards manual,
installation of network nodes and node support poles (being hereinafter referred to as “design and construction
standards”) are hereby incorporated into this division and shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning. The following definitions as found in the design and construction standards are
specifically applicable to this division:
Applicable codes.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 112/362
(1) The city's adopted building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes adopted by a
recognized national code organization; and
(2) Local amendments to those codes to the extent not inconsistent with chapter 284.
City. The City of Iowa Park, Texas or its lawful successor.
City council. The municipal governing body of the City of Iowa Park, Texas.
Chapter 284. Texas Local Government Code, chapter 284.
Code. The Texas Local Government Code.
Collocate and collocation. The installation, mounting, maintenance, modification, operation, or replacement of
network nodes in a public right-of-way on or adjacent to a pole.
Decorative pole. A streetlight pole specially designed and placed for aesthetic purposes and on which no
appurtenances or attachments, other than specially designed informational or directional signage or temporary
holiday or special event attachments, have been placed or are permitted to be placed according to
nondiscriminatory city codes and ordinances.
Design district. An area that is zoned, or otherwise designated by municipal code or ordinance, and for which
the city maintains and enforces unique design and aesthetic standards on a uniform and nondiscriminatory basis.
Easement. Any public easement or other compatible use created by dedication, or by other means, to the city for
public utility purposes or any other purpose whatsoever. “Easement” shall include a private easement used for
the provision of utilities.
Federal Communications Commission or FCC. The Federal Administrative Agency, or lawful successor,
authorized to oversee cable television and other multi-channel regulation on a national level.
Highway right-of-way. Right-of-way adjacent to a state or federal highway.
Historic district. An area that is zoned or otherwise designated as a historic district under municipal, state, or
federal law.
Law. Common law or a federal, state, or local law, statute, code, rule, regulation, order, or ordinance.
Local. Within the geographical boundaries of the city.
Location. The city-approved and lawfully permitted location for the network node, node support pole, or
transport facility.
Mayor. The mayor of the City of Iowa Park, Texas, or designee.
Micro network node. A network node that is not larger in dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width,
and 12 inches in height, and that has an exterior antenna, if any, not longer than 11 inches.
Municipal park. An area that is zoned or otherwise designated by the city as a public park for the purpose of
recreational activity.
Network node. Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and
a communications network. The term:
(1) Includes:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 113/362
(A) Equipment associated with wireless communications;
(B) A radio transceiver, an antenna, a battery-only backup power supply, and comparable
equipment, regardless of technological configuration; and
(C) Coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is immediately adjacent to and directly associated with a
particular collocation; and
(2) Does not include:
(A) An electric generator;
(B) A pole; or
(C) A macro tower.
Network provider.
(1) A wireless service provider; or
(2) A person that does not provide wireless services and that is not an electric utility but builds or
installs on behalf of a wireless service provider:
(A) Network nodes; or
(B) Node support poles or any other structure that supports or is capable of supporting a
network node.
Node support pole. A pole installed by a network provider for the primary purpose of supporting a network
node.
Permit. A written authorization for the use of the public right-of-way or collocation on a service pole required
from the city before a network provider may perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a project over
which the municipality has police power authority.
Pole. A service pole, city-owned utility pole, node support pole, or utility pole.
Private easement. An easement or other real property right that is only for the benefit of the grantor and grantee
and their successors and assigns.
Provider. The same as “network provider.”
Public right-of-way.
(1) The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley,
waterway, or utility easement in which the city has an interest.
(2) The term does not include:
(A) A private easement; or
(B) The airwaves above a public right-of-way with regard to wireless telecommunications.
Service pole. A pole, other than a city-owned utility pole, owned or operated by the city and located in a public
right-of-way, including but not limited to:
(1) A pole that supports traffic-control functions;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 114/362
(2) A structure for signage;
(3) A pole that supports lighting, other than a decorative pole; and
(4) A pole or similar structure owned or operated by a municipality and supporting only network
nodes.
Street. Only the paved portion of the right-of-way used for vehicular travel, being the area between the inside of
the curb to the inside of the opposite curb, or the area between the two parallel edges of the paved roadway for
vehicular travel where there is no curb. A “street” is generally part of, but smaller in width than the width of the
entire right-of-way, while a right-of- way may include sidewalks and utility easements. A “street” does not
include the curb or the sidewalk, if either are present at the time of a permit application or if added later.
Traffic signal. Any device, whether manually, electrically, or mechanically operated by which traffic is
alternately directed to stop and to proceed.
Transport facility. Each transmission path physically within a public right-of-way, extending with a physical line
from a network node directly to the network, for the purpose of providing backhaul for network nodes.
User. A person or organization which conducts a business over facilities occupying the whole or a part of a
public street or right-of-way, depending on the context.
Utility pole. A pole that provides:
(1) Electric distribution with a voltage rating of not more than 34.5 kilovolts; or
(2) Services of a telecommunications provider, as defined by section 51.002, Texas Utilities Code.
Wireless service. Any service, using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum, including the use of wi-fi,
whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided to the public using a network node.
Wireless service provider. A person that provides wireless service to the public.
Wireless facilities. “Micro network nodes,” “network nodes,” and “node support poles” as defined in Texas
Local Government Code, chapter 284.
Sec. 3.09.034 Use and occupancy of public rights-of-way
(a) Pursuant to this division and subject to the design and construction standards and the code, a network
provider has the nonexclusive right to use and occupy the public rights-of-way in the city for the purpose of
constructing, maintaining, and operating its facilities used in the provision of wireless facilities.
(b) The terms of this division shall apply to all network providers' facilities used, in whole or part, in the
provision of wireless services throughout the city, including any annexed areas upon the effective date of
annexation.
Sec. 3.09.035 Compliance with design and construction standards and applicable codes
All wireless network providers shall comply with the terms of this division, applicable city codes, and the terms
and conditions of the city's design and construction standards.
Sec. 3.09.036 General construction and maintenance requirements
A network provider shall construct and maintain network nodes and network support poles described in the code
in a manner that does not:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 115/362
(1) Obstruct, impede, or hinder the usual travel or public safety on a public right-of-way;
(2) Obstruct the legal use of a public right-of-way by other utility providers;
(3) Violate nondiscriminatory applicable codes;
(4) Violate or conflict with the city's publicly disclosed public right-of-way design specifications;
or
(5) Violate the federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, 42 U.S.C. section 12101 et seq.
(“ADA”).
Sec. 3.09.037 Permit applications
(a) Except as otherwise provided in chapter 284 of the code, a network provider shall obtain a permit or
permits from the city to install a network node, node support pole, transport facility or other improvements in a
city public right-of-way.
(b) The city may not directly or indirectly require, as a condition for issuing a permit required under this
division, that a network provider perform services unrelated to the installation or collocation for which the
permit is sought, including in-kind contributions such as reserving fiber, conduit, or pole space for the city.
(c) A network provider that wants to install or collocate multiple network nodes inside the municipal limits of
the city is entitled to file a consolidated permit application with the city for not more than 30 network nodes and
upon payment of the applicable fee(s) and compliance with all permit application requirements, receive a permit
or permits for the installation or collocation of those network nodes.
(d) The network provider shall provide the following information in its permit applications:
(1) Applicable construction and engineering drawings and information to confirm that the
applicant will comply with the city's design and construction standards and applicable codes;
(2) Any additional information reasonably related to the network provider's use of the public
rights-of-way to ensure compliance with the design and construction standards and this division;
(3) A certificate that the network node(s) complies with applicable regulations of the Federal
Communications Commission; and certification that the proposed network node(s) will be placed
into active commercial service by or for the network provider not later than the 60th day after the
date of construction and final testing of each network node is completed;
(4) A certificate of insurance that documents that the network provider and its contractor have at
least $1,000,000.00 in general liability coverage.
(e) Exception: As provided in section 284.157 of the code, a network provider is not required to apply, obtain
a permit, or pay a rate to the city for:
(1) Routine maintenance that does not require excavation or closing of sidewalks or vehicular
lanes in a public right-of-way;
(2) Replacing or upgrading a network node or network pole with a node or pole that is
substantially similar in size or smaller and that does not require excavation or closing of sidewalks or
vehicular lanes in a public right-of-way; or
(3) The installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of micro network nodes
that are strung on cables between existing poles or node support poles in compliance with the
National Electrical Safety Code.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 116/362
(f) Notwithstanding subsection (e) above:
(1) The network provider or its contractors shall notify the city at least 24 hours in advance of
work described in this subsection (e);
(2) The network provider or its contractors may replace or upgrade a pole only with the approval
of the pole's owner; and
(3) The size limitations may not in any event exceed the parameters prescribed by section 284.003
without the city's approval in accordance with section 284.109, with the city acting on behalf of this
state as the fiduciary trustee of public property.
Sec. 3.09.038 Installation in historic districts or design districts
A network provider must obtain advance written consent from the city council before collocating new network
nodes or installing new node support poles in an area of the city that has been zoned or otherwise designated as a
historic district or as a design district if the district has decorative poles. The network provider shall be required
to comply with the general aesthetic requirements and all other applicable requirements described in the city's
design and construction standards. The city has the authority to designate new historic districts and design
districts, and the authority to alter or modify existing historic districts and design districts, at a future date.
Sec. 3.09.039 Installation in municipal parks and residential areas
A network provider may not install a new node support pole in a public right-of-way without the city council's
discretionary, nondiscriminatory and written consent if the public right-of way:
(1) Is in a municipal park; or
(2) Is adjacent to a street or thoroughfare that is:
(A) Not more than 50 feet wide; and
(B) Adjacent to single-family residential lots or other multifamily residences or undeveloped
land that is designated for residential use by zoning or deed restrictions.
(3) In addition to the above, a network provider installing a network node or node support pole in a
public right-of way shall comply with private deed restrictions and other private restrictions in the
area that apply to those facilities.
(4) The network provider shall be further required to comply with the applicable requirements set
out in the city's design and construction standards.
Sec. 3.09.040 Municipal review process by the city
(a) Determination of application completeness. The city shall determine whether the permit application is
complete and notify the applicant of that determination:
(1) For network nodes and node support poles. No later than 30 days after the date the city receives
the permit application.
(2) For a transport facility. No later than 10 days after the date the city receives the permit
application.
(b) Approval or denial of application. The city shall approve or deny a completed application after the date it
is submitted to the city:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 117/362
(1) For network nodes. No later than 60 days after the date the city receives the complete
application.
(2) For network support poles. No later than 150 days after the date the city receives the complete
application.
(3) For transport facilities. No later than 21 days after the city receives the complete application.
(c) Basis for denial of application. If an application is denied by the city, it shall document the basis for the
denial, including the specific applicable city code provisions or other city rules, regulations, or other law on
which the denial is based. The documentation for the denial must be sent by electronic mail to the applicant on
or before the date that the city denies the application.
(d) Resubmission of denied application. The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified in the denial
application.
(1) The applicant has 30 days from the date the city denies the completed application to cure the
deficiencies identified in the denial documentation without paying an additional application fee, other
than any fee for actual costs incurred by the city.
(2) The city shall approve or deny the revised completed application after a denial not later than
the 90th day after the city receives the revised completed application. The city's review shall be
limited to the deficiencies cited in the denial documentation.
(e) Nondiscriminatory review. Each completed application shall be processed by the city on a
nondiscriminatory basis.
(f) Deemed approval. An application for a permit for a node support pole, network node, or transport facility
shall be deemed approved if the application is not approved or denied on or before the applicable date for
approval or denial prescribed by this section.
Sec. 3.09.041 Time of installation
A network provider shall begin installation for which a permit is granted not later than six months after final
approval of the application and shall diligently pursue installation to completion. The city manager may in
his/her sole discretion grant reasonable extensions of time as requested by the network provider.
Sec. 3.09.042 Applicable fees and rental rates to the city
(a) As compensation for the network provider's use and occupancy of the city public rights-of-way, the
network provider shall pay application fees and annual public right-of-way rental rates as set forth below, which
shall be in lieu of any lawful tax, license, charge, right-of-way permit, use, construction, street cut or inspection
fee; or other right-of-way related charge or fee, whether charged to the network provider or its contractor(s)
within the city, except the usual general ad valorem taxes, special assessments and sales tax levied in accordance
with state law and equally applicable to all general businesses in the city.
(b) Network nodes.
(1) Application fee. The application fee shall be $500.00 covering up to five network nodes,
$250.00 for each additional network node per application.
(2) Annual public right-of-way rate fee. The annual public right-of-way rate shall be $250.00 per
network node installed in the city public rights-of-way.
(3) Public right-of-way rate adjustment. As provided in section 284.054 of the code, the city may
adjust the amount of the annual public right-of-way rate not more than annually by an amount equal
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 118/362
to one-half the annual change, if any, in the consumer price index (CPI). The city shall provide
written notice to each network provider of the new rate; and the rate shall apply to the first payment
due to the city on or after the 60th day following the written notice.
(c) Node support poles. The application fee for each network support pole shall be $1,000.00.
(d) Transfer facilities.
(1) The application fee for each transfer facility shall be $500.00.
(2) The annual transfer facility rental rate shall be $28.00 monthly for each network node site
located in a public right-of-way. However, no rate is required if the network provider is already
paying the city an amount equal to or greater than the amount of other city right-of-way fees for
access lines under chapter 283 of the code or cable franchise fees under chapter 66 of the Texas
Utilities Code.
(e) Micro network nodes. No application fee is required for a micro network node if the installation is attached
on lines between poles or node support poles.
(f) Collocation of network nodes on service poles. Subject to the city's pole service agreement, the collocation
of network nodes on city service poles shall be at a rate of $20.00 per year per service pole.
(g) City-owned municipal utility poles. A network provider shall pay an annual pole attachment rate for the
collocation of a network node supported by or installed on a city-owned utility pole based upon the pole
attachment rate consistent with section 54.024 of the Texas Utilities Code, applied on a per-foot basis.
(h) The city shall not seek or accept in-kind services in lieu of or as additional payment or consideration from
any user of the public rights-of-way for use of the public rights-of-way.
Sec. 3.09.043 Indemnity
As provided in section 284.302 of the code, a network provider accessing a public right-of- way under chapter
284 of the code shall indemnify and hold the city and its officers and employees harmless against any and all
claims, lawsuits, judgments, costs, liens, losses, expenses, fees (including reasonable attorney's fees and costs of
defense), proceedings, actions, demands, causes of action, liability, and suits of any kind and nature, including
personal or bodily injury (including death), property damage, or other harm for which recovery of damages is
sought that is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be caused solely by the negligent act, error, or
omission of the network provider, any agent, officer, director, representative, employee, affiliate, or
subcontractor of the network provider, or its respective officers, agents, employees, directors, or representatives,
while installing, repairing, or maintaining facilities in a public right-of-way. The indemnity provided by this
section does not apply to any liability resulting from the negligence of the city, its officers, employees,
contractors, or subcontractors. If a network provider and the city are found jointly liable by a court of competent
jurisdiction, liability shall be apportioned comparatively in accordance with the laws of this state without,
however, waiving any governmental immunity available to the city under state law and without waiving any
defenses of the parties under state law. This section is solely for the benefit of the city and network provider and
does not create or grant any rights, contractual or otherwise, to any other person or entity. A network provider or
city shall promptly advise the other in writing of any known claim or demand against the network provider or
the city related to or arising out of the network provider's activities in a public right-of-way.
Sec. 3.09.044 Relocation
Except as provided in existing state and federal law, a network provider shall relocate or adjust network nodes in
a public right-of-way in a timely manner and without cost to the municipality managing the public right-of-way.
Sec. 3.09.045 Interference
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 119/362
A network provider shall operate all network nodes in accordance with all applicable laws, including regulations
adopted by the Federal Communications Commission. A network provider shall ensure that the operation of a
network node does not cause any harmful radio frequency interference to a Federal Communications
Commission-authorized mobile telecommunications operation of the city operating at the time the network node
was initially installed or constructed. On written notice, a network provider shall take all steps reasonably
necessary to remedy any harmful interference.
Sec. 3.09.046 Effect on other utilities and telecommunication providers
Nothing in this division shall govern attachment of network nodes on poles and other structures owned or
operated by investor-owned electric utilities, electric cooperatives, telephone cooperatives, or
telecommunication providers.
(Ordinance 1232 adopted 8/28/17)
CHAPTER 4
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 4.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 4.01.001 Vehicles for hire
The use of the streets of the city by any person for the purpose of operating or causing to be operated thereon
any vehicle engaged in transporting passengers for hire over fixed routes is declared a public franchise or
privilege in the nature of a franchise, and such business or occupation is declared to be a public utility, the
exercise of which is conditioned upon and subject to grant, authorization, license, inspection and regulation by
the city council. (2004 Code, art. 4.05)
State law reference–Authority of municipality to regulate taxicabs, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 215.004.
ARTICLE 4.02 PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS†
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.02.001 Definitions
Peddler. Any person who engages in commercial activities within city limits by carrying goods or merchandise
and selling or offering for sale for immediate delivery such goods or merchandise from house-to-house or
business-to-business, or upon public property.
Solicitor. Any person who solicits or attempts to solicit, from house-to-house or business-to-business, or upon
public property, funds or orders for services, commercial goods, wares, merchandise, subscriptions or
publications to be delivered at a future date or time.
(2004 Code, sec. 4.03.001)
Sec. 4.02.002 Violation–penalty
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 120/362
Any person violating the provisions of this article is guilty of a class C misdemeanor and upon conviction shall
be fined not more than $500.00 for each offense. Each day a person violates any provision of this article shall be
considered a separate offense. (Ordinance 1119, sec. 9, adopted 4/25/11)
Sec. 4.02.003 Hours and places of operation
(a) No peddler or solicitor may conduct activities defined in section 4.02.001 except between the hours of
eight a.m. and nine p.m.
(b) No peddler or solicitor may peddle or solicit in the public streets, or from medians in the streets, within the
city limits, or in any way block, obstruct, or unduly hinder passage on public streets within the city limits.
(2004 Code, sec. 4.03.002; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 4.02.004 “No solicitors” signs
Any peddler or solicitor who conducts or attempts to conduct business at a place where a sign clearly indicates
that solicitors or peddlers are unwelcome is in violation of this article. (2004 Code, sec. 4.03.003)
Sec. 4.02.005 No-contact list
(a) Any person who is the owner or lawful occupant of private property within the territorial limits of the city,
may prohibit peddling, or solicitation by registering their property in accordance with subsection (b) below.
(Ordinance 1262 adopted 3/11/19)
(b) The city secretary will compile and maintain a list of persons desiring to be included within the provisions
of subsection (a) above. This list is sometimes referred to herein as the “no-contact” list. The no-contact list shall
be updated at least semiannually by the city secretary. (Ordinance 1119, sec. 8, adopted 4/25/11)
(c) No person peddling or soliciting shall contact any person who is on the no-contact list provided to that
person. (Ordinance 1262 adopted 3/11/19)
Secs. 4.02.006–4.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 4.02.031 Required
(a) It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a peddler or solicitor within the city without first
obtaining a permit from the city manager. A person may apply for a permit under this division for other persons
only if those other persons are directly under the control of the person making the application. Each person for
whom a permit is requested under this division shall be required to provide the information required by this
division and to comply with all requirements of this article. Failure of any person to provide such information or
to comply with such requirements shall be grounds to deny a permit to such individual. Further, each person to
whom a permit is issued under this division shall be required to comply with all provisions of this article and the
failure of any individual to do so shall be grounds to revoke or suspend the permit issued to such individual.
(b) Every person engaged in soliciting or peddling activities must have a permit issued pursuant to this
division which identifies the person engaging in solicitation or peddling.
(Ordinance 1119, sec. 1, adopted 4/25/11)
Sec. 4.02.032 Exemptions
(a) The following are excluded from permitting provisions:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 121/362
(1) Newspaper carriers;
(2) Farmers who sell agricultural products that were raised or grown by them;
(3) Locally based nonprofit organizations;
(4) Religious proselytizing or distribution of religious literature;
(5) Political speech; or
(6) Canvassers who attempt only to distribute handbills or to solicit political support or to
determine opinions or sentiments.
(2004 Code, sec. 4.03.032)
(7) Security service contractors and/or security investigation companies licensed by the state
private security board as authorized in chapter 1702 of the Texas Occupations Code. (Ordinance 1182
adopted 7/14/14)
(b) Persons who are exempt from the permitting requirements pursuant to subsection (a) above shall be
subject to the provisions of section 4.02.003 (hours and places of operation); section 4.02.004 (“no solicitors”
signs); and section 4.02.005 (no-contact list); and are encouraged to notify the city manager as to the
approximate dates of the door-to-door activities and the areas in which they will be working. (Ordinance 1183
adopted 7/28/14)
Sec. 4.02.033 Application
(a) Written application. Any peddler or solicitor desiring to engage in activities as a peddler or solicitor within
the city must file a written application for a permit with the city manager which application shall give the
following information:
(1) Applicant's name, telephone number, address, birth date, physical description, finger or
thumbprint, criminal history check from the Texas Department of Public Safety, and either:
(A) Their driver's license number and state; or
(B) Their social security number and an official, government-issued picture identification
card;
(2) If the applicant is peddling or making solicitations for any commercial, charitable organization,
the name, telephone number and address of such organizations;
(3) A full and complete list of goods to be sold and/or services to be delivered;
(4) For each individual involved in the peddling or solicitation campaign: their name, telephone
number, address, birth date, physical description, and either:
(A) Their driver's license number and state; or
(B) Their social security number and an official, government-issued picture identification
card;
(5) Description (year, make, type) and license plate number and state of all vehicles to be used in
soliciting and peddling; and
(6) Applicant must provide original identifying documents to the city manager upon request.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 122/362
(b) Criminal background check. Each person that will engage in peddling or soliciting activities will be
subject to a criminal background check to determine whether any of those individuals are currently wanted on a
warrant for arrest or have been convicted of one or more of the offenses identified in section 4.02.037 below.
Each person undergoing a criminal background check must sign any documents, releases or waivers required to
facilitate the criminal background check.
(c) Payment of fees. The application shall be accompanied by the fees required by section 4.02.035 and an
amount equal to the cost to the city of performing each criminal background check required. The permit fee shall
cover the city's administrative cost in processing the application and shall be nonrefundable in the event the
application is denied. Any amounts advanced to the city for a criminal background check which are expended
for that purpose by the city shall not be refundable in the event the application is denied for any reason.
(Ordinance 1119, sec. 2, adopted 4/25/11)
Sec. 4.02.034 Conditions
The application shall contain express provisions stating that issuance of a permit shall be conditioned upon
compliance at all times during the duration of the permit with all requirements of this article and other applicable
laws including, without limitation, compliance with the provisions of section 4.02.005 relating to those residents
who are on the no-contact list maintained by the city. (Ordinance 1119, sec. 3, adopted 4/25/11)
Sec. 4.02.035 Fee schedule
All peddlers and solicitors not exempted by section 4.02.036 shall pay a permit fee as set forth in the fee
schedule in appendix A of this code. (2004 Code, sec. 4.03.035)
Sec. 4.02.036 Exemptions from fee
The following are exempt from the permit fee:
(1) Any individual soliciting or peddling for a philanthropic, charitable, political or religious
organization;
(2) Any individual engaged in interstate commerce.
(2004 Code, sec. 4.03.036)
Sec. 4.02.037 Denial
(a) A copy of the application for a permit will be referred to the city manager who will undertake an
investigation of the applicant's record and background, such as shall be reasonably necessary to protect the
public. An application for permit under this article may be denied where:
(1) Required application information is incomplete or incorrect;
(2) Applicant is currently wanted on a warrant for arrest;
(3) Applicant or any individual for whom a permit is requested has been convicted of theft or any
offense reportable by the city to the Texas Department of Public Safety or the Federal Bureau of
Investigation under “index crimes” part I and/or group A of the National Incident Base Reporting
System or crime index programs or other law enforcement reporting system (e.g. aggravated assault,
burglary, forcible rape, larceny-theft, motor vehicle theft, murder, non-negligent manslaughter, and
robbery);
(4) Applicant or any individual for whom a permit is requested fails to comply with any other
requirement of section 4.02.033 above.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 123/362
(b) If the city manager denies a permit, applicant may appeal this decision in writing to the city council, which
may affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the city manager. An appeal to the city council may be perfected
by written notice to the city secretary delivered within ten days of the date the city manager's decision is
delivered to the permittee. Any decision of the city manager which is not properly appealed shall be final.
(Ordinance 1119, sec. 4, adopted 4/25/11)
Sec. 4.02.038 Issuance; duration
(a) If the city manager finds that the application is completed in conformance with sections 4.02.033 through
4.02.036, a permit shall be issued within five working days from the date that all requirements of section
4.02.033 have been fully and completely satisfied (including the payment of all required fees) by the applicant
and all persons for whom a permit it requested.
(b) The permit shall be the original application under section 4.02.033, with an official stamp indicating
approval by the city manager and shall include, at the top of the permit:
(1) A picture of the individual for who the permit is granted;
(2) The name of the individual to who the permit is issued in large letters;
(3) A permit number and its expiration date.
(c) Each permit will be valid for 12 months from date of issue.
(d) The city secretary will retain one copy of the approved permit for official records.
(Ordinance 1119, sec. 5, adopted 4/25/11)
Sec. 4.02.039 Operations
(a) The permittee is required to notify the city manager before any peddling or soliciting under the issued
permit is conducted in each new calendar month after the issuance of the permit. At this time, the permittee will
update any information required under section 4.02.033 that has changed and will obtain the then current nocontact
list.
(b) The permittee shall inform each individual that is involved in the peddling or solicitation campaign of all
requirements of this article and applicable law and shall suspend activities by any person who fails to comply
with such requirements. The permittee will provide each person who is authorized to conduct peddling or
solicitation under the permit with a copy of the current no-contact list.
(c) The permittee shall not permit any person other than those persons listed on the permit to be engaged in
peddling or solicitation.
(d) Each peddler or solicitor will carry his or her original permit at all times while engaging in business in the
city. The permit shall be exhibited upon the person of the individual it authorizes to conduct soliciting or
peddling activities so that the permit is ready visible to persons with whom the peddler or solicitor makes
contact. Upon request or demand by any citizen, code enforcement officer or law enforcement officer, the
peddler or solicitor will exhibit the permit to indicate compliance with all of the relevant requirements of this
article.
(e) The person holding a permit may not state or imply that the issuance of the permit by the city is an
endorsement or approval by the city for the purposes of a solicitation or a product or service offered by the
permittee.
(Ordinance 1119, sec. 6, adopted 4/25/11)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 124/362
Sec. 4.02.040 Transfer
Permits issued under the provisions of this article are not transferable in any situation and will be clearly marked
“not transferable.” (2004 Code, sec. 4.03.040)
Sec. 4.02.041 Suspension
(a) The city manager or the city manager's designee may, upon documented complaint or violation of law,
suspend and confiscate a permit issued under this article.
(b) Peddlers and solicitors whose licenses are suspended have three business days during which to request an
administrative review of the suspension. If a request for administrative review is not made within three working
days, the permit is revoked.
(2004 Code, sec. 4.03.041)
Sec. 4.02.042 Revocation
(a) Upon permittee's request, the city manager shall provide the permittee with written notice containing
particulars of any and all complaints against him or her, and the time, date and place for an administrative review
of the suspension.
(b) The city manager or the city manager's designee will conduct an administrative review to determine
whether the permit shall be restored or revoked.
(c) After notice and review, the city manager may revoke any permit issued under this article for the following
reasons:
(1) Fraudulent statements, omissions on permit application or in conduct of permitted business;
(2) Any violation of law of the types identified in section 4.02.037(a)(3) above;
(3) Endangerment of public welfare, health or safety.
(d) If the city manager revokes a permit, applicant may appeal this decision in writing to the city council,
which may affirm, modify, or reverse the decision. An appeal to the city council may be perfected by written
notice to the city secretary delivered within ten days of the date the city manager's decision is delivered to the
permittee. Any decision of the city manager which is not properly appealed shall be final.
(e) Revocation or suspension of any permit shall bar the permittee from eligibility for any permit under this
article for a period of one year.
(Ordinance 1119, sec. 7, adopted 4/25/11)
ARTICLE 4.03 SHORT-TERM OR SEASONAL BUSINESSES
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.03.001 Sales tax certificate exemptions
Businesses established solely for the sale of milk, dairy products, vegetables, poultry, eggs, and other nontaxable
farm produce are not required to hold a sales tax certificate as long as there is no sales tax required by the state.
(2004 Code, sec. 4.04.005)
Sec. 4.03.002 Compliance with applicable regulations
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 125/362
All short-term or seasonal businesses shall meet all electrical, plumbing, setbacks, and all other business-related
ordinances of the city. (2004 Code, sec. 4.04.006)
Secs. 4.03.003–4.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 4.03.031 Required
It shall be unlawful for any short-term or seasonal businesses to operate in the city without first obtaining a
permit from city hall. (2004 Code, sec. 4.04.001)
Sec. 4.03.032 Application; granting or denial
Any person desiring to engage in a short-term or seasonal business shall make an application for a permit to city
hall. The building officials of the city shall review such applications for compliance with the code, and shall not
grant such permit until all other requirements have been met. (2004 Code, sec. 4.04.002)
Sec. 4.03.033 Form; display; fee; term
Such permits shall be dated and signed and issued upon payment of the fee herein required, and approval by the
building officials of the city. The permit shall specify the term of validity. The term shall not exceed six (6)
months after date of issuance. Each such licensed business shall display the permit in a visible area. The fee for
such a permit and for farm produce permits will be as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code.
(2004 Code, sec. 4.04.003)
Sec. 4.03.034 Suspension or revocation
If at any time a business holding a permit is found to be violating any city ordinances, maintaining an unsanitary
or unsightly area, or being without the proper sales tax certificate, the permit may be revoked or suspended after
a twenty-four-hour written notice. (2004 Code, sec. 4.04.004)
ARTICLE 4.04 OUTDOOR STORAGE YARDS*
Sec. 4.04.001 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Fence. A structure, erected to enclose and screen areas of property, constructed as required by section 4.04.007.
Motor vehicle salvage yard. Any outdoor storage yard used for the deposit of dismantled or junk motor vehicles
which, in their present state, are unfit for use on public highways; or any outdoor storage yard used for the
deposit of any discarded material which has been a part of or intended to be a part of any motor vehicle.
Outdoor storage. Any material, vehicle or equipment that has been used, discarded, damaged or partially
dismantled and is stored or held outside as inventory for future sale, processing or use. Such articles include but
are not limited to automobiles or automobile parts, appliances, boxes, crates, pipe or pipe fittings, paper, metal,
tires, furniture, fixtures, machinery, motors, lumber, buildings or portions of buildings, building materials,
barrels or clothing.
Outdoor storage yard. Any parcel or part of land, not within a building, upon which outdoor storage is bought,
sold, processed, stored, exchanged, baled or packaged.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 126/362
Public right-of-way. A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, prescription or condemnation and used
or intended to be used as a public roadway.
(2004 Code, sec. 4.06.001)
Sec. 4.04.002 Penalty
Any person who operates an outdoor storage yard in violation of this article shall, upon conviction of such
violation, be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00. (2004 Code, sec. 4.06.002)
Sec. 4.04.003 Access for fire department or law enforcement operations
(a) Outdoor storage yards shall be kept and maintained in such a manner that will not hinder or obstruct
firefighting or law enforcement operations. Access to each area of storage and each building or structure on the
premises shall be provided by means of roadways and/or aisles as required by the fire chief and police chief.
(b) Access roadways, when required by the fire chief and/or police chief, shall provide not less than 15 feet of
clear, unobstructed width.
(c) Any access roadway shall be provided with a turning radius of sufficient width to accommodate
firefighting and/or law enforcement apparatus.
(2004 Code, sec. 4.06.003)
Sec. 4.04.004 Removal of vegetation
Areas around or under outdoor storage materials or buildings shall be kept free and clear of accumulations of
grass, weeds, brush or other uncultivated vegetation. (2004 Code, sec. 4.06.004)
Sec. 4.04.005 Standing water
Stored materials and buildings or structures located on an outdoor storage yard shall be covered, stacked or
maintained in a manner which will prevent the accumulation of standing water within or in stored materials. The
premises of an outdoor storage yard shall be maintained in a manner which will prevent the accumulation of
standing water on such premises. (2004 Code, sec. 4.06.005)
Sec. 4.04.006 Burning
The willful burning of storage material is prohibited. No outdoor fire shall be purposely started or maintained
unless written permission has been obtained from the fire marshal's office. (2004 Code, sec. 4.06.006)
Sec. 4.04.007 Fencing
(a) Every outdoor storage yard shall have an approved fence installed and maintained which will provide a
screen to obscure the view of such storage yard from a public right-of-way and from single-family and
multifamily residences. Such fences shall be installed in the following locations as a minimum requirement:
(1) Along the perimeter of that part of the outdoor storage yard that is within 300 feet of a public
right-of-way; and
(2) Along the perimeter of that part of the outdoor storage yard abutting land upon which is
located, on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives, single-family or
multifamily dwellings within 300 feet of such outdoor storage yard.
(b) Fences, as required by subsection (a) of this section, shall comply with the following requirements:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 127/362
(1) Fences shall be sheathed with boards, slats, metal, or other approved materials, securely nailed
or attached to supports, which will provide an effective visual screen. Transparent or translucent
sheathing materials shall not be permitted.
(2) Sheathing material for screening shall extend at least six feet.
(3) A building permit shall be obtained from the building inspections division prior to construction.
Written plans and specifications must be submitted at the time of the permit application.
(4) In no case shall earthen berms, vegetation or auto parts be used to meet the fencing
requirements contained in this section. The use of used or salvage materials shall be prohibited unless
specifically noted on plans and approved by the building code administrator.
(5) Sheathing materials, posts, rails or any other fencing construction materials shall be naturally
weather resistant or shall be painted or finished to resist decay or rust. Fences shall be maintained by
repair, painting, or replacement as necessary to maintain stability, screening and weather resistance
and decay resistance.
(6) This section shall apply equally to new and existing fences, and such fences shall not be
deemed to be in compliance with this section until inspected and approved by the building code
administrator.
(c) Gates normally used for access to the outdoor storage yard may not be required to provide a solid screen.
If such screening exception is allowed, the salvage yard immediately behind and perpendicular to such gate, to a
distance of a least 30 feet, shall be kept clear of all storage materials.
(d) Buildings that are used for normal operation of the business, such as storage, sales or office buildings, may
not be required to be fenced; however, materials may not be stored in front of or to the side of such buildings so
as to be open to public view, except that the incidental outdoor display of commodities for retail sale may be
permitted when approved in writing by the building code administrator.
(e) A vehicle display area of a motor vehicle salvage yard may not be required to be fenced if such area is
used for the display of undismantled, titleable vehicles being held for resale. Such vehicle display area shall not
be used for the display of other used or salvage materials, merchandise or parts whatsoever. The vehicle display
area shall not exceed 150 feet in length measured along the front property line, and such area shall not contain
more than 15 vehicles. Such area shall be fenced as otherwise required in this section at the rear in order to
obscure public view from vehicles or materials not located in the display area.
(f) Areas of land used for the outdoor storage or display of materials or vehicles incidental to the principal
activity of a business shall not be required to comply with this section if such area is included as one of the
following uses:
(1) New or used automobile and related vehicle sales lots authorized by a state motor vehicle
dealer license.
(2) Storage yards incidental to the on-site sale of new building materials, new heavy machinery,
new farm equipment, new nursery products, new mobile homes, new boats or new trailers.
(3) Storage yards for supplies and/or raw materials necessary to the on-site manufacturing,
fabrication or assembly of finished products.
(4) Contractors' storage or equipment yards.
(5) Parking areas for vehicles and trailers incidental to rental businesses.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 128/362
(6) Parking areas for vehicles incidental to transportation and hauling activities of commercial
businesses and governmental entities.
(7) Parking areas for vehicles awaiting service at auto repair or auto body shops.
(2004 Code, sec. 4.06.007)
(8) Existing outdoor storage yards in light industrial (I-L) and heavy industrial (I-H) zoning
districts. (2004 Code, sec. 4.06.007; Ordinance adopting Code)
(g) Any exemption referenced in subsections (c) through (f) of this section shall not be construed as authority
to violate or set aside any other requirement of this article. (2004 Code, sec. 4.06.007)
State law reference–Automobile wrecking and salvage yard screening requirements and location, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec.
396.021 et seq.
Sec. 4.04.008 Storage on public right-of-way
No storage material shall be kept or stored upon a public right-of-way. (2004 Code, sec. 4.06.008)
ARTICLE 4.05 JUNKYARDS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.05.001 Applicability; compliance
Any place used or maintained as a junkyard or dumping ground, or for the wrecking or disassembling of
automobiles, trucks, tractors, or machinery of any kind, or for the storing or leaving of worn-out, wrecked, or
abandoned automobiles, trucks, tractors, or machinery of any kind, or of any of the parts thereof, or for the
maintenance or operation of such place for the accumulation of rubbish of any description, is hereby declared to
be a public and common nuisance, being obnoxious and offensive to the inhabitants of the city because of its
interference with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property by said inhabitants, and is prohibited within the
city, unless the same is conducted in the manner prescribed in sections 4.05.002 and 4.05.031. (2004 Code, sec.
6.03.001)
Sec. 4.05.002 Condition of premises
Any person granted a license as provided for in section 4.05.031 shall keep the premises used in the operation
and maintenance of said business in a neat and orderly condition, and no parts or junk as described above shall
be outside the bounds of the operator's or owner's property line, or in a city street right-of-way or roadway, or on
any city property. (2004 Code, sec. 6.03.003)
Secs. 4.05.003–4.05.030 Reserved
Division 2. License
Sec. 4.05.031 Application; issuance; fee; term
Any person desiring to use or maintain any property within the city for any of the purposes mentioned in section
4.05.001 shall make written application to the city secretary for a license, which application shall set forth the
name and address of the applicant and a legal description of the property or premises upon which said business
is to be conducted, and the city secretary shall have the power either to grant or reject such application. If the
application is granted, a license to operate such business shall be issued by the city secretary upon the payment
of a fee as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code. Any license so issued shall expire on January
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 129/362
first next succeeding the date of its issuance, but may be renewed from year to year in like manner as is provided
for the original license. (2004 Code, sec. 6.03.002)
Sec. 4.05.032 Revocation
The city council shall have the power to revoke the license provided for herein at any time for good cause, but
only after notice has been given to the owners of the business of a hearing to be held not less than ten (10) days
after the service of such notice. (2004 Code, sec. 6.03.004)
ARTICLE 4.06 ALARM SYSTEMS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.06.001 Definitions
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them:
Alarm notification. A notification intended to summon the police or fire department, which is designed either to
be initiated purposely by a person or by an alarm system that responds to a stimulus characteristic of
unauthorized intrusion or fire.
Alarm site. A single building, address, or location served by an alarm system or systems that is under the control
of one (1) owner.
Alarm system. A device or system that emits, transmits, or relays a signal intended to summon, or that would
reasonably be expected to summon, police or fire services of the city, including, but not limited to, local alarms.
Alarm system does not include:
(1) An alarm installed on a vehicle unless the vehicle is permanently located at a site; or
(2) An alarm designed to alert only the inhabitants of a premises which does not have a local
alarm.
Chief. The police chief.
False alarm notification. An alarm notification to the police or fire department, when the responding officer or
fire department personnel find no evidence of an attempted criminal offense or criminal offense or fire.
Local alarm. An alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site that is audible or visible from the exterior of a
structure.
Permit holder. The person designated in the application as required in section 4.06.041(c)(1) who is ultimately
responsible for responding to alarms and giving access to the site and who is also responsible for proper
maintenance and operation of the alarm system and payment of fees.
Person. An individual, corporation, partnership, association, organization, or similar entity.
Special trunkline. A telephone line leading into the communications center of the police or fire department that
is for the primary purpose of receiving emergency messages that originate from the automatic protection devices
and are transmitted directly or through an intermediary.
(2004 Code, sec. 8.07.001)
Sec. 4.06.002 Violations; penalty
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 130/362
(a) A person commits an offense if he violates by commission or omission any provision of this article that
imposes upon him or her a duty or responsibility.
(b) A person who violates a provision of this article shall be punished in accordance with the general penalty
provision set forth in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(c) In addition to prohibiting or requiring certain conduct of individuals, it is the intent of this article to hold a
corporation, partnership, or other association criminally responsible for acts or omissions performed by an agent
in behalf of the corporation, partnership, or other association, and within the scope of his employment.
(2004 Code, sec. 8.07.015)
Sec. 4.06.003 Operation and maintenance
(a) A permit holder in control of an alarm system shall:
(1) Maintain premises containing an alarm system in a manner that ensures proper operation of the
alarm system;
(2) Maintain the alarm system in a manner that will minimize false alarm notifications;
(3) Respond or cause a representative to respond within a reasonable period of time when notified
by the city to repair or inactivate a malfunctioning alarm system, to provide access to the premises, or
to provide security for the premises;
(4) Not manually activate an alarm for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the
alarm system was intended to report.
(b) A person in control of a local alarm shall adjust the mechanism or cause the alarm signal to sound for no
longer than fifteen (15) minutes after being activated.
(2004 Code, sec. 8.07.004)
Sec. 4.06.004 Use of relaying intermediary
A permit holder in control of an alarm system shall not allow alarm signals to be reported through a relaying
intermediary that does not comply with the requirements of this article and any rules and regulations
promulgated by the chief. (2004 Code, sec. 8.07.005)
Sec. 4.06.005 Requirements for relaying intermediaries
An intermediary who is engaged in the business of relaying alarm notifications to the city shall:
(1) Report alarms only over special trunklines designated by the chief;
(2) Communicate alarm notifications to the city in a manner and form determined by the chief;
(3) Be licensed by the state private security bureau.
(2004 Code, sec. 8.07.006)
Sec. 4.06.006 Dial alarm devices with prerecorded voice messages prohibited
No person shall use, or cause or permit to be used, any alarm device which automatically selects a telephone
trunkline of the police or fire department or any trunkline of the city, and then reproduces any prerecorded voice
messages to report any robbery, burglary, fire or other emergency. (2004 Code, sec. 8.07.007)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 131/362
Sec. 4.06.007 Operating instructions to be maintained at alarm site
A person in control of an alarm system shall maintain at each alarm site a complete set of written operating
instructions for each alarm system; for a fire alarm system, such instructions shall be posted at the alarm panel at
the alarm site. Special codes, combinations, or passwords must not be included in these instructions. (2004
Code, sec. 8.07.008)
Sec. 4.06.008 Dispatch records
(a) The officer or fire department representative responding to an alarm call resulting from an attempted
criminal offense, fire, or a false alarm shall record such information as necessary to permit the chief to maintain
records, including, but not limited to, the following information:
(1) Identification of the permit holder;
(2) Identification of the alarm site;
(3) Arrival time and dispatch received time;
(4) Time of day and date;
(5) Weather conditions;
(6) Area and subarea;
(7) Name of the permit holder's representative on the premises, if any.
(b) The responding police officer shall indicate on the dispatch record whether the notification was caused by
a criminal offense or fire, or whether the notification was the result of a false alarm.
(2004 Code, sec. 8.07.009)
Sec. 4.06.009 Performance reviews
If there is reason to believe that an alarm system is not being used or maintained in a manner that ensures proper
operation and suppresses false alarms, the chief may require a conference with an alarm permit holder and the
individual or association responsible for maintenance of the alarm system to review circumstances of each false
alarm. (2004 Code, sec. 8.07.010)
Sec. 4.06.010 Service fee
(a) Except as provided in subsection (b), the holder of an alarm permit shall pay a service fee as set forth in
the fee schedule in appendix A of this code for each police alarm notification in excess of six (6), and for each
fire alarm notification in excess of three (3), emitted from an alarm site within a permit period.
(b) If the responding police officer or fire department official determines that an alarm notification was caused
by an attempted criminal offense, criminal offense, or fire, no service fee will be assessed for that notification.
(2004 Code, sec. 8.07.011)
Sec. 4.06.011 Appeals
(a) If the chief refuses to issue or renew a permit, or revokes a permit, he shall send to the applicant or permit
holder by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of his action and a statement of the right to an
appeal. However, notification by certified mail is not required for a false alarm determination and regular
mailing shall be sufficient. The applicant or permit holder may appeal the decision of the chief to the city
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 132/362
manager by filing with the city manager a written request for a hearing, setting forth reasons for the appeal,
within ten (10) days after receipt of the notice from the chief. The filing of a request for an appeal hearing with
the city manager stays an action of the chief in revoking a permit until the city manager or his or her designated
representative makes a final decision. If a request for an appeal hearing is not made within the ten-day period,
the action of the chief is final.
(b) The city manager or his or her representative shall serve as hearing officer at an appeal and consider
evidence by any interested person. The formal rules of evidence do not apply at an appeal hearing; the hearing
officer shall make his or her decision on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing.
The hearing officer shall affirm, reverse, or modify the action of the chief. The decision of the hearing officer is
final as to administrative remedies with the city.
(c) It shall further be the function of the hearing officer to recommend prosecution of any violations of this
article to the municipal court prosecutor pursuant to the sanctions contained in section 4.06.002 of this article.
(2004 Code, sec. 8.07.013)
Sec. 4.06.012 Protection of financial institutions
(a) A financial institution required to have an alarm system pursuant to the provisions of the Bank Protection
Act of 1968 (12 U.S.C., section 1882) may install, with the permission of the chief, a signal line directly to the
police department for the purpose of reporting burglaries and robberies. If such an arrangement is made, all other
requirements of this article must be met. The financial institution shall execute a letter of agreement with the city
permitting the installation of all necessary equipment on an indicator panel monitored in the communications
division of the police department. The installation must be accomplished at the institution's expense.
(b) The financial institution shall pay a monthly fee as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code
for each indicator. The chief shall have the right, at reasonable times and upon oral notice, to inspect the alarm
system at the alarm site and require necessary repairs or improvements. If the chief finds that the alarm system
continually fails to operate properly or be operated properly, he may terminate the privilege to have equipment
and indicators in the communications center of the police department and require prompt removal of the
equipment at the expense of the financial institution.
(c) The financial institution, at its expense, shall make arrangements to provide service for the alarm system at
the request of the financial institution or the chief on a twenty-four-hour basis, seven (7) days a week. In no
event shall the city become liable for charges for repairs and maintenance.
(d) The financial institution may cancel its agreement with the city at any time by giving the city written
notice through the chief and, at its own expense, removing its equipment and indicators from the monitor panel
in the communications center.
(e) The chief may require any change, modernization, or consolidation of alarm signaling equipment that he or
she deems advisable. In no event shall the city become liable for charges for these changes.
(f) Instead of a direct line, a financial institution may report burglaries and robberies by transmission through
an alarm reporting service using a special trunkline designated by the chief.
(2004 Code, sec. 8.07.014)
Secs. 4.06.013–4.06.040 Reserved
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 4.06.041 Required; application; issuance; transfer
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 133/362
(a) A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated an alarm system without an alarm
permit issued by the chief. A separate permit is required for each alarm site.
(b) Upon receipt of a properly completed application form, and a permit fee as set forth in the fee schedule in
appendix A of this code for commercial permits or for residential permits, the chief shall issue an alarm permit
to an applicant, unless the applicant has failed to pay a service fee assessed under section 4.06.010 or has had an
alarm permit for the alarm site revoked, and the violation causing the revocation has not been corrected. The
CISD shall be exempted from the payment of a permit fee, but shall be subject to all other fees, regulations, and
requirements of this article.
(c) Each permit application must contain the following information:
(1) Name, address, and telephone number of the person who will be the permit holder and be
responsible for the proper maintenance and operation of the alarm system and payment of fees
assessed under this article;
(2) Classification of the alarm site as either residential or commercial;
(3) The purpose of the alarm system for each alarm system located at the alarm site (i.e., burglary,
robbery, personal hostage, or fire);
(4) Other information required by the chief which is necessary for the enforcement of this article.
(d) Any false statement of a material matter made by an applicant for the purpose of obtaining an alarm permit
shall be sufficient cause for revocation or refusal to issue a permit.
(e) An alarm permit cannot be transferred to another person. A permit holder shall inform the chief of any
change that alters any information listed on the permit application within three (3) business days. No fee will be
assessed for such changes.
(f) All alarm installations and installers must meet all state requirements as regulated by the state private
security bureau.
(g) All fees owed by an applicant must be paid before a permit may be issued or renewed.
(2004 Code, sec. 8.07.002)
Sec. 4.06.042 Expiration; renewal
A permit is issued for one (1) calendar year or part thereof and must be renewed every year upon submission of
an updated application and a renewal fee as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code. It is the
responsibility of the permit holder to submit an application prior to the permit expiration date. Failure to renew
the permit by January 31st will subject the permit holder to submit another application for an alarm permit and
the fees associated with it. No license will extend beyond December 31 of each year. (2004 Code, sec. 8.07.003)
Sec. 4.06.043 Revocation
(a) The chief shall revoke an alarm permit if he determines that:
(1) There is a false statement of a material matter in the application for a permit;
(2) The permit holder has violated section 4.06.003, 4.06.004, 4.06.005, 4.06.006, 4.06.007, or
4.06.042; or
(3) The permit holder has failed to make timely payment of a service fee assessed under section
4.06.010 or has an excessive number of false alarms as determined by the hearing officer.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 134/362
(b) A person commits an offense if he operates an alarm system during the period in which his alarm permit is
revoked.
(2004 Code, sec. 8.07.012)
ARTICLE 4.07 ALCOHOL SALES*
Sec. 4.07.001 Definitions
A word or term used in this article which has been defined by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code shall have the
meaning assigned to it in the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code.
Sec. 4.07.002 Construction consistent with state law
This article shall be construed to be consistent with the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code and the rules, and
regulations promulgated under its authority.
Sec. 4.07.003 Minimum distances from certain locations
(a) Except as provided by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code or this code, a person may not sell or engage in
the business of selling an alcoholic beverage at a place of business located within 300 feet from the following:
(1) A public school;
(2) A private school;
(3) A day-care center or child-care facility;
(4) A church; or
(5) A public hospital.
(b) Distances under this section shall be calculated using the method prescribed by the Texas Alcoholic
Beverage Code.
State law reference–Sales near church, school or hospital, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code, sec. 109.33; sales near daycare center
or childcare facility, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code, sec. 109.331.
Sec. 4.07.004 Variances
The city council may allow variances to the distance regulations set forth in section 4.07.003 above if the city
council determines that enforcement of the regulations in a particular instance is not in the best interest of the
public, constitutes waste or inefficient use of land or other resources, creates an undue hardship on an applicant
for a license or permit, does not serve its intended purpose, is not effective or necessary, or for any other reason
the court or governing board, after consideration of the health, safety, and welfare of the public and the equities
of the situation, determines is in the best interest of the community.
Sec. 4.07.005 Permit fee
Unless state law exempts a permittee or licensee from payment of a fee established by this section, a permittee
or licensee must pay the city a permit or license fee equal to one-half the amount of the state fee for each permit
and license authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages. Payment of such fee shall be a condition to the city
secretary's certification of an applicant's permit or license application.
State law references–Local fee authorized on alcoholic beverage permits, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code, sec. 11.38; local fee
authorized on alcoholic beverage licenses, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code, sec. 61.36.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 135/362
Sec. 4.07.006 Offense; penalty
A person who violates this article, including a failure to pay the fee provided by this article, commits an offense
punishable under section 1.01.009(a) of this code.
(Ordinance 1157 adopted 6/3/13)
CHAPTER 5
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
ARTICLE 5.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 5.01.001 Uncontained burning
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to set afire, burn or allow the burning of combustible materials which
are in an uncontained and/or uncovered environment. This restriction does not apply to:
(1) Any authorized public displays which are approved by the city council following
recommendation from the city's fire marshal and fire chief;
(2) Fires used for the purpose of training fire department personnel;
(3) Fires set by the fire department to mitigate effects from larger fires; and
(4) Controlled burns authorized jointly by the fire chief and fire marshal in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
(b) Controlled burns of vegetative debris by the property owner on a property of five (5) acres or more for
land clearing purposes or to reduce fire hazards may be permitted under the following conditions:
(1) The permit application fee for a controlled burn shall be as set forth in the fee schedule in
appendix A of this code.
(2) The applicant shall provide proof of liability insurance coverage in the property owner's name
on the property of the controlled burn and the property owner will be liable for all consequences,
damages, injuries or losses resulting from a permitted burn;
(3) An authorized controlled burn permit shall remain valid for ten (10) days.
(4) No controlled burns shall be permitted during a burn ban ordered by the city council or the
county judge;
(5) No more than one (1) pile of vegetative debris per property, no more than ten feet (10') in
height and no more than thirty feet (30') in diameter may be burned at any given time;
(6) No controlled burns shall be allowed within twenty-five feet (25') of property owned by
another party or within one hundred feet (100') of any structure;
(7) All burning must remain under the control of the permitted property owner with a pre-approved
fire control plan, a minimum two hundred fifty (250) gallons of water with a pressurized sprayer on
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 136/362
site, and the demonstrated ability to extinguish the fire;
(8) No burns may be set earlier than one (1) hour after sunrise and the property owner or his
designee(s) must remain present on site with the fire until the fire has been completely extinguished
and the ashes are cold;
(9) No burns may be set if the wind speed is or is projected to be less than six (6) miles per hour
(mph) or more than twenty-three (23) mph;
(10) No burns may be set unless the wind direction and other weather conditions are such that
smoke and other pollutants will not present a nuisance or risk to traffic, building occupants, sensitive
crops or livestock;
(11) Designated burns must be completely confined by a fire break consisting of a minimum of
twenty-five feet (25') of cleared vegetation and other fuels;
(12) Prior to ignition, the permitted property owner must notify the police department on the day of
the burn; and
(13) The fire chief, fire marshal or any officer of the city may order extinguishment of a controlled
burn or request emergency response to extinguish the fire at any time any provisions of this chapter
are violated.
(A) A property owner who fails to control a permitted burn in accordance with this chapter
shall be required to pay a fee to cover the cost of first responders and equipment dispatched to
extinguish the fire.
(B) The minimum fee for emergency response shall be as set forth in the fee schedule in
appendix A of this code.
(C) The charge for dispatched vehicles and equipment will be as stated in the most current
Federal Emergency Management Agency schedule of equipment rates.
(Ordinance 1263 adopted 3/11/19)
Sec. 5.01.002 Fireworks
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, or explode any type or kind of fireworks, including
firecrackers, torpedoes, rockets, Roman candles and any other types of explosives commonly used for this
purpose, within the city limits. (2004 Code, art. 5.03)
State law references–State regulation of fireworks and fireworks displays, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, ch. 2154; authority of city to
prohibit or further regulate fireworks, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, sec. 2154.004.
ARTICLE 5.02 FIRE MARSHAL
Sec. 5.02.001 Office created; appointment; duty to investigate fires
(a) The office of fire marshal is hereby created. (2004 Code, sec. 5.04.001)
(b) The fire marshal shall be appointed by the city manager with the advice and consent of the city council and
shall serve at the pleasure of the city manager. (Ordinance 1243 adopted 1/8/18)
(c) The fire marshal shall, under the supervision and direction of the chief of police or his or her designated
officer, assist in investigating the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring within this city by
which property has been destroyed or damaged, and shall especially make investigation as to whether such fire
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 137/362
was the result of carelessness or design. The fire marshal shall keep a record of all fires, together with all facts,
statistics and circumstances, including the origin of the fires and the amount of the loss, which may be
determined by the investigation required by this article. (2004 Code, sec. 5.04.001)
Sec. 5.02.002 Right of entry on premises where fire has occurred
The fire marshal shall have the authority at all times of the day or night, when necessary in the performance of
the duties imposed upon him or her by the provisions of this article, to enter upon and examine any building or
premises where any fire has occurred, and other buildings and premises adjoining or near the same, which
authority shall be exercised only with reason and good discretion. (2004 Code, sec. 5.04.002)
Sec. 5.02.003 Inspections; order to correct conditions; reports to state fire marshal
(a) The fire marshal, upon complaint of any person having an interest in any building or property adjacent,
and without any complaint, shall have a right at all reasonable hours, for the purpose of examination, to enter
into and upon buildings and premises within the city, and it shall be his or her duty, monthly or more often, to
enter upon and make or cause to be entered and made a thorough examination of all mercantile, manufacturing
and public buildings, together with the premises belonging thereto.
(b) Whenever he or she shall find any building or other structure which, for want of repair, or by reason of age
or dilapidated condition, or for any cause, is especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger
other buildings or property, or so occupied that fire would endanger persons or property therein, he or she shall
proceed as provided in section 5.02.004 et seq.
(c) Whenever he or she shall find an improper or dangerous arrangement of stoves, ranges, furnaces or other
heating appliances of any kind whatsoever, including chimneys, flues, and pipes with which the same may be
connected, or a dangerous arrangement of lighting devices or systems, or a dangerous or unlawful storage of
explosives, compounds, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, dangerous chemicals, vegetable products, ashes, or
combustible, inflammable and refuse materials, or other conditions which may be dangerous in character or
liable to cause or promote fire or create conditions dangerous to the firefighters or occupants, he shall order the
same to be removed or remedied, and such order shall be forthwith complied with by the owner or occupant of
said building or premises. However, if said owner or occupant deems himself or herself aggrieved by such order,
he or she may, within five (5) days, appeal to the board of appeals, who shall investigate the cause of the
complaint; and unless by his or her authority the order is revoked, such order shall remain in force and be
forthwith complied with by said owner or occupant.
(d) At the end of each month, the fire marshal shall report to the state fire marshal all existing hazardous
conditions, together with separate report of each fire in the city during the month.
(2004 Code, sec. 5.04.003)
Sec. 5.02.004 Unsafe buildings or structures declared nuisance; abatement
A building or other structure or premises which is especially liable to fire by reason of want of repair, age,
dilapidated condition or for any cause, and which is (i) so situated as to endanger buildings, structures or
property of others or (ii) so occupied that it endangers the occupants, other persons or their property, is hereby
declared a public nuisance. The fire marshal or any other interested person may file a complaint seeking to have
any such public nuisance abated, and said complaint shall be reviewed and acted upon using the procedure set
forth in article 3.03 of this code. (2004 Code, sec. 5.04.004)
Sec. 5.02.005 Unsafe conditions prohibited
Any owner or occupant of any building or other structure or premises who shall keep or maintain the same with
an improper arrangement of a stove, range, furnace or other heating appliance of any kind whatever, including
chimneys, flues and pipes with which the same may be connected, so as to be dangerous in the matter of fire, or
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 138/362
health or safety of persons or property of others; or who shall keep or maintain any building, other structure or
premises with an improper arrangement of a lighting device or system or with a storage of explosives,
petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, chemicals, vegetable products, ashes, combustibles, inflammable materials, or
refuse or with any other condition which shall be dangerous in character to the persons, health or property of
others; or which shall be dangerous in the matter of promoting, augmenting or causing fires; or which shall
create conditions dangerous to firefighters, or occupants of such building, structure or premises other than the
maintainer thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1.01.009. (2004 Code, sec. 5.04.005)
Sec. 5.02.006 Notice required before prosecution
No prosecution shall be brought under section 5.02.004 or section 5.02.005 until the order provided in section
5.02.003 has been given and the party notified shall fail or refuse to comply with the same. (2004 Code, sec.
5.04.006)
ARTICLE 5.03 FIRE CODE
Sec. 5.03.001 Adoption
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the city secretary and the city, marked
and designated as the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, including all appendix chapters, as published by the
International Code Council, Incorporated, is hereby adopted as the fire code of the city for regulating and
controlling the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location,
relocation, replacement, addition to and use or maintenance of fire suppression/control systems in the city and
providing for the issuance of permits and the collection of fees therefor. Each and all of the regulations,
provisions, conditions and terms of the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, published by the International
Code Council, Incorporated, and on file in the office of the city secretary, are hereby referred to, adopted and
made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article.
Sec. 5.03.002 Amendments
The following sections of the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, published by the International Code
Council, Incorporated, are revised as follows:
Section 101.1. Title. These provisions shall be known as the International Fire Code of the city and shall be cited
as such and will be referred to as “this code.”
Section 103.2 Appointment. The building official shall be the city manager or chief building official.
(Ordinance 1224, sec. 8, adopted 11/14/16)
Sec. 5.03.003 Enforcement officers
The fire code shall be enforced by the fire marshal, fire chief and fire department of the city. (2004 Code, sec.
5.05.003)
Sec. 5.03.004 Storage of inflammable liquids in outside above-ground tanks
Notwithstanding the provisions of the fire code, the storage of inflammable liquids in outside above-ground
tanks is prohibited within the city. (2004 Code, sec. 5.05.004)
Sec. 5.03.005 Modifications
The fire marshal shall have power to modify the effect of any of the provisions of the fire code upon particular
property, upon application in writing by the owner or lessee or his or her duly authorized agent, when there are
practical obstacles in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code shall
be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done; and the particulars of any such modification,
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 139/362
when granted or allowed, and the decision of the fire marshal thereon, shall be entered upon the records of the
city, and a signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant. (2004 Code, sec. 5.05.005)
Sec. 5.03.006 Violations; penalty
(a) Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code hereby adopted or who fails to comply
therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation
of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or
permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an
order as affirmed or modified by the fire marshal or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed
therein, shall severally for each such violation and noncompliance, respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishable as provided in section 1.01.009 of this code. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not
excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such
violations or defects within a reasonable time; and, when not otherwise specified, each ten (10) days that
prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
(b) The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited
conditions.
(2004 Code, sec. 5.05.006)
Sec. 5.03.007 Appeals
Whenever the fire marshal shall disapprove an application, or refuse to grant a license or permit applied for, or
when it is claimed that the provisions of the fire code do not apply or that the same has been wrongly interpreted
by the fire marshal, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the fire marshal to the board of appeals within
thirty (30) days from the date of the decision of the fire marshal. (2004 Code, sec. 5.05.007)
CHAPTER 6
HEALTH AND SANITATION
ARTICLE 6.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 6.01.001 State sanitary code adopted
(a) The city hereby adopts a sanitary code consisting of minimum standards of sanitation and health protection
measures as provided by V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code.
(b) The provisions of V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, including the penalty therein provided, are hereby
expressly referred to and fully incorporated into this section and adopted as the sanitary code of the city.
(2004 Code, art. 8.02)
Sec. 6.01.002 Responsibility of adjacent property owner for vegetation on public way
(a) It shall be unlawful for both the owner and the tenant of any property in the city abutting upon a street,
alley or other public way to permit any weeds, grasses, or other vegetation whatsoever to grow anywhere therein
to the centerline to a height of greater than five (5) inches.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 140/362
(b) No person, firm or corporation shall intentionally deposit, place, dump or cause to be deposited, placed or
dumped any grass clippings, leaves or yard waste material of any kind upon the streets, alleys or public lands
within the city limits.
(Ordinance 1266 adopted 4/22/19)
ARTICLE 6.02 LITTER†
Sec. 6.02.001 Definitions
As used in this article, the following terms have the respective meanings ascribed to them:
Garbage. All decayable wastes, including vegetable, animal and fish offal and carcasses of such animals and
fish (except sewage and body wastes, and industrial byproducts), and including all such substances from all
public and private establishments and from all residences.
Junk. All worn-out, worthless and discarded material in general, including, but not limited to, odds and ends, old
iron or other metal, glass, paper, cordage or other waste or discarded materials.
Litter. Any quantity of uncontainerized paper, metal, plastic, glass or miscellaneous solid waste which may be
classed as rubbish, refuse, garbage or unsolicited and unsubscribed advertising in accordance with the
definitions set forth in this section.
Private property. Includes, but is not limited to, the following exterior locations owned by private individuals,
firms, corporations, institutions or organizations: yards, grounds, driveways, entranceways, passageways,
parking areas, working areas, storage areas, vacant lots and recreation facilities.
Public property. Includes, but is not limited to, the following exterior locations: streets, street medians, roads,
road medians, catchbasins, sidewalks, strips between streets and sidewalks, lanes, alleys, public rights-of-way,
public parking lots, school grounds, vacant lots, parks, beaches, playgrounds, other publicly owned recreation
facilities, and municipal waterways and bodies of water.
Refuse. Garbage, rubbish and all other decayable and nondecayable waste, including vegetable, animal and fish
carcasses, except sewage, from all public and private establishments and residences.
Rubbish. All nondecayable wastes, except ashes, from all public and private establishments and from all
residences.
Solid waste. Rubbish, refuse, garbage, junk or unsolicited and unsubscribed advertising generated from both
residential and commercial establishments.
Unsolicited and unsubscribed advertising. In general, but not limited to, all forms of unsolicited and
unsubscribed circulars, newspapers, placards, cards and samples which serve as advertising or announcements.
(2004 Code, sec. 6.02.001)
Sec. 6.02.002 Reserved
Editor's note–Former section 6.02.002 pertaining to penalties and deriving from the 2004 Code, sec. 6.02.010; was deleted in its
entirety by Ordinance 1266, sec. 2, adopted 4/22/19.
Sec. 6.02.003 Depositing litter on public property; removal by city
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit, leave or allow the dumping, depositing or leaving of any
refuse, garbage, rubbish, junk or unsolicited or unsubscribed advertising on any street, right-of-way, alley or
public lands within the city. Upon finding the refuse, garbage, rubbish, junk or unsolicited or unsubscribed
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 141/362
advertising upon any street, right-of-way, alley or public lands within the city, said refuse, garbage, rubbish, junk
or unsolicited or unsubscribed advertising will be collected by the city's public works department and
transported to an authorized solid waste facility, and the adjoining property owner(s) to the location of [where]
said refuse, garbage, rubbish, junk or unsolicited or unsubscribed advertising was collected will be billed
accordingly for the cost associated with said items' removal. In the event the property owner fails to reimburse
the city for costs incurred with the removal of said items, the city is authorized to file a labor lien against the
property to recover expenses associated with the removal of the refuse, garbage, rubbish, junk or unsolicited or
unsubscribed advertising, including the cost of collection of said debt to the city. (2004 Code, sec. 6.02.002)
Sec. 6.02.004 Depositing litter adjacent to public streets
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit or leave any refuse, garbage, rubbish, junk or unsolicited
and unsubscribed advertising within or nearer than three hundred (300) yards of any public street or highway
within the city, whether or not the refuse, garbage, rubbish, junk or unsolicited and unsubscribed advertising
being dumped, deposited, or left, or the land upon which refuse, garbage, rubbish, junk or unsolicited and
unsubscribed advertising is dumped, deposited or left, belongs to the person so dumping, depositing or leaving
it. (2004 Code, sec. 6.02.003(a))
Sec. 6.02.005 Abandoned refrigerators and other similar containers
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit, or leave any abandoned refrigerator, deep freeze or other
appliance in which a person could become entrapped on the premises, without removal of door handles or other
closure paraphernalia that might make the appliance dangerous to the life of a child, should one become
entrapped in the appliance. In the event the owner cannot be contacted immediately, the police department will
have the power to secure the appliance immediately. (2004 Code, sec. 6.02.003(b))
State law reference–Regulation of abandoned refrigerators, freezers, and similar containers, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec.
756.011 et seq.
Sec. 6.02.006 Exemptions from sections 6.02.003, 6.02.004 and 6.02.005
The provisions of sections 6.02.003, 6.02.004 and 6.02.005 shall not affect farmers in the handling of anything
necessary in the growing, handling and care of livestock, or the erection, operation and maintenance of any
improvements that may be necessary in the handling, threshing and preparation of any agricultural products.
(2004 Code, sec. 6.02.004)
Sec. 6.02.007 Injunctive remedy for violation of sections 6.02.003, 6.02.004 and 6.02.005
In the event of any threatened or probable violation of any provision of section 6.02.003, 6.02.004 or 6.02.005, it
shall be the duty of the city attorney to bring suit for injunction to prevent such threatened or probable violation.
Any person affected or to be affected by any such threatened or probable violation shall have the right to enjoin
such violation or threatened violation. The enforcement of the remedy hereinabove provided by injunction shall
not prevent the enforcement of the other penalties provided in this code. (2004 Code, sec. 6.02.005)
Sec. 6.02.008 Vehicles transporting loose materials
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, institution or organization to transport any loose cargo by
truck or other motor vehicle within the corporate limits of the city unless said cargo is covered and secured in
such manner as to prevent depositing of litter on public and private property. (2004 Code, sec. 6.02.006)
State law reference–Transportation of loose materials, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, ch. 725.
Sec. 6.02.009 Loading and unloading operations
(a) Any owner or occupant of an establishment or institution at which litter is attendant to the packing and
unpacking and unloading or loading of materials at exterior locations shall provide suitable containers there for
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 142/362
the disposal and storage of such litter and shall make appropriate arrangements for the collection thereof.
(b) Further, it shall be the duty of the owner or occupant to remove at the end of each working day any litter
that has not been containerized at these locations.
(2004 Code, sec. 6.02.007)
Sec. 6.02.010 Construction or demolition sites
(a) It shall be unlawful for the owner, agent or contractor in charge of any construction or demolition site to
cause, maintain, permit or allow to be caused, maintained or permitted the accumulation of any litter on the site
before, during or after completion of the construction or demolition project.
(b) It shall be the duty of the owner, agent or contractor to have on the site adequate containers for the
disposal of litter and to make appropriate arrangements for the collection thereof for transport by himself to an
authorized facility for final disposition.
(c) The owner, agent or contractor may be required at any time to show proof of appropriate collection, or, if
transported by himself, of disposition at an authorized facility.
(2004 Code, sec. 6.02.008)
Sec. 6.02.011 Sweeping litter into street
It shall be unlawful to sweep or push litter from sidewalks and strips into streets. Sidewalk and strip sweepings
must be picked up and put into household or commercial solid waste containers. (2004 Code, sec. 6.02.009(a))
Sec. 6.02.012 Maintenance of vacant property; cleaning of property by city
(a) It shall be the duty of every nonresident owner of a vacant lot or other vacant property to appoint, in
writing, to the city, a resident agent who shall have responsibility for keeping that lot or other property free of
litter.
(b) If, after due warning, citation or summons, an owner, agent, occupant or lessee fails to remove litter from
any private property, the city is authorized to serve written notice to the owner or his appointed agent that, if the
condition is not corrected within ten (10) days, the property will be cleaned by the city and the owner or his
appointed agent billed for the cost thereof. If the bill is not paid within thirty (30) days, execution may be issued
by the city against the property for the amount of the cleaning charge, and such execution shall constitute a lien
on the property until the claim has been satisfied.
(2004 Code, sec. 6.02.009(b), (c))
ARTICLE 6.03 WEEDS, RUBBISH OR OTHER OBJECTIONABLE MATTER ON PRIVATE
PROPERTY*
Sec. 6.03.001 Places where water may accumulate
It shall be unlawful for any person who shall own or occupy any lot in the city to permit or allow holes or places
on said lots where water may accumulate and become stagnant, or to permit same to remain. (2004 Code, sec.
6.05.001)
Sec. 6.03.002 Stagnant water
It shall be unlawful for any person who shall own or occupy any lot in the city to permit or allow the
accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or to permit same to remain. (2004 Code, sec. 6.05.002)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 143/362
Sec. 6.03.003 Carrion, filth or other unwholesome matter
It shall be unlawful for any person who shall own or occupy any house, building, establishment, lot or yard in
the city to permit or allow any carrion, filth or other impure or unwholesome matter to accumulate or remain
thereon. (2004 Code, sec. 6.05.003)
Sec. 6.03.004 Weeds, rubbish, brush or other objectionable matter
It shall be unlawful for any person who shall own or occupy any lot in the city to allow weeds, rubbish, brush,
tires or any other unsightly, objectionable or insanitary matter to accumulate or grow on said lot. (Ordinance
1260 adopted 2/25/19)
Sec. 6.03.005 Notice of violation
Methods for notification:
(1) In person;
(2) By United States mail;
(3) By publication at least twice within ten (10) consecutive days;
(4) By posting notice on or near a building near the property to which the violation relates;
(5) By posting notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property to
which the violation relates, if the property contains no buildings.
(2004 Code, sec. 6.05.005)
Sec. 6.03.006 Immediate abatement of dangerous weeds
The city may immediately abate the nuisances of weeds in excess of forty-eight (48) inches in height which are
an immediate danger to the health, life or safety of any person. (2004 Code, sec. 6.05.006)
State law reference–Additional authority to abate dangerous weeds without notice, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 342.008.
Sec. 6.03.007 Subsequent violations within one year
Upon giving written notice to a property owner in violation of the city health ordinances, the city may inform the
property owner by certified mail that, if the owner commits another violation of the same kind or nature on or
before the first anniversary of the date of the notice, the city may without further notice correct the violation at
the owner's expense and assess the expense against the property. (2004 Code, sec. 6.05.007)
Sec. 6.03.008 Abatement procedure
In the event any person fails to comply with any of the requirements set forth in sections 6.03.001, 6.03.002,
6.03.003 and/or 6.03.004 within the time limits specified in section 342.006 of the Texas Health and Safety
Code (as it may be amended from time to time), the city may do the work required to abate such condition(s),
pay for the work required to abate such condition(s) or take such other action as may be permitted by applicable
law following notice by the city to such person in accordance with said statute. Thereafter, the city may assess
its expenses against such property and obtain a lien against such property in accordance with section 342.007 of
the Texas Health and Safety Code (as it may be amended from time to time). (2004 Code, sec. 6.05.008)
Sec. 6.03.009 Collection of abatement cost
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 144/362
The mayor, city manager or city health officer shall file a statement of such expenses incurred under section
6.03.008 giving the amount of such expenses and the date on which said work was done or improvements made
with the county clerk, which filing shall create a privileged lien on such lots or real estate upon which said work
was done or improvements made to secure the expenditures so made, in accordance with the provisions of
Health and Safety Code, section 342.007, which lien shall be second only to tax liens and liens for street
improvements, and said amount shall bear ten percent (10%) interest from the date said statement was filed. It is
further provided that, for any such expenditures and interests as aforesaid, suit may be instituted and recovery
and foreclosure of said lien may be had in the name of the city, and the statement of expenses so made as
aforesaid, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended for such work or
improvements. (2004 Code, sec. 6.05.009)
ARTICLE 6.04 FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 6.04.001 Definitions; references to sections
(a) The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to
them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Authorized agent and employee. An employee of the general environmental health division of the regulatory
authority.
Food. A raw, cooked or processed edible substance, ice, beverage or ingredient used or intended for use or for
sale in whole or in part for human consumption, or chewing gum.
Food establishment. An operation that stores, prepares, packages, serves, vends, or otherwise provides food for
human consumption as defined by the department of state health services in 25 Texas Administrative Code
§228.2.
Mobile food unit (MFU). A vehicle-mounted self-contained food service operation, designed to be readily
moveable (including, but not limited to catering trucks, trailers, push carts and roadside vendors) and used to
store, prepare, display, serve or sell food.
Regulatory authority. The Wichita Falls - Wichita County Public Health District.
State rules. The state rules found at Texas Administrative Code, Title 25, Part 1, Chapter 228. These rules are
also known as the Texas Food Establishment Rules.
(b) References to a particular section or sections in this chapter shall refer to a section or sections of this Code
of Ordinances unless otherwise indicated.
Sec. 6.04.002 State rules adopted
The city adopts by reference the provisions of Texas Administrative Code, Title 25, Part 1, Chapter 228,
regarding the regulation of food establishments including the definitions found in that chapter.
Sec. 6.04.003 Cleaning standards for commercial cooking equipment adopted
All food equipment in use for commercial cooking must be certified or classified for sanitation by an American
National Standards Institute (ANSI) - accredited certification program. Standards applicable to the materials,
design and construction of commercial cooking equipment shall apply only to equipment installed after
December 3, 2009.
Sec. 6.04.004 Compliance with applicable laws
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 145/362
All persons who manage, operate, accept employment in, or are employed in any food establishment shall
comply with all applicable federal and state statutes and regulations and with all applicable sections of this code
and city ordinances.
Sec. 6.04.005 Violations; penalty
Any violation of this article, including a violation of the rules adopted by reference pursuant to sections 6.04.002
through 6.04.004, shall be a class C misdemeanor punishable by a fine as set out in section 1.01.009. Each day
upon which a violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation.
Sec. 6.04.006 Fees
The regulatory authority may charge administrative fees for its activities pursuant to this chapter. The fees shall
be those approved by the city council and set forth in appendix A, section A6.001 of this code.
Secs. 6.04.007–6.04.040 Reserved
Division 2. Food Establishment Permit
Sec. 6.04.041 Required
A person may not operate a food establishment without a permit issued by the regulatory authority. Permits are
not transferable from one person to another or from one location to another location, except as otherwise
permitted by this division. A valid permit must be posted per section 6.04.044 in or on every food establishment
regulated by this division.
Sec. 6.04.042 Application; renewal
(a) Any person desiring to operate a food establishment must make written application for a permit on forms
provided by the regulatory authority. The application must contain the name and address of each applicant, the
location and type of the proposed food establishment, and any information required by section 6.04.045. The
application must be submitted with the applicable fee. An incomplete application will not be accepted.
(b) Failure to provide all required information or falsifying information required may result in denial or
revocation of the permit.
(c) All permits issued under this division shall remain in force for one year from the date of issuance unless
revoked or suspended by the regulatory authority. Permit fees shall be paid to the regulatory authority at the time
of application for initial permits and fifteen (15) days prior to permit expiration for renewal permits. All permit
holders, including nonprofits, that submit renewal applications and/or fees after the permit expires will be
assessed a late charge. A complete application with updated information is required for each renewal permit.
Any changes to the physical facility, menu or equipment must be reported to the regulatory authority.
Sec. 6.04.043 Issuance
Prior to the approval of an initial food establishment permit or the renewal of an existing permit, the regulatory
authority shall inspect the proposed food establishment to determine compliance with applicable laws and state
rules. A food establishment that does not comply with applicable laws and state rules will be denied a permit or
the renewal of a permit.
Sec. 6.04.044 Compliance required; posting; term; types of permits
(a) Only persons who comply with the requirements of this division shall be entitled to receive and retain a
permit required by this division. Such permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place in public view in or on the
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 146/362
food establishment. All permits issued under this division remain in force one year from the date of issuance
unless revoked or suspended.
(b) The following permits will be issued under this division:
(1) Process 1: Low to moderate risk. This process involves food sale with or without preparation
and includes no cooking. Generally, the steps in this process are: Receive, Store, Prepare, Hold,
Serve, Vend.
(2) Process 2: High risk. This process involves food preparation for same-day service. Generally,
the steps in this process are: Receive, Store, Prepare, Cook, Hold, Serve.
(3) Process 3: Very high risk. This process involves complex food preparation. Generally, the steps
in this process are: Receive, Store, Prepare, Cook, Cool, Reheat, Hot Hold, Serve.
(4) Temporary events. Events which last no more than seven (7) consecutive days. Applicants are
limited to seven (7) temporary event permits per year. No annually permitted establishment shall
allow temporary event food vending at their site unless a temporary event application has been
submitted to the regulatory authority.
(5) Seasonal permit. Facilities which operate for a period of no more than six (6) consecutive
months out of a twelve-month period and has a limited menu that does not offer very high risk foods.
Sec. 6.04.045 Review of plans
(a) Whenever a food establishment is constructed or more than 20 percent of its area is remodeled or
whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a food establishment, plans and specifications properly
prepared for such construction, remodeling or conversion shall be submitted to the regulatory authority for
review before work is begun. This is in addition to any permit(s) required under building regulations. The
submitted plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, equipment arrangement, mechanical plans
and construction of materials of work areas, and the type and model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities.
Every commissary shall additionally submit plans showing refrigerated and dry storage areas reserved for
mobile unit use. Food establishments that have been closed and are being reopened under new management as
the same type of establishment shall be required to submit new equipment specifications and a floor plan of the
food establishment. The regulatory authority shall approve the plans and specifications if they meet the
requirements of the rules adopted by this division. The approved plans and specifications must be followed in
construction, remodeling or conversion.
(b) Failure to follow the approved plans and specifications will result in a permit denial, suspension, or
revocation.
Sec. 6.04.046 Suspension
(a) The regulatory authority may, without warning, notice, or hearing, suspend any permit to operate a food
establishment if the operation of the food establishment constitutes an imminent hazard to public health. A
supervisor at the regulatory authority will confirm the hazard before suspension is effective when possible.
Suspension is effective upon service of the written notice required by this division. When a permit is suspended,
food operations shall immediately cease. The regulatory authority may end the suspension at any time if the
reason for suspension no longer exists.
(b) Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit or the person in charge of the food establishment
at the time of suspension shall be notified in writing that the permit is, upon service of the notice, immediately
suspended. Opportunity for a hearing will be provided if the holder of the permit files a written request with the
regulatory authority within ten days of receipt of written notice of suspension. Whenever a permit is suspended
and a request for hearing made, the holder of the permit shall be afforded a hearing within 20 days of the receipt
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 147/362
by the regulatory authority of a request for a hearing. If no written request for a hearing is filed within ten days,
the suspension is sustained. The regulatory authority may end the suspension at any time if reasons for
suspension no longer exist.
Sec. 6.04.047 Revocation
The regulatory authority may, after providing opportunity for a hearing, revoke a food establishment permit for
serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of this division or for interference with the regulatory
authority in the performance of its duties. Prior to revocation, the regulatory authority shall notify the holder of
the permit or the person in charge of the food establishment at the time of revocation, in writing, of the reason
for which the permit is subject to revocation. The permit shall be revoked at the end of ten days following
service of such notice unless the holder of the permit files a written request for a hearing with the regulatory
authority within such ten-day period. If no request for a hearing is filed within the ten-day period, the revocation
of the permit becomes final.
Sec. 6.04.048 Service of notices; conduct of hearings
(a) A notice as required in this division is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit or
the person in charge of the food establishment at the time of the notice or when it is sent by registered or
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the holder of the permit. A copy of the
notice shall be filed in the records of the regulatory authority.
(b) The regulatory authority shall conduct the hearings provided for in this division at a time and place
designated by the regulatory authority. Based upon the recorded evidence of such hearing, the regulatory
authority shall make final findings and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the
hearing. The regulatory authority shall furnish a written report of the hearing decision to the holder of the
permit.
Secs. 6.04.049–6.04.080 Reserved
Division 3. Frozen Dessert Vendors
Sec. 6.04.081 Standards for frozen desserts
(a) All frozen desserts must meet the following standards:
(1) Maximum temperature: 41°F;
(2) Maximum total coliform: 150/ml.
(b) All soft serve must meet the following standard:
(1) Maximum standard plate count: 200,000/ml.
Sec. 6.04.082 Certification required; issuance
(a) Every food establishment that prepares, serves, provides, sells, displays or stores for future sale, or offers
for sale frozen desserts for human consumption must have a frozen dessert certification in addition to its permit,
regardless of permit category.
(b) In order to receive and maintain frozen dessert certification:
(1) One employee from each mobile, stationary, temporary, seasonal or permanent facility or
location must attend and successfully complete frozen dessert training as required by the regulatory
authority.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 148/362
(2) At least one (1) sample of any frozen dessert pre-mix and one (1) sample of any final frozen
dessert product shall be sampled annually by the regulatory authority from each machine operated by
a food establishment. Each sample will be submitted to an approved laboratory for analysis of its
content.
(3) If any samples collected from a food establishment are not within the standards established in
section 6.04.081, additional samples will be collected and an inspection of the equipment and facility
will be conducted to determine the reason for the violation of the standards. No food establishment
shall adopt any procedures that would result in repeated failures of the first samples collected for any
annual inspection. Two consecutive frozen dessert samples determined by laboratory analysis to be
above the limits of the standards will result in suspension of the permit to operate the food
establishment or suspension of the frozen dessert certification. A resample and inspection fee will be
charged for each consecutive inspection and sample tested after a permit or certification has been
suspended.
(c) The certification shall be posted in a conspicuous place in public view.
(d) All certifications issued under this division shall remain in force for one year from the date of issuance
unless revoked or suspended.
Sec. 6.04.083 Suspension, revocation and reinstatement of certification
(a) A frozen dessert certification issued under this division may be suspended or revoked by the regulatory
authority upon the violation by the holder of any of the terms of this article.
(b) Any person or food establishment whose frozen dessert certification has been suspended or revoked shall
immediately discontinue the preparation, service, provision, sale, display or storage for future sale of frozen
dessert until the defects that caused the suspension have been corrected and the certification reinstated.
Following correction, the applicant may request reinstatement of the certification by the regulatory authority.
The regulatory authority may require the certification holder to demonstrate proper cleaning procedures and
maintenance of the frozen dessert equipment before reinstating the certification.
(c) Notice of suspension or revocation and the conduct of hearing for any suspension or revocation of a frozen
dessert certification shall be conducted under the procedures established in section 6.04.046 through section
6.04.048.
Sec. 6.04.084 Labeling of products
All frozen dessert products and frozen dessert pre-mix not sold at the point of manufactured origin must be
properly labeled according to current Food and Drug Administration guidelines.
Sec. 6.04.085 Vending without certification
It shall be unlawful for any person to prepare, serve, provide, sell, display or store for future sale, or offer for
sale, frozen desserts at a food establishment that does not hold a current frozen dessert certification.
Sec. 6.04.086 Possessing mix or pre-mix without certification
It shall be unlawful for any person to receive into the city for sale or to offer for sale in the city or to have in
storage for future sale ice cream mix or frozen dessert pre-mix without first applying for all required permits and
certifications from the regulatory authority.
Secs. 6.04.087–6.04.120 Reserved
Division 4. Food Handler's Training Certificate
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 149/362
Sec. 6.04.121 Required
It shall be unlawful for any person to accept employment in any food establishment without securing a food
handler's training certificate. It shall be unlawful for any person operating or managing any food establishment
to employ or retain any person or allow any person to work as a food handler unless that person has obtained
either a current temporary receipt issued under section 6.04.123 or a current food handler's training certificate.
Sec. 6.04.122 Application; training course required
Any person who is required to have a certificate under this division shall attend and successfully complete a
training course approved by the regulatory authority, department of state health services or the American
National Standards Institute. The person in charge of the food establishment shall be required to keep a
certificate of completion of the training course for all employees of the food establishment on site for
compliance review by the regulatory authority.
Sec. 6.04.123 Temporary receipt; issuance of certificate; permanent certificate
(a) When an applicant for a certificate required by this division makes application to the regulatory authority,
a temporary receipt, valid for 30 calendar days, will be issued to the applicant to allow the applicant to continue
employment at a food establishment while completing the course required by section 6.04.122. Applicants are
limited to one (1) successive temporary receipts. If an applicant has not successfully completed the training
course by the time the third temporary receipt expires, he/she cannot continue employment as a food handler.
(b) Upon successful completion of the training course, the regulatory authority will issue a food handler's
training certificate, which shall expire two years from the date of the food handler's certificate application.
Sec. 6.04.124 Training courses accepted
The regulatory authority shall accept training issued by all companies or programs approved by the department
of state health services.
Sec. 6.04.125 Fees
A fee shall be charged by the regulatory authority for the food handler's training certificate. There shall be a
charge for replacement cards.
Sec. 6.04.126 Records
It shall be the duty of the regulatory authority to provide for the keeping of a permanent record, together with the
date of issuance, of all permanent food handler's certificates issued to a person under this division. All other food
handler's certificate records shall be kept for a period of not less than five years.
Secs. 6.04.127–6.04.160 Reserved
Division 5. Mobile Food Vendors
Sec. 6.04.161 Permit requirements
(a) No person shall operate a mobile food unit who does not possess a valid, current mobile food unit permit
from the regulatory authority as provided in this article.
(b) A person seeking a mobile food unit permit from the regulatory authority shall make application and shall
provide all of the information listed in the following subsections as part of the application:
(1) The name and address of the owner and operator;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 150/362
(2) A copy of a current driver's license of the owner and operator, if the mobile food unit is to be
powered by a motor or towed;
(3) If the applicant represents a corporation, limited liability company, association, or partnership,
the names and addresses of the persons responsible for the entity's operations;
(4) The name under which the mobile food unit will be operated;
(5) A description of the type of food or the specific foods to be vended;
(6) The manner of mobile food vending operation to be conducted;
(7) A description of all vehicles to be used in the mobile food unit operation along with the license
or registration and vehicle identification number of said vehicles, and a copy of the current certificate
of liability for all said vehicles;
(8) The address and food establishment permit number of the central preparation facility for all
vehicles to be used in the mobile food unit operation; and
(9) Any other information required by the regulatory authority as it pertains to the safe operation of
the mobile food unit.
(c) Upon receiving a proper application for a mobile food unit permit, the regulatory authority shall inspect
the location, food, equipment, vehicles and other reasonable matters concerning the mobile food unit operation
and shall issue a permit and a sticker only if:
(1) The application complies with subsection (b); and
(2) The inspection reveals compliance with the applicable requirements of all federal and state
statutes and regulations, and city ordinances governing the proposed mobile food unit operation.
(d) Fees shall be determined by the risk process level appropriate for the establishment and be in addition to
any central preparation facility fees.
(e) A valid permit sticker shall be displayed by a mobile food unit.
(f) Mobile food unit permits shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance unless suspended or revoked.
(g) Mobile food unit permits shall not be transferred or assigned and shall be considered revoked should the
character of the food vending operation be changed from that specified in the permit.
(h) Every mobile food unit permit shall be renewed each year in like manner as the original permit
application.
(i) The regulatory authority shall make routine, unannounced inspections of mobile food units, mobile food
pushcarts, and commissaries when applicable, to determine whether or not the operation is being conducted in
such a manner as to comply with the conditions of the permit, the provisions of this article, other applicable city
ordinances and state and federal statutes, regulations and rules.
(j) The regulatory authority may take and retain samples of food and other substances used in the preparation
of food and examine it for the detection of unwholesome and deleterious qualities. The regulatory authority may
condemn and forbid the sale of or cause to be removed or destroyed, any food which is adulterated, tainted,
diseased, fermented, decaying or otherwise unwholesome, unclean or deleterious to health. The owner, operator
or other person in charge of such food shall immediately and in the presence of the regulatory authority, destroy
such adulterated, tainted, diseased, fermented, decaying or otherwise unwholesome, unclean food as directed by
the regulatory authority.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 151/362
(Ordinance 1206 adopted 12/14/15)
ARTICLE 6.05 LODGING ESTABLISHMENTS
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 6.05.001 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Clean. Free from dirt, impurities or multiple stains; hygienic conditions and practices that serve to promote or
preserve health.
Contagious disease. A diagnosis of an illness due to Norovirus, hepatitis A virus, Salmonella typhi, Shigella
spp., shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli, or similar organism clinically suspected to cause symptoms of
vomiting, diarrhea, jaundice or sore throat with fever and considered transmissible.
Continual, continued, or repeat violation. A particular condition of construction, operation, or maintenance
which is found in violation of these rules on three or more consecutive inspections or laboratory analyses within
a twelve-month period.
Easily cleanable. Surfaces which are readily accessible and made of such materials and finishes and so
fabricated that residue may be effectively removed by normal cleaning methods.
Equipment. Any items used in connection with the operation of a lodging establishment, including but not
limited to any washer, dryer, ice machine, fans, air conditioning units, heaters, refrigerators, or cooking units.
Excessive. More than a usual, multiple or an unreasonable number.
Extended stay. Guests that stay for a week or longer in length.
Fixtures. Any sinks, bathtubs, showers, toilet fixtures, or any other such items used in connection with the
operation of a lodging establishment.
Furnishings. Any bedding, furniture, lamps, or any such items used in connection with the operation of a
lodging establishment.
Guest. Any person who rents and occupies a guestroom in a lodging establishment.
Guestroom. Any room or unit where sleeping accommodations are regularly offered to the public.
Imminent health hazard. A situation that is likely to cause an immediate threat to human life, an immediate
threat of serious physical injury, immediate threat of serious adverse health effects, or a serious risk of
irreparable damage to the environment if immediate action is not taken.
Inspect or inspection. An examination by the director of health or his/her designee of the lodging establishment
structure, facilities, equipment, and operations. The inspection area shall include, but not be limited to, the
public and guest rooms, fixtures, furnishings, equipment and utensils, water supply and waste disposal facilities,
and the building's surroundings. It shall also include a determination of the cleanliness and maintenance of the
building, furnishings, fixtures, equipment and utensils, and any other examination necessary to determine the
degree to which any lodging establishment complies with the provisions of these rules. Inspections are
performed on a routine schedule or as a result of a complaint.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 152/362
Kitchenette. A small kitchen with refrigeration, vented cooking range, dishwashing sinks and cooking utensil
storage.
Law. All federal, state, and local statutes, ordinances, and/or rules.
Linens. The fitted sheets, top sheets, and pillows, excluding coverlets and comforters.
Lodging establishment. Any building, group of buildings, structure, facility, place, or places of business where
two or more guestrooms are provided, which is owned, maintained, or operated by any person and which is kept,
used, maintained, advertised or held out to the public for hire. It can be construed to be a hotel, motel, motor
hotel, apartment hotel, tourist court, resort, cabins, tourist home, bunkhouse, bed and breakfast, or other similar
place by whatever name called, and includes all such accommodations operated for hire as lodging
establishments for either transient guests, permanent guests, or for both transient and permanent guests. The
term does not include duplexes, quadriplexes, dormitories, and apartment complexes.
Manager or operator. The owner's agent or representative who is directly responsible for operation of the
lodging establishment.
Nuisance. Any condition as defined in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code section 341.011.
Numerical score. The score determined by deducting the values of all items found in violation from 100.
Owner. A person(s) who holds legal possession or ownership of a total or partial interest in the structure or
property on which exists a lodging establishment.
Regulatory authority. The director of the Wichita Falls-Wichita County Public Health District or his/her
designee.
Rules. City and county ordinances or state statutes.
Sanitary. Free from harmful elements, including pathogens that endanger public health.
Sanitize. The effective bactericidal treatment by a process that provides enough accumulative heat or
concentration of chemical for sufficient time to reduce the bacterial count, including pathogens, to a safe level
on cleaned surfaces.
Sealed. Free of multiple cracks or other openings that permit the entry or passage of excessive moisture that
causes water damage to the property.
Single-service articles or utensils. Cups, containers, ice bucket liners, stirrers, paddles, straws, napkins, doilies,
wrapping materials and similar articles intended for one-time use and then discarded.
Sec. 6.05.002 Penalty
(a) A person commits a class C misdemeanor if the person violates any part of this article after being given a
72-hour notification of continual violations or allows conditions deemed an imminent health hazard. An offense
under this article is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine pursuant to section 1.01.009 of the Code of Ordinances.
(b) Each day of a continuing violation is a separate offense.
Sec. 6.05.003 Records of inspections
It shall be the duty of the regulatory authority to provide inspection records for review. Records shall be kept for
a minimum of five (5) years and shall be available for review according to the public information act.
Secs. 6.05.004–6.05.030 Reserved
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 153/362
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 6.05.031 Required; posting
A person may not operate a lodging establishment without a permit issued by the regulatory authority. Permits
are not transferable from one person to another or from one location to another location, except as otherwise
permitted by these rules. A valid permit must be conspicuously displayed in view of the guests within a common
lobby area at all lodging establishments.
Sec. 6.05.032 Application; renewal
(a) Any person desiring a lodging establishment permit must make a written application for a permit on forms
provided by the regulatory authority. The application must contain the following:
(1) Name.
(2) Address.
(3) Phone number.
(4) Emergency contacts included, for each applicant.
(5) Physical location.
(6) Billing information and the applicable fee.
(b) An incomplete application will not be accepted. Failure to complete required information or falsifying
information required may result in denial or revocation of the permit. Renewal of the permit is required on an
annual basis and is the responsibility of the owner and manager of the lodging establishment both jointly and
separately. The same information is required for a renewal permit as for an initial permit. New and existing
lodging establishments shall be in compliance with this article to be issued a permit.
Sec. 6.05.033 Inspection of premises
(a) Prior to the approval of an initial permit for lodging establishments or the renewal of an existing permit,
the regulatory authority shall inspect the lodging establishment to determine compliance with these rules.
(b) A lodging establishment that does not comply with these rules will not be granted a permit to operate.
(c) The regulatory authority is authorized to conduct inspections, at intervals determined by the regulatory
authority, to ensure compliance with all provisions of this article.
(d) The lodging establishment must achieve at minimum a numerical score of 70 to pass an inspection.
Demerits will be equally weighted at two points each and multiple violations of the same deficiency shall
constitute one violation on the inspection form. The numerical score shall be computed by subtracting the
number of demerits from 100.
(e) If a lodging establishment receives a numerical score of 70 or below, there must be immediate corrective
actions taken to correct deficiencies to raise the numerical score above a 70 within the following 24-hour period
to avoid possible closure.
(f) Inspections will be conducted during normal business hours unless there is a report of a contagious disease
or complaint that presents an imminent threat to public health and safety. The regulatory authority shall have the
right to enter at any hour upon the premises where a lodging establishment is located as deemed necessary by the
director of health.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 154/362
(g) Occupied rooms may be inspected whenever there is a reasonable risk of a health hazard or imminent
threat to the structure that if uncorrected would adversely affect adjoining rooms.
(h) The regulatory authority shall have the authority to collect samples for laboratory analysis.
(i) It shall be a violation to refuse or obstruct the regulatory authority or designee from conducting
inspections.
Sec. 6.05.034 Compliance required; term; fee
Only persons and entities that comply with the requirements of these rules shall be entitled to receive and retain
a permit required by this article. Permits to operate a lodging establishment expire one year after issuance, unless
revoked or suspended for noncompliance. All lodging establishments must comply with provisions of this rule
upon thirty (30) days from passage, excluding procurement of permits which will be required on January 1,
2010. The permit fee will be paid annually to the regulatory authority at least five (5) working days prior to
expiration of the previous permit. All lodging establishments shall have a minimum of seventy-five percent
(75%) of their guestrooms in a condition that meets the requirements of this article in order to retain a permit to
operate the lodging establishment.
Sec. 6.05.035 Suspension
(a) The regulatory authority may, without warning, notice, or hearing, suspend any permit to operate a lodging
establishment if the operation of the establishment constitutes an imminent health hazard to public health. A
supervisor will confirm the hazard before suspension is effective when possible.
(b) Whenever a permit is suspended because of noncompliance or failure to maintain inspection minimum
standards, the holder of the permit or person in charge shall be notified in writing that the permit is, upon service
of the notice, immediately suspended.
Sec. 6.05.036 Appeals
(a) Opportunity for a hearing will be provided if the holder of the permit files a written request with the
regulatory authority within ten (10) days. Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit shall be
afforded an opportunity for a hearing as soon as possible and not to exceed twenty (20) days of receipt of the
request for a hearing. If no written request for a hearing is filed within ten (10) days, the suspension is sustained.
(b) The regulatory authority may end the suspension at any time if reasons for the suspension no longer exist.
Sec. 6.05.037 Revocation
The regulatory authority may, after providing for a hearing, revoke a lodging establishment permit for serious or
repeated violations of any of the requirements of this article or for interference with agents of the regulatory
authority in the performance of their duties. Prior to revocation, the regulatory authority shall notify the holder
of the permit or the person in charge, in writing, of the reason for which the permit is subject to revocation. The
permit shall be revoked at the end of ten (10) days following service of such notice unless the holder of the
permit files a written request for a hearing with the regulatory authority within such ten-day period. If no request
for a hearing is filed within the ten-day period, the revocation of the permit becomes final.
Sec. 6.05.038 Service of notice; conduct of hearings
(a) A notice as required in this article is properly served when it is hand delivered to the general manager and
a copy is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the holder of
the permit. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the regulatory authority.
(b) The regulatory authority shall conduct the hearings provided for in this article at a time and location
designated by the director of health. The hearing shall be conducted before a panel including the assistant
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 155/362
director of health, who shall preside over the meeting, the health district's director of nursing, and a hotelier
chosen by the city manager. This panel shall conduct the hearing with evidence presented by the inspection staff
and by the involved lodging property staff to determine whether to recommend sustaining, modifying, or
rescinding any order recommended by the general environmental division. The recommendation of the panel
shall be conveyed to the director of health for his/her consideration and, based upon the recorded evidence of
such hearing, the director of health shall make final findings and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or
order considered in the hearing. The director of health shall furnish a written report of the hearing to the holder
of the permit.
Secs. 6.05.039–6.05.070 Reserved
Division 3. Standards
Sec. 6.05.071 Safety and sanitation standards
All lodging establishments shall be maintained to meet the following requirements:
(1) Lodging establishment grounds shall be free of excessive litter and have garbage properly
stored in covered containers with tightfitting lids and be free of any collection of items that could
harbor rodents, cockroaches or mosquitoes, and:
(A) Shall have all walking and driving surfaces of the immediate exterior areas surfaced with
concrete or asphalt, or other approved material, to minimize dust.
(B) There shall be no conditions that constitute a public health nuisance as set forth by the
state.
(C) Non-essential articles, items, or equipment that cause a public nuisance or harbor
roaches, rodents or other vectors shall be removed.
(D) Outside garbage containers shall be cleaned at least monthly or as needed to prevent a
nuisance or odor. Liquid waste resulting from cleaning the containers shall be disposed in a
manner that does not create a nuisance.
(E) Animals shall be excluded from the laundry, linen storage, utensil washing, food service,
single-service storage and ice machine areas except as provided by law.
(2) Lodging establishments shall be sealed and free of leaks and excessive water damage or mold.
Construction surfaces shall be easily cleanable, in good physical condition, and with carpets and
curtains in clean condition and free of excessive stains. Further requirements are as follows:
(A) Furnishings shall be maintained in good condition and clean. Items with excessive wear,
tears, or stains shall be replaced.
(B) Each unit shall have trash removed, be vacuumed, and have smooth surfaces sanitized
after each occupancy.
(C) Glasses, pitchers, ice buckets, and eating and cooking utensils in the kitchenettes shall be
cleaned and sanitized after each occupancy.
(D) All rooms and bedding shall be free from an accumulation or infestation of insects or
ectoparasites. If a room becomes infested with insects of any type, the room shall not be
occupied until the infestation is controlled.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 156/362
(E) Soap shall be provided with a dispensed liquid or with new, individually wrapped bar
soap. Used bar soap shall be removed from the rooms when the guest ends the occupancy.
Other toiletries provided by the lodging establishment which are opened by the guest shall be
removed when the guest ends the occupancy. Used soap and toiletries shall be discarded and
shall not be used for any other purpose.
(F) A dispensed liquid soap shall be provided in all common and public bathrooms and
toilets.
(G) Single-service articles shall be replaced after each occupancy or when visibly damaged
or the possibility of contamination exists.
(H) All toxic and hazardous substances shall be properly labeled with the common name of
the contents and appropriately stored to prevent contamination.
(3) Lodging establishments providing ice shall only produce ice from potable water and such shall
be handled in a sanitary manner including that:
(A) Ice shall be free from visible trash and sediment.
(B) Ice shall not be made or stored in an owner's or manager's private refrigerator and/or
private living areas.
(C) Ice that is not produced at the lodging establishment shall be obtained from an approved
source and shall be properly labeled and protected from contamination during transportation
and storage.
(D) Ice machines shall be of sanitary, durable, corrosion-resistant, and easily cleanable
construction.
(E) Ice machines shall be kept sanitized and in good repair.
(F) Ice storage bins shall be drained into an approved sewage system and must have a
physical air gap.
(G) When replacement of a self-service ice machine becomes necessary or additional
machines are added, an automatic self-serve ice dispensing machine shall be installed.
(H) Ice machines shall be located in a place which provides protection from the elements and
possible sources of contamination. Exterior storage spaces shall provide, at a minimum,
overhead protection. The area shall be kept clean and shall be free of accumulation of excessive
moisture, drippage, or trash.
(I) Vending and ice machines shall be sanitized, with an ice scoop available, and installed
with a drain that includes a physical air gap to prevent backsiphonage. All ice machines with
storage bins shall be equipped with an ice scoop that is attached to the ice bin with a tether of
easily cleanable material. The tether shall be of such a length to prevent the scoop from
touching the ground and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
(J) All lodging establishments with customer service ice machines in common areas prior to
the adoption of these rules shall have automatic self-service ice dispensing machines upon
replacement. This requirement excludes kitchenettes and icemakers in refrigerators.
(4) All linens, towels, and laundry shall be provided in a clean, sanitary condition without
excessive stains or damage. In addition, the following are required:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 157/362
(A) During laundering, clean linens, towels, and laundry shall be kept in separate carts and
stored away from soiled linens, towels, and laundry.
(B) Shall be protected from dust, dirt, vermin, or other contamination at all times.
(C) Linens shall be changed to clean linens after each occupancy in preparation for a
different occupancy.
(5) Lodging establishments with non-guest laundry facilities shall be restricted to the washing and
drying of linens, towels, uniforms, and aprons necessary to the operation of the lodging
establishment. In addition, the following are required:
(A) If such items are laundered on the premises, a commercial washing machine and dryer
shall be provided and used in accordance with subsection (C) below of this section.
(B) Dryers shall be installed according to manufacturer's instructions.
(C) All lodging establishments with on-premises laundries prior to adoption of these rules
shall have commercial washing machines and dryers within one year after the date of the
adoption of this article.
(D) Laundry facilities shall be separated from any other permanent living quarters by
complete partitioning and solid self-closing doors.
(E) Traffic through or use by guests of the non-guest laundry facility is prohibited.
(6) Should separate laundry facilities be provided for the use of the lodging establishment guests,
these shall be located in a different room or area of the lodging establishment than those provided for
commercial laundry purposes. These facilities shall be clean and maintained in good repair.
(7) Fire safety of lodging establishments shall be the responsibility of the manager/operator and be
in accordance with the applicable code and/or ordinance. In addition, the following are required:
(A) Shall have proper fire extinguishers available, fully charged, and have current inspections
as required by current city code.
(B) Portable outside cooking grills of any type shall be no closer than ten feet from any
enclosed or combustible structure.
(C) Only professionally installed and inspected cooking ranges with approved venting for
kitchenettes shall be allowed in lodging establishments.
(D) Individual rooms may have a microwave oven and/or a coffee/tea maker; kitchenettes are
exempt from this limitation.
(E) Corded cooking or heating devices such as portable hot plates or crock pots shall not be
allowed in rooms. The operator shall either post signs, state this policy verbally, provide in
writing during check-in procedures, or provide this information within the guest services book
within each guestroom to comply with this section.
(F) Storage and equipment rooms must be organized with all flammables properly labeled
with common names.
(G) Rooms where fuel-burning appliances are used shall be properly vented in accordance
with the manufacturer's specifications and carbon monoxide monitors shall be provided in these
rooms.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 158/362
(H) Rooms shall have and maintain, in operating condition, an approved battery or
electrically operated smoke detector device in each guestroom. Owners and operators shall be
required to test each smoke detector at a minimum of two times each calendar year to determine
if each detector is in working order. Records of the testing shall be maintained and provided to
the public health inspector upon request.
(I) Emergency phone numbers including 9-1-1, fire, and police, and first aid equipment, must
be available at the front desk.
(J) Records shall be kept of all accidents or injuries of guests and employees that occur on
the premises of a lodging establishment.
(8) Should swimming pools, spas, and similar facilities be installed, they shall be constructed and
maintained in accordance with the applicable code. Swimming pool water shall only be disposed of
into an approved sanitary sewer.
(9) Insect and rodent control, in all lodging establishments, shall be kept in such a condition as to
prevent the harborage or feeding of insects or rodents. Windows shall be screened and be in good
condition without cracks or missing seals and shall be in good working order. Screening material
shall be 16 mesh to the inch. Rooms with infestations of insects or rodents shall be subject to closure
until treatment has been deemed effective by the regulatory authority. A licensed exterminator
company shall provide routine treatment of a lodging establishment and receipts shall be kept on file.
(10) Lodging establishments shall, in general, be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, in good
repair, and shall be maintained and operated with strict regard to health and safety of the transient or
permanent guest. Extended stay guests at all lodging establishments shall be moved to a new room
after seven (7) days to allow cleaning and sanitization of the guestroom and bathroom if maid service
is not provided at a minimum of once per week or facility repairs are necessary to adhere to these
rules.
(11) Records shall be kept for a period of no less than ninety (90) days of the cleaning frequency of
rooms that are used for extended guests' stays, noting last cleaning performed and any room damage
or repairs.
Sec. 6.05.072 Water supply; drinking water
(a) An adequate, accessible supply of potable drinking water approved by the state commission on
environmental quality shall be provided at all lodging establishments.
(b) Water under pressure at the required temperatures shall be provided to all fixtures and equipment that use
water.
(c) Water from a source other than a public water supply shall not be used until the department or other state
regulatory authority has approved it.
Sec. 6.05.073 Sewage disposal
(a) Sewage and wastewater treatment and disposal shall be accomplished in a manner so as to not create a
health hazard, pollute or contaminate groundwater, or create a nuisance. This includes draining swimming pool
water and while performing plumbing repairs of any kind.
(b) Sewage and wastewater treatment systems with a discharge shall be installed and maintained in
compliance with the state laws and local ordinances.
Sec. 6.05.074 Personnel
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 159/362
(a) No employee of a lodging establishment, while infected with a contagious disease that can be transmitted
to other employees or the guests, or who is a carrier of organisms that cause such a disease, or who is affected
with a boil, an infected wound or acute respiratory infection, shall work in a lodging establishment in any
capacity in which there is a likelihood of such an employee contaminating ice, clean linens, or single-service
articles with pathogenic organisms or transmitting the disease to other persons.
(b) Employees working with and handling single-service items such as clean laundry, ice or beverages or
performing tasks that would contaminate their hands shall thoroughly wash their hands and exposed areas of
their arms before starting work, and after smoking, eating or using the toilet. Employees shall keep their
fingernails trimmed evenly and clean.
(c) Employees involved in guest services and housekeeping functions shall wear clean clothing which is in
good repair. When performing cleaning functions that could bring the employee into contact with guest's bodily
fluids, the employee shall be provided protective gloves for optional use.
Sec. 6.05.075 Procedures when infection is suspected
(a) When the regulatory authority has reasonable cause to suspect possible contagious disease transmission by
an employee of a lodging establishment, it shall immediately secure a medical history of the suspected
employee, make other investigations as necessary, and notify the state epidemiologist. The regulatory authority
may require any or all of the following measures and any other measure which is deemed necessary for the
protection of the public health:
(1) The immediate exclusion of the employee from employment in lodging establishments.
(2) The immediate closure of the lodging establishment concerned until, in the opinion of the
regulatory authority, no further danger of disease outbreak exists. Immediate suspension initiated
without a hearing shall only occur upon personal order of the director of the Wichita Falls-Wichita
County Public Health District.
(3) The restriction of the employee's services to specific areas of the lodging establishment
operations where there would be no danger of transmitting disease.
(4) Adequate medical and laboratory examination of the employee and other lodging establishment
employees, including collection of appropriate medical specimens.
(b) When the regulatory authority has reasonable cause to suspect possible contagious disease transmission by
a guest of a lodging establishment, the guestroom shall not be occupied again until the regulatory authority has
given its approval. The lodging establishment manager shall follow the regulatory authority's instructions with
respect to required cleaning and disinfection of the guestroom, bathroom, furnishings, and equipment or the
temporary removal of furnishings and equipment.
(c) The regulatory authority may require the immediate closure of any lodging establishment or any portion of
a lodging establishment, after proper notice has been given, if just cause to suspect the possibility of
transmission of disease or other public health hazard will result from the operation of the lodging establishment
or a particular portion of the lodging establishment. Immediate suspension initiated without a hearing shall only
occur upon order of the director of the Wichita Falls-Wichita County Public Health District.
Sec. 6.05.076 Poisonous or toxic chemical materials
(a) Generally. There shall be present in lodging establishments only those poisonous or toxic chemical
materials necessary for maintaining and cleaning the premises, maintaining the landscaped grounds, maintaining
the swimming pool/spa(s), washing linens and towels, cleaning and sanitizing equipment and utensils, and
controlling insects and rodents.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 160/362
(b) Labeling. All containers of chemical materials shall be prominently and distinctly labeled for easy
identification and use of the contents.
(c) Material safety data sheets. All chemical materials shall have the appropriate material safety data sheet
(MSDS) kept on file for emergency use.
(d) Storage and use of materials.
(1) Categories. Poisonous or toxic materials consist of the following categories:
(A) Insecticides and rodenticides.
(B) Detergents, sanitizers and related cleaning or drying agents, caustics, acids, polishes and
other chemicals.
(C) Landscaping materials.
(2) Storage. Each of the three material categories shall be stored separately and kept in chemical
cabinets or separate rooms or physically located away from each other to prevent mixing and possible
contamination. All poisonous or toxic materials shall be stored in cabinets or in a similar physically
separated place used for no other purpose. To preclude contamination, poisonous or toxic materials
shall not be stored above ice, linens, towels, utensils, or single-service articles, except that this
requirement does not prohibit the convenient availability of detergents and sanitizers at utensil or
dishwashing stations, or laundry compounds in the vicinity of washing machines or dryers.
(3) Use.
(A) Bactericides, cleaning compounds or other chemicals intended for use on food, beverage,
or ice contact surfaces shall not be used in a way that leaves a toxic residue on such surfaces or
that creates a hazard to employees or other persons.
(B) Poisonous or toxic materials shall not be used in a way that contaminates ice, linens,
towels, single-service articles or utensils, nor in a way that constitutes a hazard to guests,
employees or other persons, nor in a way other than in full compliance with the manufacturer's
labeling.
(4) Personal articles and medications shall be stored in employee lockers or away from ice, linens,
towels, single-service articles or utensils that could become contaminated.
(5) First aid supplies shall be stored away from ice, linens, towels, single-service articles or
utensils that could become contaminated.
(Ordinance 1100 adopted 5/17/10)
ARTICLE 6.06 PUBLIC AND SEMI-PUBLIC SWIMMING AQUATIC FACILITIES*
Sec. 6.06.001 State regulations adopted
(a) The standards of the following statutes, laws, and regulations in their current form and as they may
hereafter be amended, are adopted and applied into this article as if they were set forth at length herein:
(1) Texas Health and Safety Code title 5, section 341.064 “swimming pools and bathhouses”;
(2) Texas Health and Safety Code chapter 757 (pool yard enclosures);
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 161/362
(3) Texas Administrative Code title 25, part I, chapter 265 subchapter L, “standards of public pools
and spas”; and
(4) Texas Administrative Code title 25, part I, chapter 265 subchapter M, “public interactive water
features and fountains.”
(b) If a conflict occurs between a provision of this article and a provision of the above statutes, laws, or
regulations, the stricter provision shall apply.
Sec. 6.06.002 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Aquatic facility. A pool, spa, special aquatic activity device, public interactive water feature, fountain or venue
that may be used for swimming or bathing, or other regulated water body as defined by state aquatic facility
regulations.
Authorized agent. The director of health of the regulatory authority, which shall have the enforcement
responsibility for this article.
Certified pool operator. A person who:
(1) Possesses a valid and current certificate of accreditation; and
(2) Obtains certification by completion of one of the following courses or other nationally
recognized course in aquatic facility operation, safety and management:
(A) NRPA, “aquatic facility operator” (A.F.O.);
(B) NSPF, “certified pool-spa operator” (C.P.O);
(C) Y.M.C.A., “pool operator on location” (P.O.O.L.);
(D) NSPI, “professional pool and spa operator” (P.P.S.O.);
(E) ASPSA, “licensed aquatic facility technician” (L.A.F.T.); or
(F) Other training at discretion of the director of health.
Coliform testing. Refers to total coliform, not fecal coliform.
Enclosure. A fence, wall, or combination of fences, walls, gates, windows, or doors that completely surround an
aquatic facility.
Extensively remodeled. The replacement of or modification to an aquatic facility structure or its enclosure, its
circulation system or its appurtenances, so that the design, configuration or operation is different from the
original design, configuration or operation, including the installation of new deck detail or tile work that is
different from the original design. This term does not include the normal maintenance and repair or the
replacement of equipment which has been previously approved if the size, type or operation of the equipment is
substantially the same as the original equipment.
Manager of operations. The person primarily responsible for the safe, sanitary maintenance of a public pool,
spa, or other water-related activity.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 162/362
Permit holder. A local person who has the ultimate responsibility for the operation of any pool, spa, or other
related water activity regulated in this article, and who shall, in all respects, act as the representative for any
entity having an ownership interest in the same.
Private aquatic facility. Any aquatic facility located on private, single-family residential property under the
control of the homeowner or tenant, the use of which is limited to members of the homeowner's or tenant's
family or invited guests.
Public aquatic facility. Any aquatic facility which is intended to be used by the general public for swimming,
bathing or other related purposes and is operated by an owner, lessee, operator, licensee or concessionaire,
regardless of whether a fee is charged for use.
Regulatory authority. The Wichita Falls-Wichita County Public Health District.
Secured. An enclosure during normal operation is maintained so that all gates and entrances are maintained
closed with functioning self-latching and self-closing mechanisms, and that the enclosure is not allowed to
maintain gaps large enough to allow the passage of a four-inch sphere or provide any feature that may be easily
climbed to gain access to the aquatic facility. The enclosure during times when the aquatic facility is closed to
the public must maintain the above conditions, but the gates or entrances to the enclosure must also be locked so
that no person may enter the gates or entrances without the authorization of the certified pool operator and/or
person in charge.
Semi-public aquatic facility. Any aquatic facility which is not included within the definition of either “private
aquatic facility” or “public aquatic facility” as those terms are defined in this section.
Service animal. A dog that has been individually trained to do work or perform tasks for an individual with a
disability. The task(s) performed by the dog must be directly related to the person's disability.
State aquatic facility regulations. The regulations adopted by the state of Texas to regulate public pools and spas
as adopted in section 6.06.001(a) of this article.
Sec. 6.06.003 Penalty for violation
A violation under this article is a class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000.00. In addition
thereto, such person may be enjoined from continuing such violations. Each day upon which such violation
occurs constitutes a separate violation.
Sec. 6.06.004 Permit required; issuance; certification of manager of operations
(a) Permit required; transfer; posting. A person may not operate a public or semi-public aquatic facility
without a permit issued by the regulatory authority. Permits are not transferable from one person to another
person or from one location to another location. A valid permit must be posted at every establishment regulated
by this article. Therapeutic pools and class E pools as defined in the standards are not exempt from this section.
(b) Application for permit; renewal; fee. A person desiring to operate a public or semi-public aquatic facility
must make a written application for a permit on forms provided by the regulatory authority. The application
must contain the name and address of each applicant, the location and type of the pool, the name and address of
each manager of operations and the application fee. An incomplete application will not be processed. Failure to
provide all required information or falsifying information required may result in denial or revocation of the
permit. All permits will expire March 31st of each year; the same information is required for a renewal permit as
for an initial permit. Each pool and spa at each location will be charged a separate permit fee as determined by
the regulatory authority.
(c) Certification of manager of operations.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 163/362
(1) A manager of operations of a public or semi-public aquatic facility shall obtain certification
from the regulatory authority. A manager of operations may obtain certification by successfully
completing a training course conducted by the regulatory authority. No person will be allowed to act
as the manager of operations without first having obtained certification.
(2) At least two certification training programs will be conducted per year. The fee for certification
of a manager of operations shall be determined by the regulatory authority and the certification shall
expire one year following its issuance.
(3) A person showing a current certificate as a certified aquatic facility operator (AFO), certified
pool-spa operator (CPO), a pool operator on location (POOL) or any other training approved by the
regulatory authority shall be exempt from the health district training.
(4) Facilities constructed before the adoption of this article must comply with all provisions of this
article and all future amendments to this article, unless the regulatory authority grants a variance in
writing, or unless otherwise exempted under Tex. Health and Safety Code sec. 757.005.
(5) All fees are nonrefundable and will not be prorated.
Sec. 6.06.005 Inspections
(a) The regulatory authority is authorized to conduct inspections as necessary to ensure compliance with all
sections of this article. The regulatory authority shall have the right of entry at any reasonable hour upon the
premises where a public or semi-public aquatic facility is located. The regulatory authority shall have the
authority to collect water samples from the aquatic facility for laboratory analysis.
(b) Each public or semi-public aquatic facility shall pass an annual pre-operation inspection by the regulatory
authority prior to use by the public each permit year. There shall be no charge for one preliminary pre-operation
inspection that is not requested by the facility and for one pre-operation inspection that is requested by the
facility; a re-inspection fee shall be required for all further pre-operation inspections.
Sec. 6.06.006 Maintenance and operation
(a) Every public or semi-public aquatic facility shall be under the supervision of the permit holder, who shall
be responsible for compliance with all parts of this article relating to the facility maintenance, operation and
safety of swimmers. It shall be unlawful for such permit holder to cause or permit the existence of a condition
which is in violation of any section of this article.
(b) It shall be the duty of the certified pool operator and/or an appropriately trained designee to:
(1) Assure that someone can physically respond within one hour of being notified by the regulatory
authority to the site of the aquatic facility;
(2) Check at least once per day that the aquatic facility remains in compliance with this article and
with state aquatic facility regulations;
(3) Check and record water chemistry at least once per day for each aquatic facility permitted to
ensure compliance with state and local aquatic facility regulations, including:
(A) Disinfectant levels;
(B) pH levels; and
(C) Cyanuric acid levels (if applicable).
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 164/362
(4) Ensure that an appropriate method is used to check water chemistry as specified in state aquatic
facility regulations;
(5) Retain records of daily water chemistry checks for at least two years on site; and
(6) Make all records available to the regulatory authority upon request.
(7) Register certification as a certified pool operator or manager of operations with the regulatory
authority and maintain a copy of the registration on site at the facility. In the event that the certified
pool operator/manager of operations is no longer employed on premises, the aquatic facility must
employ another certified pool operator/manager of operations who possesses or obtains a current
Wichita Falls Wichita County Public Health District Manager of operations or certified pool operator
as defined by this article.
(c) All pumps, filters, sanitizers and chemical feeders, drains, ladders, lighting, ropes and appurtenant
equipment used in the operation of all public and semi-public aquatic facilities shall be maintained in a good
state of repair.
(d) All public and semi-public aquatic facilities shall be treated and maintained in accordance with current
department of state health services standards unless otherwise stated.
(1) Every pool shall contain a sanitizer concentration equivalent to a free chlorine residual between
1.0 and 8.0 ppm. Every spa shall contain a minimum sanitary concentration equivalent to a free
chlorine residual between 3.0 and 8.0 ppm. Any aquatic facility outside the specified range of free
chlorine residual shall be immediately closed to the public. A test kit for measuring the concentration
of the free chlorine shall be present at each aquatic facility. The use of any sanitizer other than
chlorine must be approved by the regulatory authority.
(2) Every aquatic facility shall have water with a pH of not less than 7.2 and not more than 7.8. An
adequate pH test kit shall be present at each aquatic facility. If a pH test shows an acid reaction less
than 7.2 or basic reaction over 7.8, then the aquatic facility shall be immediately closed to the public.
(3) The presence of microorganisms of the total coliform group or E coli in any water sample shall
be deemed unacceptable water quality. Two consecutive samples showing microorganisms of total
coliform or E coli will be grounds for immediate closure of the aquatic facility.
(4) Every aquatic facility shall have water clarity sufficient for the main drain or a six-inchdiameter
turbidity test disk placed at the deepest part of the basin, to be clearly visible from the deck
of the facility at all distances up to ten yards, measured from a line drawn across the pool through the
disc. Failure to meet this requirement shall be sufficient cause for immediate closure of the aquatic
facility.
(5) A 15-minute maximum timer shall be installed and operational at each spa. The timer must be
located so that it cannot be reached unless a person exits the spa.
(6) Cyanuric acid shall not exceed 100 ppm in any aquatic facility. If the level exceeds 100 ppm,
the facility shall close until the level can be lowered to below 80 ppm.
(7) During any routine inspection, if the regulatory authority is required to close the aquatic facility
for non-compliance, a re-inspection fee may be charged to the permit holder for each requested return
visit for re-inspection.
Sec. 6.06.007 Violations; suspension of permit
(a) A person commits an offense if he/she violates any portion of this article or the standards set forth by the
department of state health services.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 165/362
(b) Failure to comply with any section of this article may result in the immediate closure of the public or
semi-public aquatic facility and/or the initiation of legal action. Upon determination that the aquatic facility does
not comply with the provisions of this article, the regulatory authority shall notify the permit holder or manager
of operations of the existing violations. If the regulatory authority determines that the condition of the aquatic
facility may be hazardous to the health or safety of the swimmers or to the general public, the aquatic facility
shall be immediately closed. A new water sample and inspection of the aquatic facility will be conducted from
8:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m., Monday through Thursday, at the request of the pool manager of operations or the permit
holder. The aquatic facility water must completely turn over through the filtration and chlorination system at
least once before reinspection and re-sampling. If compliance has been achieved, the permit holder shall be
notified that the pool or spa may be opened.
(c) When the regulatory authority has ordered that an aquatic facility be closed due to noncompliance with
any provision of this article, the permit holder shall not allow the facility to be used for swimming, diving or
bathing purposes and shall immediately take every reasonable step to prevent the use of such facility for such
purposes. By way of example and without limiting such duty, the permit holder shall immediately:
(1) Post notices reasonably likely to come to the attention of potential users of the aquatic facility
advising of the closure;
(2) Lock all gates and doorways in any fence or other enclosure surrounding such pool; and
(3) Failure to immediately comply with the above will result in the regulatory authority posting a
sign at the pool which states “Pool Closed by Order of the Wichita Falls-Wichita County Public
Health District.” It shall be unlawful to remove, cover or mutilate such sign without the approval of
the regulatory authority. Use of the facility by an individual for swimming, diving or bathing
purposes after the regulatory authority has ordered such facility to be closed shall be deemed prima
facie evidence that the permit holder of such pool or spa has knowingly allowed the facility to be
used for such purposes.
(d) The regulatory authority shall suspend a permit to operate a public or semi-public aquatic facility if:
(1) A permit holder fails to designate a certified manager of operations as specified in this article;
(2) The condition or operation of an aquatic facility is considered to be hazardous or constitutes an
imminent health hazard to the health or safety of swimmers or the general public;
(3) The permit holder fails to keep all spa equipment and devices working properly; or
(4) The suspension shall continue until the regulatory authority has conducted a new inspection
and the cause of suspension is corrected.
Sec. 6.06.008 Construction standards and plan review
(a) Prior to the construction of a new or the extensive remodeling of an existing public or semi-public aquatic
facility, the owner shall submit plans and specifications for such construction or remodeling to the building
inspections department for review.
(b) The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout and arrangement of mechanical, plumbing,
fencing, electrical, construction materials of work areas, the type and model of proposed fixed equipment and
facilities and all associated buildings or structures.
(c) A licensed professional engineer shall examine the final aquatic facility design/blueprints for all new and
extensively remodeled aquatic facilities (including structural, mechanical, plumbing or electrical renovations)
and certify by original signature and engineer's seal compliance with state aquatic facility regulations and this
article.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 166/362
(d) No work shall begin until regulatory authority has received the engineer's certificate of pre-construction,
conducted a plan review and has communicated with the building inspections department that a building permit
may be issued. Work shall commence and conclude within the time allowed by such permits. Deviations from
approved plans shall not be permitted without approval in writing from the regulatory authority and the building
inspections department. If no work has begun within 180 days from the date the regulatory authority has given
written notice that work may begin, or if work has begun and is halted more than sixty (60) days, the director
may withdraw approval.
(e) The aquatic facility construction shall pass a pre-gunite inspection, pre-plaster inspection and
preoperational inspection by the regulatory authority prior to issuance of a permit. The completion of these
inspections by a regulatory authority does not substitute or replace inspections required by other departments
within the city.
(f) It is the responsibility of the person in charge to ensure that the building permit applicant and licensed
professional engineer comply with all zoning, building, fire, and health ordinances of the city.
Sec. 6.06.009 Regulations of persons in aquatic facilities
A person commits an offense if they:
(1) Have skin abrasions, open sores, skin disease, eye disease, nasal or ear discharge, diarrhea, or a
communicable disease and bathes in a public or semi-public aquatic facility;
(2) Alter or remove safety equipment or signage from a public or semi-public aquatic facility
except in an emergency;
(3) Alter or damage any part of a public or semi-public aquatic facility enclosure or allow the
aquatic facility enclosure to remain unsecured while the enclosure is under repair;
(4) Alter or damage drain and/or suction outlet covers or grates;
(5) Carry glass within a public or semi-public aquatic facility area or enclosure;
(6) Allow an animal under his or her control to enter or remain within the aquatic facility, area or
enclosure of a public or semi-public aquatic facility without approval from the regulatory authority,
unless the animal is a service animal;
(7) Interfere with or obstruct the regulatory authority while they are in the process of enforcing this
article; or
(8) Are the manager of operations, certified pool operator or the person in charge of a public or
semi-public aquatic facility and violate any provision of this article.
(Ordinance 1265 adopted 4/1/19)
CHAPTER 7
MUNICIPAL COURT
ARTICLE 7.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 167/362
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 7.02 MUNICIPAL COURT OF RECORD†
Sec. 7.02.001 Created
A municipal court of record is hereby created for the city in accordance with the Uniform Municipal Courts of
Record Act (the “Act”) effective the 1st day of June, 2009 (the “effective date”). (Ordinance 1082, sec. 1,
adopted 5/11/09)
State law reference–Creation of court, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 30.00003.
Sec. 7.02.002 Name
The municipal court herein created shall be known and designated as the “Municipal Court of Record of the City
of Iowa Park, Texas.” (Ordinance 1082, sec. 2, adopted 5/11/09)
Sec. 7.02.003 Transition from current municipal court
The municipal court of record of the city shall be in lieu of the current municipal court of the city, and all cases
pending in the municipal court of the city on the effective date shall be transferred to and thereafter disposed of
in the municipal court of record of the city. (Ordinance 1082, sec. 3, adopted 5/11/09)
Sec. 7.02.004 Times for transaction of business
The municipal court of record of the city shall have no terms and may sit at any time for the transaction of
business of the court. (Ordinance 1082, sec. 4, adopted 5/11/09)
Sec. 7.02.005 Jurisdiction
The municipal court of record of the city shall have subject matter jurisdiction as provided by general law for
municipal courts and, in addition, the following subject matter jurisdiction:
(1) Over criminal cases arising under ordinances authorized by sections 215.072 (dairies;
slaughterhouses), 217.042 (nuisances), and 341.903 (municipal owned property outside
municipality), of the Texas Local Government Code.
(2) Concurrent jurisdiction with the justice court in the precinct in which the city is located in
criminal cases that arise within the territorial limits of the municipality and are punishable only by
fine.
(3) Civil jurisdiction for the purpose of enforcing municipal ordinances enacted under subchapter
A, chapter 214, Texas Local Government Code (relating to dangerous structures), or subchapter E,
chapter 683, Texas Transportation Code (relating to junked vehicles; public nuisance and abatement).
(4) Concurrent jurisdiction with a district court or a county court at law under subchapter B,
chapter 54, Texas Local Government Code (relating to municipal health and safety ordinances),
within the municipality's territorial limits and property owned by the municipality located in the
municipality's extraterritorial jurisdiction, for the purpose of enforcing health and safety and nuisance
abatement ordinances.
(5) Authority to issue:
(A) Search warrants for the purpose of investigating a health and safety or nuisance
abatement ordinance violation;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 168/362
(B) Seizure warrants for the purpose of securing, removing, or demolishing the offending
property and removing the debris from the premises; and
(C) Writs of mandamus, attachment, and other writs necessary to the enforcement of the
jurisdiction of the court and writs of habeas corpus in cases in which the offense charged is
within the jurisdiction of the court.
(Ordinance 1082, sec. 5, adopted 5/11/09)
State law reference–Jurisdiction, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 30.00005.
Sec. 7.02.006 Appointment of judges; qualifications; salary; term
(a) The municipal court of record of the city shall be presided over by one or more municipal judges.
(b) The city council shall appoint a presiding judge of the municipal court of record of the city and may
appoint, from time to time, such other judges or temporary judges as it deems necessary in accordance with the
Act.
(c) The city council shall establish a salary for each municipal judge appointed in accordance with the Act.
The amount of a judge's salary may not be diminished during the judge's term of office. The salary may not be
based directly or indirectly on fines, fees, or costs collected by the court.
(d) Each municipal judge must:
(1) Be a resident of this state;
(2) Be a citizen of the United States;
(3) Be a licensed attorney in good standing; and
(4) Have two or more years of experience in the practice of law in this state.
(e) A person may not serve as municipal judge if the person is otherwise employed by the city. A municipal
judge who accepts employment with the city vacates the judicial office.
(f) Each municipal judge shall serve for a term of two years commencing October 1 and ending on September
30 of the second year following the commencement date. The first term of office following adoption of this
article shall commence on the effective date and shall end on September 30, 2009. The individual now serving as
judge of the municipal court of the city is hereby appointed as presiding judge of the municipal court of record
of the city to serve the first term specified above.
(Ordinance 1082, sec. 6, adopted 5/11/09)
State law reference–Judge generally, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 30.00006.
Sec. 7.02.007 Removal of judge
A municipal judge may be removed from office at any time upon the grounds set forth for removing members of
the city council for the reasons set forth in article V, section 1-a, of the state constitution. (Ordinance 1082, sec.
7, adopted 5/11/09)
State law reference–Removal of judge, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 30.000085.
Sec. 7.02.008 Rules of practice and procedure
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 169/362
The presiding judge of the municipal court of record of the city may make and publish all rules of practice and
procedure necessary to expedite the trial of cases before the courts that are not inconsistent with law. (Ordinance
1082, sec. 8, adopted 5/11/09)
State law reference–Court rules, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 30.00023.
Sec. 7.02.009 Staff
The city council shall appoint the following persons, who will serve at the pleasure of the city council: (1) a
clerk of the municipal court of record of the city, and (2) such deputy clerks, warrant officers, or other personnel
as needed for the proper operation of the municipal court of record of the city. Such officers shall have the duties
and responsibility provided by the Act and applicable law and shall serve under the direction of the presiding
judge as required by the Act. The individuals now serving as the clerk and deputy clerk of the municipal court of
the city, respectively, are hereby appointed as the clerk and deputy clerk, respectively, of the municipal court of
record of the city as of the effective date. (Ordinance 1082, sec. 9, adopted 5/11/09)
State law reference–Appointment of clerk and other personnel, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 30.00009.
Sec. 7.02.010 Recording of proceedings
The proceedings of the municipal court of record of the city shall be recorded by a good quality electronic
recording device meeting the requirements of the Act and applicable law. A court reporter will not be required
except for transcription of proceedings for purposes of appeal or as provided in the Act. The city manager shall,
from time to time, appoint an official court reporter, who will have the qualifications provided by law for official
court reporters. The official court reporter appointed by the city manager shall serve at the pleasure of the city
manager, who shall have authority to remove such official court reporter at any time. The appointment of an
individual as the official court reporter shall not entitle such person to a salary nor shall such person have any
right or expectation of continued appointment as the official court reporter. (Ordinance 1082, sec. 10, adopted
5/11/09)
State law reference–Court reporter and recording devices, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 30.00010.
Sec. 7.02.011 Appeals
Appeals from judgments or orders of the municipal court of record of the city shall be governed by the
applicable provisions of the Act and the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure. (Ordinance 1082, sec. 11, adopted
5/11/09)
State law reference–Appeals, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 30.00014 et seq.
ARTICLE 7.03 FEES, COSTS AND SPECIAL EXPENSES*
Sec. 7.03.001 Technology fund
(a) Established. There is hereby created and established a municipal court technology fund, herein known as
the fund, pursuant to article 102.0172 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. The fund shall be maintained in the
general revenue account.
(b) Assessment and collection of fee.
(1) The fee shall be as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code. The fee shall be
assessed and collected from the defendant upon conviction for a misdemeanor offense in the
municipal court as a cost of court. A defendant is considered convicted if:
(A) A sentence is imposed on the person;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 170/362
(B) The person is placed on community supervision, including deferred adjudication
community supervision; or
(C) The court defers final disposition of the person's case.
(2) The fee shall be collected on conviction for an offense committed on or after October 1, 1999.
The clerk of the court shall collect the fee and pay the fee to the municipal treasurer of the city, who
shall deposit the fee into the municipal court technology fund.
(2004 Code, art. 7.02)
(c) Authorized uses. The fund shall be used only to finance the purchase of technological enhancements for
the municipal court of the city, including those items as specified in V.T.C.A., Code of Criminal Procedure,
article 102.0172. (2004 Code, art. 7.02; Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Authority of municipality to establish municipal court technology fund, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 102.0172.
Sec. 7.03.002 Building security fund
(a) Established. There is hereby created and established a municipal court building security fund (the “fund”)
pursuant to article 102.017 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
(b) Assessment of fee. The municipal court of the city is hereby authorized and required to assess a municipal
court building security fee (the “fee”) as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code against all
defendants convicted in a trial of a misdemeanor offense by the municipal court. Each misdemeanor conviction
shall be subject to a separate assessment of the fee.
(c) Collection of fee. The municipal court clerk is hereby authorized and required to collect the fee and to pay
the same to the finance director of the city. All fees so collected and paid over to the finance director for the city
shall be segregated in the fund.
(d) Authorized uses. The fund shall be used only for the purpose of financing the purchase of security devices
and/or services for the building or buildings housing the municipal court for the city. “Security devices and/or
services” shall include any and all items described in article 102.017(d) of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
(e) Administration. The fund shall be administered by and under the direction of the city council.
(2004 Code, art. 7.03)
State law reference–Authority to establish municipal court building security fund, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 102.017.
Sec. 7.03.003 Juvenile case manager fund
(a) Effective September 1, 2006, a juvenile case manager fee as provided in appendix A to this code will be
assessed as a cost of court against every defendant convicted of a fine-only misdemeanor offense in the
municipal court of the city. The presiding judge of the municipal court is authorized to waive the juvenile case
manager fee in a case of financial hardship. For the purpose of assessing the juvenile case manager fee, a
defendant will be considered convicted if any of the circumstances set forth in Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art.
102.0174(e) (as amended from time to time) exist with respect to a particular defendant.
(b) All juvenile case manager fees assessed as provided by subsection (a) above shall be delivered to the city
treasurer and placed in a fund which will be known as the juvenile case manager fund (herein, the “fund”).
(c) The mayor is hereby authorized and directed to enter into a contract with the IPCISD (the “contract”)
providing, among other things, that:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 171/362
(1) All payments made from the fund shall be used solely for the purpose of paying a portion of the
salary, consideration or benefits of a juvenile case manager who will spend more than half of his or
her time working on cases brought under Tex. Education Code sections 25.093 and 25.094;
(2) The IPCISD shall be required to provide the city with an accounting of the funds paid to it to
show compliance with this condition;
(3) The IPCISD will indemnify the city from any claims arising as a result of its failure to comply
with such provision or from the claims of third parties;
(4) The contract may be renewed or extended annually by the city and the IPCISD; and
(5) The contract will be substantially on the terms and conditions of the contract which is attached
to Ordinance 1010; provided, however, that the mayor and city manager may vary the terms of the
final contract as a result of negotiations with the IPCISD, except that no variation shall be
inconsistent with the terms set forth in this section.
(d) The mayor, city manager and other officers of the city are hereby authorized and directed to take any other
actions on behalf of the city as may be required to carry out the terms of this section or the contract.
(2004 Code, art. 7.04)
State law reference–Juvenile case manager fund, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 102.0174.
CHAPTER 8
OFFENSES AND NUISANCES
ARTICLE 8.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 8.01.001 Reward for arrest and conviction of persons vandalizing city property
The city hereby offers a reward of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the arrest and conviction of any persons
found guilty of committing the crime of damaging, vandalizing, destruction or theft of property and equipment
belonging to the city. This reward is a standing offer and shall be paid out of the general fund account of the city.
(2004 Code, sec. 8.01.002)
Sec. 8.01.002 Climbing on water towers
It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized persons to climb upon the water towers of the city. (2004 Code, sec.
8.01.001)
Sec. 8.01.003 Driving on Gordon Lake Dam
(a) It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to drive a vehicle on the Gordon Lake Dam.
(b) Any person failing to adhere to this provision shall, upon conviction in the municipal court, be fined in
accordance with the general penalty provision set forth in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(2004 Code, sec. 8.01.003)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 172/362
Sec. 8.01.004 Spitting in public buildings or on sidewalks
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to spit upon the floors or walls of any public building within the city.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to spit upon the sidewalks in the city.
(2004 Code, sec. 8.01.004)
ARTICLE 8.02 MINORS
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 8.02.001–8.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Curfew*
Sec. 8.02.031 Definitions
In this division:
Curfew hours.
(1) 11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday, until 6:00 a.m. of the
following day; and
(2) 12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Friday or Saturday.
Emergency. An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action.
The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation
requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
Establishment. Any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited,
including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment.
Guardian.
(1) A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or
(2) A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court.
Minor. Any person under seventeen (17) years of age.
Operator. Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any
establishment. The term includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a
corporation.
Parent. A person who is:
(1) A natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent of another person; or
(2) At least eighteen (18) years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and
custody of a minor.
Public place. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is
not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 173/362
transport facilities, and shops.
Remain. To:
(1) Linger or stay; or
(2) Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator, or
other person in control of the premises.
Serious bodily injury. Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious
permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
(2004 Code, sec. 8.05.001)
Sec. 8.02.032 Offenses
(a) A minor commits an offense if he or she remains in any public place or on the premises of any
establishment within the city during curfew hours.
(b) A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he or she knowingly permits, or by insufficient
control allows, the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city
during curfew hours.
(c) The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment commits an offense if he or she knowingly
allows a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours.
(2004 Code, sec. 8.05.002)
Sec. 8.02.033 Defenses
(a) It is a defense to prosecution under section 8.02.032 that the minor was:
(1) Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;
(2) On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop;
(3) In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
(4) Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment
activity, without any detour or stop;
(5) Involved in an emergency;
(6) On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next-door
neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police department about the minor's presence;
(7) Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and
sponsored by the city, a civic organization or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the
minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious, or
other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or
another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor;
(8) Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free
exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right to assembly; or
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 174/362
(9) Married or had been married or had disabilities or minority removed in accordance with
chapter 31 of the Texas Family Code.
(b) It is a defense to prosecution under section 8.02.032(c) that the owner, operator, or employee of an
establishment promptly notified the police department that a minor was present on the premises of the
establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
(2004 Code, sec. 8.05.003)
Sec. 8.02.034 Enforcement
Before taking any enforcement action under this division, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age
and reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this
division unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and
other circumstances, no defense in section 8.02.033 is present. The officer will only make an arrest when an
offender refuses to comply with this division or becomes unruly and abusive. (2004 Code, sec. 8.05.004)
Sec. 8.02.035 Penalty; referral of minors to juvenile court
(a) A person who violates a provision of this division is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a
day during which the violation is committed, continued, or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction, is
punishable by a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision set forth in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(b) When required by section 51.08 of the Texas Family Code, as amended, the municipal court shall waive
original jurisdiction over a minor who violates section 8.02.032(a) of this division and shall refer the minor to
juvenile court.
(2004 Code, sec. 8.05.005)
ARTICLE 8.03 NOISE*
Sec. 8.03.001 General prohibition; declaration of nuisance
(a) Any unreasonably loud, disturbing, unnecessary noise which causes material distress, discomfort or injury
to persons of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity thereof is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is
prohibited.
(b) Any noise of such character, intensity and continued duration which substantially interferes with the
comfortable enjoyment of private homes by persons of ordinary sensibilities is hereby declared to be a nuisance
and is prohibited.
(2004 Code, sec. 8.03.001)
Sec. 8.03.002 Specific noises prohibited
The following acts, among others, are declared to be nuisances in violation of this code, but said enumeration
shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
(1) The playing of any radio, phonograph or other musical instrument in such manner or with such
volume, particularly during the hours of curfew, as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of
persons of ordinary sensibilities in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence.
(2) The use of any stationary loudspeaker or amplifier of such intensity that annoys and disturbs
persons of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity thereof; or the use of any stationary
loudspeaker or amplifier operated on any weekday between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or
at any time on Sunday.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 175/362
(3) The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or long-continued noise shall
disturb the comfort and repose of any person of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity.
(4) The continued or frequent sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile,
motorcycle, bus or other vehicle except as a danger or warning signal; or the creation by means of
any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh noise for any unnecessary and unreasonable
period of time.
(5) The running of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such
manner as to create loud or unnecessary grating, grinding, jarring or rattling noise or vibration.
(6) The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal
combustion engine, motor vehicle or boat engine except through a muffler or other device which will
effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
(7) The use of any mechanical device operated by compressed air, unless the noise to be created is
effectively muffled and reduced.
(8) The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair work, of any building, other
than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on weekdays, or at any time on Sunday, except in
case of urgent necessity in the interest of the public safety and convenience, and then only by permit
from the governing body, which permit may be renewed by it during the time the emergency exists.
(9) The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school or institution of
learning while the same is in session, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with
the workings of such institutions, providing conspicuous signs are displayed in such manner
indicating that the same is a school or hospital street.
(10) The creation of any loud and excessive noise in connection with the loading or unloading of
any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates, and containers.
(11) The raucous shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturb the peace
and quiet of the neighborhood.
(12) The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting
attention by the creation of noise to any performance, show or sale of merchandise.
(13) The operation of a motor vehicle on a public road, alley, right-of-way or highway in a manner
that causes the vehicle to undergo a sustained loss of traction and squealing of the tires is prohibited.
(2004 Code, sec. 8.03.002)
ARTICLE 8.04 WEAPONS*
Sec. 8.04.001 Discharging firearms
It shall be unlawful to discharge any gun, rifle, pistol or firearm of any kind within the city, except by peace
officers or members of the state or federal military forces in the discharge of their duties, or by citizens in the
lawful protection of persons or property. (2004 Code, sec. 8.04.001)
Sec. 8.04.002 Discharging airguns
It shall be unlawful to discharge any airgun, air rifle or air pistol of any description (by whatever name known)
that by means of compressed air, compressed gas, springs or any other means is capable of discharging shots,
pellets, or any solid object at any velocity, anywhere within the city. (2004 Code, sec. 8.04.002)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 176/362
ARTICLE 8.05 SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS†
Sec. 8.05.001 Definitions
In this article:
Child-care facility. A facility which is required to register as a child-care facility with the state department of
family and protective services (or its successor agency), and includes, without limitation, a licensed child-care
center, a licensed child-care home, a registered child-care home and a listed family home.
Park containing playground equipment. Any outdoor facility located on public property that is intended for
recreation, is open to the public, and contains apparatus intended for the recreation of children, such as slides or
swing sets.
Public or private youth center. Any recreational facility or gymnasium that:
(1) Is intended primarily for use by persons who are 17 years of age or younger; and
(2) Regularly provides athletic, civic or cultural activities.
Reside. To live, dwell, abide, stay, or lodge for a period of more than one day.
School. A private, public, or charter elementary or secondary school.
Sec. 8.05.002 Prohibited areas
(a) Applicability. This section applies only to a person who is:
(1) Required to register as a sex offender under chapter 62, Code of Criminal Procedure, because
of a reportable conviction or adjudication involving a victim younger than 17 years of age; or
(2) Civilly committed as a sexually violent predator under chapter 841, Health and Safety Code,
and subject to outpatient treatment and supervision under that chapter.
(b) Prohibited areas. A person to whom this section applies may not reside within 1,000 feet of a school,
child-care facility, public or private youth center, or park containing playground equipment, as measured in a
straight line from the nearest property line of the residence to the nearest property line of the school, child-care
facility, youth center, or park.
(c) Exceptions. A person residing within 1,000 feet of a school, child-care facility, youth center, or park does
not commit a violation of this section if any of the following apply:
(1) The person established the residence prior to May 8, 2006.
(2) The person is under the age of 18 years.
(3) The person is residing at the residence at the time the school, child-care facility, youth center,
or park is established or extended to within 1,000 feet of the residence.
(d) Penalty. A person to whom this section applies commits a class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of
not more than $2,000.00, if a person violates this section. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense.
Sec. 8.05.003 List of parks and public or private youth centers; map
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 177/362
(a) The city manager shall compile and maintain a list of parks containing playground equipment and public
or private youth centers. The location of these facilities, as well as schools and child-care facilities, may be
displayed on a map showing the perimeters of the safety zone established by this article.
(b) If any person: (i) believes that a park (which is not on the list described in subsection (a) of this section)
meets the criteria established by the definition of “park containing playground equipment” in section 8.05.001 or
(ii) operates a public or private youth center (which is not on the list described in subsection (a) of this section)
which the person believes meets the criteria of the definition of “public or private youth center” in section
8.05.001, then, in either case, such person may petition the city manager to have such park or public or private
youth center included on the list referred to in subsection (a) of this section. In the event the city manager denies
such petition, such person may appeal said ruling to the city council. The action of the city council on such
matter shall be final.
(Ordinance 1071, sec. 3, adopted 11/17/08)
ARTICLE 8.06 JUNKED VEHICLES*
Sec. 8.06.001 Definitions
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the definitions set forth below:
Antique vehicle. Shall have the meaning assigned to it in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, section 683.077.
Junked vehicle. Any vehicle that is self-propelled and:
(1) Does not have lawfully attached to it:
(A) An unexpired license plate; or
(B) A valid motor vehicle inspection certificate;
(2) Is wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled or discarded; or
(3) Is inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than:
(A) Seventy-two hours if the vehicle is on public property; or
(B) Thirty consecutive days if the vehicle is on private property.
Motor vehicle. Shall have the meaning assigned to it in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, section 683.001.
Motor vehicle collector. Shall have the meaning assigned to it in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, section
683.077.
Officer. Any officer of the city, including, without limitation, city manager, police chief, police officer, fire
marshal, code enforcement or compliance officer, building official or health officer, but shall not include the
mayor or members of the city council.
Other terms. Any other terms used in this article and not specifically defined in this section shall have the
meanings assigned to them V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, section 683.001 or the meaning assigned to them in
other portions of this code.
Special interest vehicle. Shall have the meaning assigned to it in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, section 683.077.
Sec. 8.06.002 Penalty
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 178/362
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
punished in accordance with the general penalty provision set forth in section 1.01.009 of this code.
Sec. 8.06.003 Declaration of nuisance
The parking, placing, accumulation or storage of one or more junked vehicles or parts(s) thereof as defined in
section 8.06.001 herein within the city limits where such junked vehicle or part(s) thereof is visible from a
public place or public right-of-way is detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city,
tends to reduce the value of private property, invites vandalism, creates fire hazards, constitutes an attractive
nuisance creating a hazard to the health and welfare of the city by producing urban blight adverse to the
maintenance and continuing development of the city, and shall constitute a public nuisance.
Sec. 8.06.004 Notice generally
If an officer shall find that a motor vehicle or part thereof is a public nuisance, as defined herein, such officer
shall prepare a notice, in writing, stating in detail:
(1) The conditions which constitute the public nuisance;
(2) That the public nuisance must be removed and abated within ten (10) days after receipt of the
notice;
(3) That a public hearing will be held before the municipal judge in the municipal court to
determine the allegations in the notice and a remedy to be imposed if the allegations are found to be
true; and
(4) That the public hearing will be held at a specified date and time in the municipal court of which
date and time shall not be earlier than the 11th day after the date of the service of the notice.
Sec. 8.06.005 Address and description in notice
The notice shall set forth the street address and description sufficient for identification of the motor vehicle and
the premises upon which the motor vehicle is located.
Sec. 8.06.006 Service of notice
(a) The officer shall cause copies of the notice to be served upon the following:
(1) The last known registered owner of the junked motor vehicle;
(2) Any lienholder of record; and
(3) If the nuisance is upon private property:
(A) The owner of the private premises on which the public nuisance exists; and
(B) The occupant of the private premises on which the nuisance exists;
(4) If the nuisance is upon public property:
(A) The owner of the public premises on which the public nuisance exists; and
(B) The occupant of the public premises;
(5) If the nuisance is upon a public right-of-way:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 179/362
(A) The owner of the premises adjacent to the public right-of-way on which the public
nuisance exists; and
(B) The occupant of the premises adjacent to the public right-of-way on which the public
nuisance exists.
(b) The notice shall be mailed, by certified mail, with a five-day return requested, to the parties named in
subsection (a).
(c) If any notices are returned undelivered by the United States post office, official action to abate the public
nuisance shall be continued to a date not less than ten (10) days after the date of the return.
Sec. 8.06.007 Hearing
(a) Hearings under this chapter to determine whether a vehicle or vehicles alleged to be a public nuisance is,
in fact, a public nuisance, as defined by this chapter and state, shall be conducted in accordance with the
following procedures:
(1) All hearings shall be before the municipal judge at the municipal court unless otherwise
ordered by the municipal court judge.
(2) The hearing shall be held at the date, time and place specified in the original notice unless
continued by the municipal judge to a different date, time and place; however, any rescheduled
hearing shall be set not less than seven days from the date of the hearing in the original notice.
(3) If a hearing is rescheduled from the date and time specified in the original notice, notice of the
date, time and place of the rescheduled hearing shall be given in accordance with the municipal court
rules of practice and procedure.
(b) At the hearing, the municipal judge shall determine whether the vehicle alleged to be a public nuisance is,
in fact, a public nuisance as defined by this article and state law. At the hearing, the junked motor vehicle is
presumed to be inoperable unless demonstrated otherwise by the owner.
(c) If a determination is made that the alleged nuisance is, in fact, a public nuisance, the municipal judge shall
enter an order, pursuant to section 683.074(b) and (c) of the Texas Transportation Code, reciting such finding
and ordering the abatement or removal of the nuisance by a date certain. The order shall also provide for the
removal or abatement of the nuisance by the city or a contractor retained by the city in the absence of
compliance with the order by the owner or other person interested in the nuisance by the date specified in the
order. If the information is available at the location of the nuisance, the order must include the vehicles:
description, vehicle identification number and license plate number.
Sec. 8.06.008 Order to remove
(a) The order requiring the removal of the motor vehicle or motor vehicle part(s) must include a description of
the motor vehicle and the correct vehicle identification number and license plate number of the vehicle, if such
information is available at the site of the motor vehicle.
(b) The order shall also state that the motor vehicle shall not be reconstructed or made operable after it has
been removed.
(c) The state department of transportation shall be given notice of removal of the motor vehicle not later than
the fifth day after the date of removal. Such notice must identify the motor vehicle or motor vehicle part(s). This
notice is to be given to authorize the state department of transportation to immediately cancel the certificate of
title to the vehicle pursuant to the Certificate of Title Act (V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, chapter 501).
Sec. 8.06.009 Relocation of vehicle
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 180/362
The relocation of a junked vehicle that is a public nuisance to another location within the corporate city limits
after a proceeding for the abatement or removal of the public nuisance has commenced has no effect on the
proceeding if the junked vehicle constitutes a public nuisance at the new location.
Sec. 8.06.010 Exceptions
The procedures herein shall not apply to a motor vehicle or motor vehicle part(s) that is completely enclosed
within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or from other public or private
property, or a motor vehicle or motor vehicle part(s) that is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private
property in connection with the business of a licensed motor vehicle dealer or junkyard, or an unlicensed,
operable, or inoperable antique or special interest motor vehicle stored by a collector on the collector's property,
if the motor vehicle and the outdoor storage area are maintained in a manner so that they do not constitute a
health hazard and are screened from ordinary public view by means of a fence, rapidly growing trees, shrubbery,
or other appropriate means.
Sec. 8.06.011 Administration
Procedures of this article must be administered by regular salaried, full-time employees of the city, except that
the removal of a motor vehicle or motor vehicle part(s) from the property may be by any duly authorized person.
Sec. 8.06.012 Authority to enter private property
An officer, agent or employee authorized by the city to administer the procedures authorized by this article may
enter private property for the purposes specified in the procedures herein to examine a motor vehicle or motor
vehicle part(s), obtain information as to the identity of the motor vehicle, and remove or cause removal of the
motor vehicle or motor vehicle part(s) that constitutes a nuisance in conformity with this article. The municipal
court of the city may issue such orders as may be necessary to enforce the procedures set forth in this article.
Sec. 8.06.013 Liability of city agents and employees
No officer, agent or employee of the city shall be personally liable for damage incurred or alleged to have been
incurred as a result of any act required, permitted or authorized to be done or performed in the discharge of his
duties pursuant to this article. Any suit brought against any officer, agent or employee of the city as a result of
any act required, permitted or authorized in the discharge of his duties under this article shall be deemed an
action against the city.
Sec. 8.06.014 Filing of complaint
If the public nuisance is not removed nor abated within the ten-day period provided by this article, the city,
acting by and through its city manager, code compliance officer, fire marshal or health officer, shall then file a
complaint under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, section 683.074, in the municipal court for the city or in the
justice of the peace court of the county.
Sec. 8.06.015 Disposal
A junked motor vehicle(s) or part(s) thereof may be disposed of to a commercial scrap yard, demolisher or other
suitable site. A junked vehicle or part(s) thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrap yard, demolisher or
any suitable site operated by the city for processing as scrap or salvage if the city council determines by
resolution that commercial channels for disposition are not available or are inadequate.
(Ordinance 1280 adopted 11/11/19)
ARTICLE 8.07 LOITERING
Sec. 8.07.001 Unlawful
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 181/362
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, as hereinafter defined, in, on, or about any place, public or private,
when such loitering is accompanied by activity or is under circumstances that afford probable cause for alarm or
concern for the safety and well-being of persons or for the security of property, in the surrounding area.
Sec. 8.07.002 Definitions
Any place, public or private. Includes, but not limited to, the following: All places commonly known as being
distinctively public, such as public streets, public restrooms, sidewalks, parks, municipal airports, alleys and
buildings; all places privately owned but open to the public generally such as shopping centers, transportation
terminals, retail stores, movie theaters, office buildings, and restaurants; and, all places distinctively private,
such as homes or private residences and apartment houses.
Loiter. The walking about aimlessly without apparent purpose; lingering; hanging around; lagging behind; and
moving slowly about, where such conduct is not due to physical defects or conditions.
Surrounding area. That area easily and immediately accessible to the person under observation.
Sec. 8.07.003 Examples of loitering activities
Without limitation, the following activities and circumstances may be considered in determining probable cause
for alarm or concern:
(1) The flight of a person upon the appearance of a peace officer or any other person;
(2) Attempted concealment by a person upon the appearance of a peace officer or any other person;
(3) The systematic checking by a person of doors, windows, or other means of access to buildings,
houses, or vehicles;
(4) Repeated activity by a person, continuous or broken, which outwardly manifests no purpose,
such as going from one place to another and back with no showing of use for such movement;
(5) Continuous presence by a person in close proximity to any building, house, vehicle, or any
other property or to any other person, at any time when the activity of such person manifests possible
unlawful activity, such continuous presence being for an unreasonable period of time under the
circumstances then existing;
(6) A change of direction by a person upon the appearance of a peace officer in order to avoid
meeting or crossing paths of such officer;
(7) If on private property, the continued refusal of a person to leave such private property when
requested to do so by the owner, manager, proprietor, or lessee of such property.
Sec. 8.07.004 Penalty
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
punishable in accordance with the general penalty provision set forth in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(Ordinance 1147 adopted 9/24/12)
CHAPTER 9
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 182/362
PERSONNEL
ARTICLE 9.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 9.01.001 Travel policy
(a) The city shall pay reasonable expenses which are incurred from authorized official travel. The following
uniform rules are hereby established to govern expense allowances to be granted city employees,
councilmembers, and board and commission members.
(b) Prior approval is an integral part of the travel expense procedure. All travel on city business must be
approved by the city manager to ensure that sufficient budgeted funds are available.
(c) Prepayment of registration fees and advances for expenses should be made by the city prior to the
expected departure. Therefore, request for travel authorization must be made in sufficient time to allow
processing of the registration fees and advances. The following schedule shall be used for computing the
applicable expenses to the city:
(1) Registration fees. Conference and/or training registration fees will be paid in full by the city.
(2) Transportation. City vehicles are to be utilized to the maximum extent practical for official
travel. In cases where personal vehicles are used, the city will advance at a mileage rate equal to the
rate allowed by the U.S. Internal Revenue Service for business travel at the time. This advance will
be based on the most direct route from the point of departure to the point of destination. Where public
transportation is used, the city will pay the entire cost of the ticket. The city manager shall determine,
on a case-by-case basis, what type of transportation is to be used.
(3) Lodging. Reservations should be made in advance so the lodging costs can be predetermined
and, if desirable, prepaid by the city.
(4) Meals. The city will pay for actual meals and gratuity at a reasonable rate to be determined on a
case-by-case basis.
(d) In cases where prepayment of fees and advances is not possible, reimbursement will be made in
accordance with subsection (c) above.
(e) Exceptions to the policies outlined above are to be made only in exceptional circumstances and when the
best interests of the city are clearly manifest.
(2004 Code, art. 9.02)
Sec. 9.01.002 City secretary
(a) The city manager shall designate an employee of the city as city secretary with the confirmation of the city
council.
(b) The city secretary shall attend meetings of the city council, and keep accurate minutes of the proceedings
thereof in a book to be provided for that purpose, and engross and enroll all laws, resolutions and ordinances of
the city council, keep the corporate seal, take charge of and preserve and keep in order all the books, records,
papers, documents and files of the council, countersign all commissions issued to city officers, and licenses
issued by the city, and keep a record or register thereof, and make out all notices required under any regulation
or ordinance of the city. He/she shall draw all the warrants on the treasurer and countersign the same and keep an
accurate account thereof in a book provided for the purpose. He/she shall be the general accountant of the
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 183/362
corporation and shall keep in books regular accounts of the receipts and disbursements for the city, and
separately, under proper heads, each cause of receipt and disbursement, and also accounts with each person,
including officers, who have money transactions with the city, crediting accounts allowed by proper authority
and specifying any particular transaction to which such entries apply. He/she shall keep a register of bonds and
bills issued by the city, and all evidence of debt due and payable to it, noting the particulars thereof, and all facts
connected therewith, as they occur. He/she shall carefully keep all contracts made by the city council, and he/she
shall perform all such other duties as may be required of him by law, ordinance, resolution or order of the city
manager.
(c) The city manager shall designate an employee of the city as assistant city secretary with the confirmation
of the city council. The assistant city secretary shall discharge the duties of the city secretary in the absence of
the city secretary.
(2004 Code, sec. 9.03.002)
ARTICLE 9.02 EMPLOYMENT POLICIES*
Sec. 9.02.001 Applicability
The policies contained herein will apply to all paid employees of the city. Applicants for employment will be
required to read them prior to their final interview and upon acceptance for employment will be provided a copy
of same for their personal file and reference. Employees will sign a certificate at the time of employment
certifying they have read or have heard, read, and understand the terms of employment. (2004 Code, sec.
9.04.001)
Sec. 9.02.002 General policies
(a) Employees will be chosen to work for the city without regard to political affiliation, handicap, creed, race,
color, national origin, sex, age or religion, through application, interview and evaluation of references and
credentials if appropriate.
(b) Application will be made at the city hall.
(c) The applicants will be interviewed initially by the city manager, who will refer them to a department head,
if he deems it advisable, prior to making a decision. The city manager will make the final decision of hiring the
applicant, with the exception of department heads. The city manager will make a recommendation to the city
council for the hiring of department heads.
(d) The first one hundred eighty (180) days of employment is on a trial basis. During the probationary period
the employee's work, attitude, and relations will be evaluated carefully to determine whether he should be
retained in the position for which he is being considered. Upon the satisfactory completion of the probationary
period, the qualifying date for benefits will normally be the date of first employment. If a holiday falls within the
probationary period, it will be allowed, but if the employment terminates prior to the end of the one-hundredeighty-
day period, the pay for that day will be deducted from the final check. At his discretion, the city manager
may prolong the probationary period for additional thirty-day increments, not to exceed two (2) such increments,
or may place any employee who has previously completed his probationary period in a probationary status as a
result of disciplinary action for a violation of any personnel policies or procedures.
(e) The schedule for work and days off will vary according to the department where the employee works and
will be determined by the department head.
(f) If unable to report to work as scheduled the employee is expected to notify the appropriate persons two (2)
hours prior to that time so a suitable replacement or adjustment can be made.
(2004 Code, sec. 9.04.002; Ordinance 1223, sec. 1, adopted 11/14/16)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 184/362
Sec. 9.02.003 Pay policies
(a) Employees will be paid biweekly on Thursday. This pay will include all compensation earned on work
shifts started before midnight the preceding Friday, which constitutes the end of one pay period and the
beginning of the next. The pay period and payday will be the same for all employees. When a new employee is
hired, he or she will be paid on the next payday for that portion of the pay period which was worked prior to the
end of the pay period in progress at the time he or she was employed; then he or she will be paid on a regular
biweekly schedule. (Ordinance 1223, sec. 2, adopted 11/14/16)
(b) The city manager, chief of police, public works director, and other positions that may be designated by the
city manager on a case-by-case basis will be paid an annual salary, and the number of hours worked will be as
necessary to accomplish their jobs.
(c) All other city employees will be paid an hourly rate. Hourly employees will be paid one and one-half (1-
1/2) times their normal hourly rate for all the time worked in excess of forty (40) hours during any one-week
period.
(d) Two (2) weeks' notice is expected from any employee planning to terminate employment. Upon leaving
city employment, the balance due the employee will be paid, following the regular pay schedule.
(e) If an employee is scheduled to be available for call-out duty, the actual time the employee worked will be
entered on the time sheet. Time sheets for each employee will be checked for accuracy of actual time worked by
the department head prior to being turned in for pay calculation.
(f) Salary increases are provided for recognition of years of service, good work, attitude, willingness to accept
job responsibility and the ability to improve. Such increases are not granted solely upon the basis of length of
service, but also on merit and loyalty to their work. Increases in salary require the approval of the city manager
subject to the availability of funding in the departmental personnel budgets approved by the city council.
(2004 Code, sec. 9.04.003)
Sec. 9.02.004 Holidays
(a) Regular employees (those who are regularly scheduled to work thirty (30) or more hours per week) shall
receive pay for the following holidays: New Year's Day, Presidents' Day, Texas Independence Day, Memorial
Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, the Friday after Thanksgiving, Christmas Eve and
Christmas Day. (Ordinance 1148 adopted 10/8/12)
(b) Department heads will ensure that adequate personnel will be available should an emergency arise.
(c) If an hourly employee of any division is required to work on the observed holiday, he will be entitled to
pay equal to eight (8) hours at his regular hourly rate as compensation for the holiday, plus the regular hourly
rate to which he is entitled for any hours actually worked. Employees who are regularly scheduled to work less
than thirty (30) hours per week are not eligible for holiday pay except for actual hours worked.
(d) When a holiday falls on Saturday, the holiday will be observed on Friday; when the holiday falls on
Sunday, the holiday will be observed on Monday.
(2004 Code, sec. 9.04.004)
Sec. 9.02.005 Vacation leave; personal leave
(a) Personal leave will be granted after a person has been employed for a period of one hundred eighty (180)
days, at which time credit will be given from date of employment. Personal leave will be accrued at a rate of 3.1
hours per pay period for the first year of employment, 4.62 hours per pay period between the first anniversary of
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 185/362
employment and the fifth anniversary of employment, and 6.15 hours per pay period for all time after the fifth
anniversary of employment.
(b) The maximum unused personal leave which can be carried from one (1) calendar year to the next or for
which a terminating employee can be paid is ninety-six (96) hours if his tenure with the city is five (5) years or
less, or one hundred thirty-six (136) hours if his tenure with the city is more than five (5) years.
(c) Personal leave will be scheduled and approved in advance at the convenience of the employee and the
appropriate department head whenever possible. Except in cases involving unexpected illness, the department
head will take into consideration the work load, manpower, and other appropriate factors before approving the
leave.
(d) No advance leave or extensions will be granted.
(e) Deviations from the established leave policies will be permitted only if approved by the city manager.
Emergency leave with pay, not to exceed three (3) days, may be granted in the event of serious illness or death
of a person closely related to the employee or death of a close relative of the employee's spouse.
(f) Employees who are regularly scheduled to work less than thirty (30) hours per week are not eligible for
paid personal leave or emergency leave.
(2004 Code, sec. 9.04.005)
(g) Employees, who chose to do so, may donate a portion of their reserved vacation/personal leave to an
employee who has exhausted his or her personal and major medical leave. The employee donating
personal leave to another employee must maintain forty (40) hours of personal leave for has or her own
use. All unused donated personal leave will be returned to the donor employee(s) at such time the
employee receiving the donation either returns to work or terminates his or her employment with the city
by resignation or retirement. Only employees who have completed their one hundred and eighty (180) day
probationary period may receive donated personal leave time; the employee must have provided the city
with a doctor's certified statement that said employee is under the doctor's care prior to receiving donated
leave time. An employee may receive no more than one thousand and forty (1,040) hours of donated leave
during his or her tenure with the city. Employees donating personal leave time must complete an
employee-to-employee leave donation program request form; information on the donation of leave time
and the use of said leave time will remain confidential. (Ordinance 1177, sec. 1, adopted 3/24/14)
Sec. 9.02.006 Sick leave; major medical leave
(a) Major medical leave will begin accumulating after a person has successfully completed the probationary
period(s) specified in section 9.02.002(d). Major medical leave will be accrued at the rate of three and one-tenth
(3.1) hours per pay period. Employees who are regularly scheduled to work less than thirty (30) hours per week
are not eligible for major medical leave. Major medical leave may be accumulated to a maximum of three
hundred twenty (320) hours, with no more than two hundred forty (240) hours being carried from one (1)
calendar year into the next. No benefits will be paid for unused major medical leave upon termination or
retirement. (2004 Code, sec. 9.04.006)
(b) Absence from the job for five (5) consecutive work days resulting from illness or injury, as certified by a
doctor's written statement, will be required before an employee can receive major medical leave payments. At
any time that major medical leave is used, a doctor's release will be required before the employee may return to
work. (Ordinance 1139 adopted 2/13/12)
(c) In case of extended illness, an employee's job will be held open for the length of his or her accumulated
personal leave and major medical leave. Upon exhausting all personal and major medical leave, the employee
will be terminated, unless a specific exemption is granted by the city manager. (2004 Code, sec. 9.04.006)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 186/362
(d) Absence from the job for three (3) consecutive work days, resulting from illness or injury, will require the
employee to provide his/her department head with a doctor's certified written statement that said employee has
been under the doctor's care for all or a portion of the three consecutive days of absence. (Ordinance 1139
adopted 2/13/12)
(e) Employees, who chose to do so, may donate a portion of their reserved major medical leave to an
employee who has exhausted his or her personal and major medical leave. The employee donating major
medical leave to another employee must maintain forty (40) hours of personal leave and one hundred and sixty
(160) hours of major medical leave for his or her own use. All unused donated major medical leave will be
returned to the donor employee(s) at such time the employee receiving the donation either returns to work or
terminates his or her employment with the city by resignation or retirement. Only employees who have
completed their one hundred and eighty (180) day probationary period may receive donated major medical leave
time; the employee must have provided the city with a doctor's certified statement that said employee is under
the doctor's care prior to receiving donated leave time. An employee may receive no more than one thousand and
forty (1,040) hours of donated leave during his or her tenure with the city. Employees donating major medical
leave time must complete an employee-to-employee leave donation program request form; information on the
donation of leave time and the use of said leave time will remain confidential. (Ordinance 1177, sec. 2, adopted
3/24/14)
Sec. 9.02.007 Maternity leave
Maternity leave shall begin when the employee's physician feels such leave is necessary. A written statement
from the physician giving the anticipated delivery date and the date the employee should cease work must be
submitted to the city manager. Before returning to work, the employee must submit a written statement from her
physician stating that she is capable of returning to work. Employees on maternity leave are eligible for personal
leave and major medical leave to the extent of leave accumulated. The employee's job will be held open until the
date specified by her physician that she is able to work or for sixty (60) days after the birth of the child,
whichever comes first. (2004 Code, sec. 9.04.007)
Sec. 9.02.008 Military leave
An employee who has been an active member of a military reserve unit or National Guard unit who has served
an active period of six (6) months or more will be granted time off without pay for that time required for training
not to exceed two (2) weeks per year or any time his unit is activated for emergency service. His position will be
available upon release from active duty. (2004 Code, sec. 9.04.008)
Sec. 9.02.009 Jury duty
(a) Employees are encouraged to participate as jurors if selected. They will be entitled to full pay, plus the
amount paid from the clerk of the court for the time served.
(b) Immediately upon receiving a summons for jury duty, the employee will notify his department head so the
work schedule of other employees may be altered if necessary so that a burden will not be placed on the
department to accomplish the required work.
(c) Any employee dismissed from jury duty shall return to work if so much as five (5) hours remain in his
normally scheduled work day before he is to return for jury duty. Any employee being discharged from jury duty
shall return to work if as much as three (3) hours remain in his work day.
(d) Upon concluding the jury duty the employee will furnish an affidavit from the court clerk's office to his
department head, who will attach it to the time sheet when turned into the city offices.
(2004 Code, sec. 9.04.009)
Sec. 9.02.010 Leave accountability
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 187/362
Each employee's leave account will be computed as of the end of each pay period. The time taken as leave time
(any type) will be noted on each employee's time sheet. The payroll clerk will make the appropriate entries on
the employee's permanent record. This record will be kept for a period of not less than three (3) years after the
employee terminates city employment. Each employee will have the right to review his leave record at any time
during normal business hours of the city offices. Each department head shall have the right to review the records
of any or all employee's records which pertain to his department. (2004 Code, sec. 9.04.010)
Sec. 9.02.011 Termination of service
(a) An employee's employment may be terminated by one of three (3) ways:
(1) Resignation.
(2) Mutual consent or request.
(3) Dismissal.
(b) An employee may be dismissed immediately for any of the following reasons:
(1) Refusal to perform work as directed or willful neglect of duty.
(2) Habitual absenteeism or tardiness.
(3) Any use of intoxicants or illegal use of drugs on the job.
(4) Two (2) days off from work without proper notice.
(5) Purposely falsifying any document pertaining to city business.
(6) Any immoral conduct or public behavior which might bring discredit to the city.
(7) Intentional abuse or destruction or unauthorized use of city property.
(8) Doing favors for anyone utilizing city equipment, with or without expectation of receiving
compensation in any manner from that party.
(9) Creating an atmosphere of dissension affecting the morale or efficiency of other city
employees.
(10) The willful damage of city property or property of others.
(11) Creating an atmosphere of non-cooperation with the citizens of city.
(12) Work performance which is substandard and does not meet the minimum requirements or
policies of the city or any department thereof.
(c) The department head will confer with the city manager before serving notice of termination. If conditions
warrant, the department head may suspend an employee until such time as contact can be made with the city
manager.
(2004 Code, sec. 9.04.011)
Sec. 9.02.012 Insurance
(a) Each full-time employee, upon entering the service of the city, shall be required to become a member of
the group insurance plan as determined by the city council or sign a waiver releasing the city of responsibility
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 188/362
for insuring him/her.
(b) Part-time employees will not be eligible for insurance coverage.
(Ordinance 1223, sec. 3, adopted 11/14/16)
Sec. 9.02.013 City residency not required
A nonresident of the city may be appointed and serve in an official capacity for the city. (2004 Code, sec.
9.04.013)
State law reference–Residency requirements for municipal employees, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 150.021.
Sec. 9.02.014 Hiring and dismissal; performance evaluations
(a) The city manager shall have the authority to hire individuals to fill any positions budgeted by the city
council, except for department heads.
(b) In considering the applications of individuals applying for positions subordinate to that of a department
head, the city manager shall confer with the head of the department to which an individual makes application,
prior to hiring such individual.
(c) The city manager shall have authority to dismiss any officer or employee of the city subordinate to a
department head, upon a finding by the city manager that grounds for termination exist pursuant to section
9.02.011(b) of this article.
(d) Prior to dismissing an officer or employee pursuant to subsection (c) above, the city manager shall confer
with the head of the department in which the officer or employee works.
(2004 Code, sec. 9.04.014)
(e) Department heads of the city are the chief of police, the public works director, the economic development
director, the parks and recreation director, the city attorney and the fire chief. (Ordinance 1223, sec. 4, adopted
11/14/16)
(f) Annual performance evaluations will be conducted by January 15th for all employees with at least nine (9)
months' regular service since the end of their probation period.
(1) The city manager will inform department heads in writing of their responsibility to evaluate the
performance of their subordinates.
(2) The department head will review the employee's position description and any other appropriate
materials.
(3) The department head will evaluate the employee's job performance using the employee
performance evaluation.
(4) The department head will schedule an evaluation conference with the employee.
(5) During the conference, the supervisor will explain the evaluation, including specific ways the
employee has improved performance over the past year, as well as areas in need of continued
improvements.
(6) The employee will be provided a copy of the completed evaluation form.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 189/362
(7) The department head will review the completed evaluation form and ensure that it is filed in the
employee's personnel file.
(2004 Code, sec. 9.04.014)
Sec. 9.02.015 Disciplinary action
(a) The city manager and any department head may take disciplinary action with regard to any officer or
employee under their supervision. All officers and employees, including department heads, are under the
supervision of the city manager.
(b) Disciplinary action includes, but is not limited to, the following measures:
(1) A conference with the officer or employee;
(2) A suspension of the officer or employee, with or without pay, as is deemed appropriate under
the particular circumstances of each case;
(3) Placing the officer or employee on probation.
(c) Each department head is to advise the city manager of any disciplinary action prior to taking such action,
unless there is an immediate need for such disciplinary action and the city manager cannot be reached.
(d) In addition to the disciplinary actions referred to above, a department head may recommend to the city
manager that an officer or employee be dismissed. Such recommendation by a department head shall not be
construed as a prerequisite to the city manager's independent exercise of his authority pursuant to section
9.02.014(c) of this article.
(2004 Code, sec. 9.04.015)
Sec. 9.02.016 Grievance procedure
(a) A grievance is a dispute regarding the interpretation or application of any statute, ordinance, rule,
regulation, policy, or procedure which exists under the personnel administration system of the city.
(b) All grievances shall be handled in the following manner:
(1) An officer or employee with a grievance shall report such grievance to his or her department
head, in writing, within five (5) working days after such officer or employee first becomes aware of
the act or condition upon which the grievance is based. The department head shall render a decision
within five (5) working days of the date such department head becomes aware of the grievance.
(2) If no mutually agreeable settlement is reached under the procedures described in subsection (b)
(1) above, the officer or employee may petition the city manager to review the department head's
decision. Such request shall be in writing and filed within five (5) working days after receipt of the
department head's decision. The city manager shall investigate the case, request all pertinent facts,
and, after a review thereof, make a final disposition of the case within twenty (20) working days after
receipt of such written appeal. The final decision of the city manager shall be submitted in writing to
all parties and shall be final and binding on all parties to the grievance, provided the city manager
does not exceed his or her authority pursuant to this code and state law. The city manager shall be
expected to maintain a fair and impartial attitude in the adjudication of all issues which come before
the city manager and shall function in accordance with both the law and the ideals of justice,
common sense and professionalism.
(c) The officer or employee having a grievance shall have responsibility for compliance with this grievance
procedure. Grievances need not be considered unless there is compliance with this grievance procedure.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 190/362
(2004 Code, sec. 9.04.016)
Sec. 9.02.017 Financial obligations
All employees are expected to do everything possible to maintain a good credit rating, pay city taxes promptly
and satisfy all just debts. Failure to do so jeopardizes the credit rating of fellow employees, and also reflects
poorly on the city government. Therefore, failure to abide by this directive constitutes grounds for disciplinary
action or dismissal. (2004 Code, sec. 9.04.017)
Sec. 9.02.018 Safety policy; safety manager
The city manager or a designated employee shall be the safety manager and responsible for the city's safety
program. City employees are expected to follow safety practices, adhere to safety rules, and support the program
set forth by the city and safety manager. Every effort should be made to reduce the costly and unnecessary
burden of accidents. Failure to abide by the safety policy constitutes grounds for disciplinary action or dismissal.
(2004 Code, sec. 9.04.018)
Sec. 9.02.019 Affirmative action plan
(a) The city has placed a priority on good personnel administration. The city states as one of its objectives,
“To provide fair and equal opportunity to all qualified applicants without discrimination because of age, religion,
political affiliation, handicap, sex, race, creed, color, or national origin, to enter the city's employment on the
basis of demonstrated merit and fitness, as ascertained through fair and practical methods of selection.”
(b) The city manager or his representative shall advertise in a positive manner the employment needs of the
city, with a view toward obtaining an adequate supply of qualified candidates for each vacancy to be filled by
recruitment. All advertising will contain this statement: “The City of Iowa Park, An Equal Opportunity
Employer.” All media and/or employment agencies may be requested to refer applicants.
(c) Sufficient time, as determined by the city manager, will be allowed in order to receive applications from
the state and nation.
(2004 Code, sec. 9.04.019)
Sec. 9.02.020 Coordination with other provisions
Nothing in this article or article 9.03, 9.04 or 9.05 of this chapter shall be construed to diminish the city
manager's authority pursuant to section 9.02.003 of this chapter. In addition to the authority granted the city
manager pursuant to section 9.02.003 of this chapter, the city manager is hereby given authority to promulgate
such rules and regulations as are reasonably necessary to carry out and enforce the provisions of article 9.03,
9.04 or 9.05 of this chapter. (2004 Code, sec. 9.04.020)
Sec. 9.02.021 Longevity stipend
The city council may, annually, budget funds to provide both full-time and part-time employees with a longevity
stipend based on said employees continuous tenure with the city. Stipends will be paid to the employees based
on a specified dollar amount for each month of their respective tenure. The council, in choosing to budget the
necessary funds to pay said stipend, must set an amount-per-month to be paid as well as a minimum and
maximum amount of stipend to be paid to the employee and whether said stipend will be pre- or postpayroll/
social security taxes and pension contributions. Employees' tenure will be figured as of September 30th
of the preceding fiscal year. Said city council must authorize the city manager and personnel director to make
longevity stipend payments to all full-time and part-time employees. Municipal employees who are also active
members of the city's park volunteer fire department will receive either a longevity stipend or an attendance
stipend, which ever is the greater amount however; no city employee or member of the fire department will
receive both stipends in the same fiscal year.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 191/362
Sec. 9.02.022 Attendance stipend
The city council may, annually, budget funds to provide members of the city's park volunteer fire department
with an attendance stipend based on said members' donated time for both firefighting and emergency medical
services within the city and the department's assigned area of the county. Stipends will be paid to the members of
the department based on a specified dollar amount for the amount of time donated to the department/city. The
council, in choosing to budget the necessary funds to pay said stipend, must set an amount-per-hour to be paid as
well as a minimum and maximum amount of stipend to be paid to the members of the department. Members'
hours will be figured as of September 30th of the preceding fiscal year. Said city council must authorize the city
manager and director of finance to make attendance stipend payments to all members of the fire department.
(Ordinance 1154 adopted 12/10/12)
ARTICLE 9.03 SOCIAL SECURITY*
Sec. 9.03.001 Authority to enter agreements
The city council, acting for and on behalf of the city, shall enter into all necessary agreements with the state for
the purpose of carrying out the provisions of (1) House Bill 603, Acts 52nd Leg. R.S. 1951, and (2) Public Law
734, 81st Congress, to secure the benefits of Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance as outlined in said laws.
(2004 Code, sec. 9.06.001)
Sec. 9.03.002 Agent to execute agreements
The mayor is hereby appointed as agent of the city council and of the city to execute all necessary agreements
and instruments for and in behalf of the city council and the city. (2004 Code, sec. 9.06.002)
Sec. 9.03.003 Duties of city secretary
The city secretary is hereby directed to be the person responsible for making assessments, collections, payments
and reports as required by the state. (2004 Code, sec. 9.06.003)
Sec. 9.03.004 Special fund
A sufficient sum of money [shall] be allocated and set aside from available funds for the purpose of carrying out
the provisions of the above-mentioned acts, such money so allocated and set aside to be known as the city social
security fund, which fund shall be set aside and maintained in the regular city depository. (2004 Code, sec.
9.06.004)
ARTICLE 9.04 TEXAS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM†
Sec. 9.04.001 Ordinances adopted
The provisions of the Texas Municipal Retirement System as adopted by the city are incorporated herein by
reference and are maintained on file in the office of the city secretary. (2004 Code, art. 9.07)
ARTICLE 9.05 POLICE**
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 9.05.001–9.05.030 Reserved
Division 2. Police Department
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 192/362
Sec. 9.05.031 Established
There is hereby created and established a police department for the city. (2004 Code, sec. 9.05.001)
Sec. 9.05.032 Composition
The police department of the city shall consist of one chief of police and such additional police personnel as the
city council may from time to time deem necessary and proper. (2004 Code, sec. 9.05.002)
Sec. 9.05.033 Reserved
Editor's note–Former section 9.05.033 pertaining to appointment and removal of members and deriving from the 2004 Code, sec.
9.05.003, was deleted in its entirety by Ordinance 1228, sec. 1, adopted 2/27/17.
Sec. 9.05.034 Training requirements
The chief of police and each officer of the police department shall hold a valid basic certificate from the state
commission on law enforcement officer standards and education at the time of the appointment; provided that an
applicant may be appointed on a temporary or probationary basis who secures their basic certificate within the
period of time as authorized by the applicable state law. (2004 Code, sec. 9.05.004)
State law reference–Commission on law enforcement officer standards and education, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, ch. 1701.
Sec. 9.05.035 Recording of appointments
The appointment of a chief of police or any member of the police department shall be made and entered in the
minutes of the city council at any regular or special meeting of the council, and the commission issued to such
chief of police or other officer shall become effective after the same has been signed by the mayor and such
appointment has been entered in the minutes. (2004 Code, sec. 9.05.005)
Sec. 9.05.036 Oath
The chief of police and members of the police department shall take and subscribe to the official oath prescribed
by the constitution of the state. (Ordinance 1228, sec. 2, adopted 2/27/17)
Sec. 9.05.037 Reserved
Editor's note–Former section 9.05.037 pertaining to the commission of office and deriving from the 2004 Code, sec. 9.05.007, was
deleted in its entirety by Ordinance 1228, sec. 3, adopted 2/27/17.
Sec. 9.05.038 Badge
A metallic badge, identifying the police chief and each member as a member of the police department, shall be
issued to each member of the police department. (2004 Code, sec. 9.05.008)
Sec. 9.05.039 Function of office of chief
The chief of police shall be the chief police officer of the city, and as such shall have supervision over the other
members of the police department. (2004 Code, sec. 9.05.009)
Sec. 9.05.040 Compensation of members
The members of the police department shall receive such compensation as the city council may from time to
time determine. (2004 Code, sec. 9.05.010)
Sec. 9.05.041 Duties; prevention of crime
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 193/362
It is the duty of every member of the police department to preserve the peace within the city, and to effect this
purpose the officer may use all lawful means. He may interfere without warrant to suppress or prevent crime.
(2004 Code, sec. 9.05.011)
Sec. 9.05.042 Authority
Every member of the police department shall have authority:
(1) To execute warrants of arrest or other process issued out of the municipal court.
(2) To arrest without warrant in all cases where authorized by the laws of the state.
(3) To arrest without warrant when offenses against the laws or ordinances are committed in his
presence, or where persons are found in suspicious places and under circumstances which reasonably
show that such persons have been guilty of some felony or breach of peace, or threatened or are about
to commit some offense against the law.
(2004 Code, sec. 9.05.012)
Sec. 9.05.043 Uniforms
(a) The police uniform will be worn by officers and the police chief at all times when on duty unless otherwise
assigned.
(b) Uniforms will be purchased by the city. The city will provide for the cleaning of the uniforms. Clothing
destroyed or damaged beyond serviceable repair in the line of duty will be replaced by the city, on certification
of the chief of police. However, in the event an officer loses or damages a uniform while off duty, he shall be
responsible for said uniform.
(c) The officers will supply their own footwear. The footwear must be black and meet the approval of the
chief of police.
(2004 Code, sec. 9.05.013)
Secs. 9.05.044–9.05.080 Reserved
Division 3. Reserve Police Unit*
Sec. 9.05.081 Established
The reserve police unit for the city's police department, which shall be a volunteer force of reserve police
officers, hereinafter referred to in this division as the “reserve unit,” is hereby established. (2004 Code, sec.
9.08.001)
Sec. 9.05.082 Control and supervision
Reserve officers shall perform under the general direction and control of the chief of police, subject to the
supervision of the city manager. Reserve officers are subject to such rules, regulations and orders as may be
promulgated from time to time by the chief of police in accordance with the authority vested in the chief of
police by the city's Code of Ordinances, by ordinances or by resolutions adopted by the city council for the city.
(2004 Code, sec. 9.08.002)
Sec. 9.05.083 Size; composition and organization
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 194/362
The reserve unit shall be an auxiliary police force composed of volunteers, who shall serve without pay. The
chief of police shall establish the size, composition and organization of the reserve unit, which shall not exceed
in total the number of regular officers authorized by ordinance or resolution or exceed the number of reserve
officers for which worker's compensation fund contributions have been budgeted for the then-current fiscal year.
(2004 Code, sec. 9.08.003)
Sec. 9.05.084 Training requirements
Prior to performing any duties as a reserve police officer, each police reserve applicant shall have received basic
training as approved and in accordance with the requirements of the state commission on law enforcement
officer standards and education or its successor, and shall apply for certification by said commission as a reserve
police officer. The names of reserve police applicants who have received certification from the state commission
on law enforcement officer standards and education shall be submitted to the city council for approval. (2004
Code, sec. 9.08.004)
State law reference–Commission on law enforcement officer standards and education, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, ch. 1701.
Sec. 9.05.085 Call to active service
Members of the reserve unit shall serve at the discretion of the chief of police and may be called into active
service at any time the chief of police considers it necessary to have additional police officers to preserve the
peace and enforce the law. (2004 Code, sec. 9.08.005)
Sec. 9.05.086 Supplemental function of unit
The reserve police officers of the reserve unit shall act only in a supplemental capacity to the regular police force
who [and] shall in no case assume full-time duties of the regular police officers. (2004 Code, sec. 9.08.006)
Sec. 9.05.087 Compensation of members; benefits
No reserve police officer appointed pursuant to this division shall be entitled to compensation for service. A
police reserve officer who sustains an injury in the course of performing official duties may receive hospital and
medical assistance through the city's worker's compensation program administered by the Texas Municipal
League and in the same manner as provided for full-time police officers; provided, however, that nothing in this
division shall be construed to authorize or permit a member of the reserve unit to become eligible for
participation in any pension fund created pursuant to state statute to which regular officers may become a
member by payroll deductions or otherwise. Reserve police officers shall be eligible for death benefits as set out
in chapter 86, Acts of the 60th Legislature, Regular Session 1967, as amended (V.T.C.A., Local Government
Code, section 142.003), again provided this will not constitute the eligibility of participation in any pension fund
to which regular officers may become a member by payroll deduction or otherwise. (2004 Code, sec. 9.08.007)
State law reference–Hospital and medical assistance and death benefits for police reserve force, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code,
sec. 142.003.
Sec. 9.05.088 Status as peace officers
Reserve officers of the reserve unit shall serve as peace officers during the actual discharge of official duties
subject at all times to the direction, control and supervisory authority of the chief of police; said duties of a
reserve police officer include the authority to make arrests. A reserve officer shall be deemed to be actually
discharging his or her official duties only while on active status. (2004 Code, sec. 9.08.008)
Sec. 9.05.089 Carrying weapons; prerequisites for commencing duty
(a) No person appointed to the reserve unit may carry a weapon or otherwise act as a peace officer until:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 195/362
(1) The person has satisfactorily completed the basic training course in an academy certified by the
state commission on law enforcement officer standards and education; and
(2) The person has been accepted for duty by the police department and taken an oath of office as
prescribed by ordinance.
(b) After meeting the conditions in subsections (a)(1) and (2) above, the reserve officer may carry a weapon
only when the reserve is assigned to active duty. Reserves shall not be entitled to carry firearms other than for
on-duty purposes, unless so authorized by the chief of police.
(2004 Code, sec. 9.08.009)
Sec. 9.05.090 Operations policy
An explicit policy governing the operations of the reserve unit and its reserve police officers has been reviewed
and adopted by the city council and is a part of the general orders policy for the police department, one copy of
which is maintained at the police department and one copy maintained at city hall under the direction of the city
secretary. (2004 Code, sec. 9.08.010)
Secs. 9.05.091–9.05.120 Reserved
Division 4. Mutual Law Enforcement Assistance*
Sec. 9.05.121 Authorized
The city council does hereby authorize the city manager, at his or her discretion, to send the regularly employed
law enforcement officers to assist any other county or municipality when the mayor, or other officer authorized
to declare a state of civil emergency, requests this assistance, and there exists in such other county or
municipality [a need for the services of additional law enforcement officers to protect the health, life, and
property of such other county or municipality], its inhabitants, and the visitors thereto, by reason of riot,
unlawful assembly characterized by the use of force and violence, or threat thereof by three (3) or more persons
acting together or without lawful authority, or during time of natural disaster or man-made calamity. (2004 Code,
sec. 1.06.001)
Sec. 9.05.122 Status of officers from other governmental unit
Whenever any law enforcement officer of any other county or municipality is assigned to this city, under
authority of an order adopted by the governing body of such other county or municipality, to assist under
circumstances as described above which may exist in this city, that [then] such officer shall be a peace officer of
this city and shall be under the command of the chief of police of this city while so assigned, and he or she shall
have all the powers of a regular law enforcement officer of this city as fully as though he or she were within the
county or municipality where regularly employed, and his or her qualifications, respectively, for office where
regularly employed shall constitute his or her qualification for office in this city, and no other oath, bond or
compensation shall be made. (2004 Code, sec. 1.06.002)
Sec. 9.05.123 Compensation and rights of city officers while serving outside city
When any law enforcement officer of this city is ordered by proper authority to perform peace officer duties
outside the territorial limits of this city, he or she shall be entitled to the same wage, salary, pension, and all other
compensation and all other rights for such service, including injury or death benefits, the same as though the
service had been rendered within the limits of this city; and he or she shall also be paid for any reasonable
expenses of travel, food or lodging, as well as for damage to equipment and clothing, and medical expenses,
which he or she may incur while on duty outside such limits, or while traveling to or from such assignment.
(2004 Code, sec. 1.06.003)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 196/362
Sec. 9.05.124 Reimbursement of other governmental units
When any law enforcement officer is assigned to this city from another city under the circumstances described
above, and upon request of the proper authority of this city, this city will, upon proper request, reimburse the
county or city furnishing the services of such law enforcement officer for his or her actual expenses of travel,
food, lodging and for such cost or damage to equipment and clothing resulting from the services of such law
enforcement officer in this city and for which the county or city where he or she is regularly employed has paid.
(2004 Code, sec. 1.06.004)
CHAPTER 10
SUBDIVISION REGULATION
ARTICLE 10.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 10.01.001 Replats
(a) Any person who wishes to revise a subdivision plat which has been previously filed for record must make
an application of the proposed revised plat to the city council. The replat of the subdivision shall meet all the
requirements for a subdivision that may be pertinent. However, if the subdivision as replatted does not require
any appreciable alteration or improvement of utility installations, streets, alleys, building setback lines, etc., then
no engineering plans or preliminary plat will be required.
(b) In the event the proposed replat involves property which has been previously developed or zoned as
single-family or duplex residential use, then special requirements are triggered as follows:
(1) After an application is filed for a replat affecting single-family and duplex property, the city
manager shall give notice of the application to be published in the official newspaper of the city at
least fifteen (15) days before the date of the city council meeting at which it is to be considered. Such
notice must include a statement of the time and place at which the city council will meet to consider
the replat and to hear protests to the revision at a public hearing. Additionally, written notice must be
sent to all owners of property located within two hundred feet (200') of the property upon which the
replat is requested. Such notice may be served by depositing the notice, properly addressed and
postage paid, at the local post office.
(2) If twenty percent (20%) or more of the property owners to whom notice has been required to be
given file a written protest of the replatting before or at the public hearing, then the affirmative vote
of at least three-fourths (3/4) of the city council members is required to approve the replat.
(2004 Code, art. 10.03)
State law references–Replatting without vacating preceding plat, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 212.014; additional
requirements for certain replats, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 212.015.
ARTICLE 10.02 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE*
Sec. 10.02.001 Adopted
The subdivision ordinance, Ordinance 138, adopted by the city on June 23, 1969, as amended, is included at the
end of this chapter as exhibit A. Due to the nature of the subdivision ordinance and the technicalities involved in
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 197/362
adopting or amending it, such ordinance is printed herein as it appeared in exhibit A to chapter 10 of the 2004
Code of Ordinances, with only nonsubstantive formatting and style changes. Capitalization, punctuation and
numbering of articles, sections and subsections have been retained as printed in the 2004 Code. Amendments
will be inserted in their proper place and denoted by a history note following the amended section. The absence
of a history note indicates the material is unchanged from the original. Obviously misspelled words have been
corrected without notation. Any other material added for purposes of clarification is enclosed in brackets. (2004
Code, art. 10.02; Ordinance adopting Code)
EXHIBIT A
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 138
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF IOWA PARK, TEXAS, that an ordinance
relating to the subdivision and platting of land within the City of Iowa Park and without the City of Iowa Park by
[but] within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of said city, to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare
of the community; to lessen the congestion of traffic on streets; to promote the orderly layout and use of land; to
secure safety from fire and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; facilitate adequate provisions for
transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks, playgrounds, and other public requirements; protect neighborhood
areas from the hazard of through traffic, and providing for penalties not in excess of $20.00 for each violation of
this ordinance is hereby adopted by the City Council of the City of Iowa Park, Texas, in regular session on this
the 9th day of June A.D. 1969.
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 1.01. Purpose and Intent
The regulations are designed to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the community by
establishing standards for the subdivision of land within the City's jurisdiction.
The provisions of this ordinance are specifically designed to lessen the congestion of traffic on streets; promote
the orderly layout and use of land; secure safety from fire and other dangers; provide adequate light and air;
facilitate adequate provisions for transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks, playgrounds and other public
requirements; and protect neighborhood areas from the hazard of through traffic.
These regulations are designed, intended and should be administered according to the purposes so as to achieve
the following:
(a) Implement the official city plan;
(b) Provide for conservation of existing standard residential areas and prevent the development of
slums and blight;
(c) Harmoniously relate the development of the various tracts of land to the existing community
and facilitate the future development of adjoining tracts;
(d) Provide that the cost of improvements which primarily benefit the tract of land being developed
by [be] borne by the owners or developers of the tract, and that the cost of improvements which
primarily benefit the whole community be borne by the whole community;
(e) Provide the best possible design for the tract;
(f) Reconcile any differences of interest;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 198/362
(g) Establish adequate and accurate records of land subdivision.
Sec. 1.02. Short Title
These regulations shall be known as the Subdivision Regulations of the City of Iowa Park, Texas.
Sec. 1.03. Authority
V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Chapter 43 (§ 43.001 et seq.) and Chapter 212, Subchapter A (§ 212.001 et
seq.), as heretofore or hereafter amended are hereby adopted with respect to annexations. (Ordinance 627, sec. 1,
adopted 4/9/90)
Sec. 1.04. Jurisdiction
(A) These regulations shall govern the subdivision of land in the following areas:
(1) That land within the corporate limits of the City of Iowa Park.
(2) That land outside, but within one (1) mile of and contiguous to the corporate limits of the City
of Iowa Park except for such land that is within five (5) miles of the corporate limits of the City of
Wichita Falls, Texas.
(B) These regulations shall govern the subdivision of such areas of land lying outside the corporate limits of
Iowa Park but within five (5) miles of the corporate limits of the City of Wichita Falls and one (1) mile of the
corporate limits of the City of Iowa Park as may be agreed upon between the two (2) cities.
(C) These regulations shall apply to the following forms of land subdivision:
(1) The division of land into two (2) or more tracts, lots, sites or parcels, any part of which, when
subdivided, shall contain less than five (5) acres in area; or
(2) The division of land, previously subdivided or platted, into tracts, lots, sites or parcels, of less
than ten (10) acres in area;
(3) The dedication, vacation or reservation of any public or private easement through any tract of
land regardless of the area involved, including those for use by public and private utility companies;
or
(4) The dedication or vacation of any street or alley through any tract of land regardless of the area
involved.
(Ordinance 627, sec. 2, adopted 4/9/90)
State law reference–Extension of subdivision rules to extraterritorial jurisdiction, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 212.003.
Sec. 1.05. Definitions
(A) Alley. A minor right-of-way dedicated to public use, which gives a secondary means of vehicular access
to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting a street, and which may be used for public utility purpose.
(B) Block. A parcel of land, intended to be used for urban purposes, which is entirely surrounded by public
streets, highways, railroad rights-of-way, public walks, parks or greenstrips, rural land or drainage channels, or a
combination thereof.
(C) Building line or setback line. A line or lines designating the area outside of which building may not be
erected.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 199/362
(D) City. The City of Iowa Park; also includes the use of the word “town.”
(E) Council. The City Council of Iowa Park, Texas.
(F) Easement. A grant by the property owner to the public, a corporation or persons, of the use of a strip of
land for specific purposes.
(G) Lot. A subdivision of a block or other parcel intended as a unit for the transfer of ownership or for
development.
(H) Lot, corner. A lot located at the intersection of and abutting on two (2) or more streets.
(I) Lot, double frontage. A lot which runs through a block from street to street and which has two (2)
nonintersecting sides abutting on two (2) or more streets.
(J) Lot split. Any division of land by metes and bounds description into two (2) or more parcels for the
purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership, and which does not constitute a subdivision as
herein defined.
(K) Official city plan. The city plan and/or plans for the city which has been officially adopted to provide
long-range development policies for the area subject to urbanization in the foreseeable future and which
includes, among other things, the plan for land use, land subdivision, circulation and community facilities.
(L) Plat, preliminary. A map of a proposed land subdivision showing the character and proposed layout of the
tract in sufficient detail to indicate the suitability of the proposed subdivision of land.
(M) Plat, final. A map of a land subdivision prepared in a form suitable for filing of record with necessary
affidavits, dedications, and acceptances, and with complete bearings and dimensions of all lines defining lots and
blocks, streets and alleys, public areas, and other dimensions of land.
(N) Roadway. That portion of any street so designated for vehicular traffic and where curbs are normally
placed; that portion of the street between the curbs.
(O) Street. The entire width between the property lines boundary every way, of whatever nature, when any
part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right, for the purpose of vehicular traffic and wherever
designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, expressway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane,
place, circle or however otherwise designated.
(P) Street, major. An arterial street which is designated on the major street plan or official city plan and
designed to carry intercity traffic and to relate the various neighborhoods within the city.
(Q) Street, minor. Any street not specifically classified on the major street plan whose primary purpose is to
provide access to adjacent properties.
(R) Street, collector. Those residential streets designed to carry intra-city traffic connecting neighborhood
areas to a major street whose purpose is to collect traffic from other minor streets and to serve as the most direct
route to a major street or to a community facility.
(S) Street, cul-de-sac. A minor street having one end upon to vehicular traffic and having one closed end
terminated by a turnaround.
(T) Street, frontage or service. A minor street auxiliary to and located on the side of a major street for service
to abutting properties and adjacent areas and for control of access.
(U) Subdivider. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity, acting as a unit, subdividing or
proposing to subdivide land as herein defined.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 200/362
(V) Subdivision. The division or redivision of land by map into two or more lots, tracts, sites or parcels for the
purpose of transfer of ownership or for development, or the dedication or vacation of a public or private right-ofway
or easement.
ARTICLE II. DESIGN STANDARDS
Sec. 2.01. Street Plan and Relation to Adjoining Street System
(A) The arrangement, character, extent, width[,] grade and location of all streets in a proposed subdivision
shall conform to the official city plan and these regulations.
(B) All such streets shall be related to existing and proposed streets in the area, topographical conditions,
public convenience and safety, and existing and proposed land uses along such streets.
(C) All streets shall be platted in such a manner that all resulting lots shall conform to the applicable zoning
regulations.
(D) Where such streets are not shown in the official city plan, the arrangements of these streets in the
subdivision shall either:
(1) Provide for the continuation of appropriate projection of existing streets in the surrounding
areas; or
(2) Conform to a neighborhood plan approved or adopted by the planning and zoning commission.
(E) Minor streets shall be laid out so as to discourage through traffic.
(F) Where a residential subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed major thoroughfare, the planning
and zoning commission shall require:
(1) Marginal access streets,
(2) Reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a non-access reservation along the rear
property line,
(3) Deep lots with rear service streets, or
(4) Such other treatment as may be necessary for the adequate protection and stabilization of
residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic.
Sec. 2.02. Relation to Other Limited Rights-of-Way
Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way or limited access highway, the planning and
zoning commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way.
Sec. 2.03. Reserve Strips Prohibited
Reserve strips designed and used for the primary purpose of controlling access to minor streets by parties or
persons other than a public agency shall be prohibited.
Sec. 2.04. Street Alignment
(A) Street jobs [jogs] with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet shall be avoided.
(B) A tangent of not less than one hundred (100) feet in length shall be introduced between reverse curves on
arterial and collector streets.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 201/362
(C) Sight distance: Minimum clear sight distance, measured along the chord of the centerline, shall be
provided on all streets as follows:
Major streets 400 feet
Collector streets 350 feet
Minor streets 250 feet
Sec. 2.05. Street Rights-of-Way and Roadway Widths
(A) Street rights-of-way and roadway width shall conform to the official city plan.
(B) All streets shall be paved according to the established standards adopted by the City Council.
(C) The following minimum standards shall apply:
Street Type Right-of-Way Width Roadway
Expressway 300-400 ft. Four 24'-36' lanes as determined
by the Texas State Highway
Department
Urban arterial 100-130 ft. Two 36' lanes
Major thoroughfare 70-100 ft. Two 44'-66' lanes
Major thoroughfare with
median
100-150 ft. Two 24'-36' lanes
Commercial street 60 ft. 36'
Collector street 60-70 ft. 36'-44'
Residential street 50-60 ft. 30'-36'
(D) Half streets shall be prohibited, except where essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision
in conformity with the other requirements of these regulations.
(E) In no event, however, shall lots facing a one-half minor residential street be permitted.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 202/362
(F) Wherever an existing half street is adjacent to a tract to be subdivided, the other half of the street shall be
platted within such tract.
Sec. 2.06. Major Street Frontage Access Control
(A) No access on a major street shall occur within minimum intervals of six hundred (600) feet, measured
from the nearest intersecting rights-of-way lines, (except as modified by section 2.06(B)); said distance may be
extended or increased if traffic conditions as determined by the planning and zoning commission warrant such
extension.
(B) In commercial and industrial subdivisions, specifically designated “one-way turn only” access may be
provided in the direction of the adjacent traffic lane at a minimum distance of three hundred (300) feet between
major street intersections or a minimum of three hundred (300) feet between each access point.
(C) Commercial or industrial subdivisions should have access to a major or commercial street, and may have
access to a collector street, if traffic conditions as determined by the planning and zoning commission warrant
such extension, but shall not have access to a residential street.
(D) To assure traffic safety, appropriate non-access provisions shall be designated and dimensioned along all
abutting streets in commercial, and industrial subdivisions, and along major streets in residential subdivisions. A
description of such non-access provisions shall appear upon the plat.
(E) Access to property occurring within the minimum distance prescribed or major street access, six hundred
(600) feet, shall only be by the closest service or frontage road entrance onto the major street.
(F) Individual driveways will be so located on each lot to avoid direct vehicular access to or form [from] any
expressway, thoroughfare, or major street. Driveways should be located to enable direct access primarily to or
from a minor street or, if necessary, to the collector streets which serve as feeders to or distributors from the
major streets.
Sec. 2.07. Street and Subdivision Names
(A) No street name shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with the names of existing streets.
(B) Street names shall be referred to the post office for recommendation and are subject to the approval of the
planning and zoning commission and the City Council.
(C) Subdivision names shall not duplicate existing subdivisions of record.
Sec. 2.08. Street Grades
(A) The minimum grade of all streets shall be four-tenths (0.4) percent.
(B) Except where unusual topographic conditions justify it, the maximum grade of all streets shall not be
greater than the following:
Street type Grade
Major 3%
Collector 5%
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 203/362
Service streets 7%
Sec. 2.09. Street Intersections
(A) Streets shall be laid out to intersect at right angles and may be curved, if necessary, in order to make this
possible. In no event shall a street intersect any other street at any angle of less than seventy-five (75) degrees.
(B) Street corners on local residential streets shall have a minimum radius of twenty (20) feet at curbline or its
equivalent.
(C) Street corners on commercial and industrial streets shall have a minimum radius of twenty-five (25) feet at
the curbline or its equivalent.
(D) Street intersections involving major thoroughfares shall have a minimum street corner radius of thirty (30)
feet at the curbline or its equivalent.
(E) All street corner radii shall be shown on the preliminary and final plats.
(F) A twenty-five (25) foot area of clear vision at street intersections in subdivisions shall be provided. This
area shall be kept clear of all structures and vegetation exceeding a height of three (3) feet above the established
City street elevation.
Sec. 2.10. Cul-de-Sacs and Dead-End Streets
(A) The maximum length of a cul-de-sac shall be five hundred (500) feet, except where topography would
prohibit the use of a standard distance as set forth in section 2.13 of these regulations, between intersecting
streets.
(B) Each cul-de-sac shall be provided with a turnaround having a minimum right-of-way radius of fifty (50)
feet.
(Ordinance 138 adopted 6/23/69)
(C) The road surface within the cul-de-sac right-of-way shall have a minimum radius of thirty-eight (38) feet.
(Ordinance 1241 adopted 12/11/17)
(D) In the case of temporarily dead-ended streets, which are stub streets designed to provide future connection
with unsubdivided areas adjoining, the planning and zoning commission may require:
(1) Temporary easement for a turnaround having a radius of fifty (50) feet; or
(2) An appropriate area for a backaround.
(E) In all instances, proper provisions shall be made for adequate storm drainage so that stormwater does not
collect at the ends of these streets.
Sec. 2.11. Alleys
(A) Alleys shall be provided in all commercial districts except where a commercial district will be developed
as a self-contained unit; then other provisions shall be made on the site for service drives and service areas.
(B) Alleys in residential areas shall not be less than twenty (20) feet in width when provided.
(C) Alleys in commercial areas shall not be less than thirty (30) feet in width and shall be paved.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 204/362
(D) Dead-end alleys are prohibited except where natural or other features make it impossible to continue
them. Where dead-end alleys are unavoidable they shall be provided with adequate turnaround areas with a
minimum radius of forty (40) feet at the dead-end. Backaround areas may be allowed in residential subdivisions.
Sec. 2.12. Easements
(A) Where alleys are not provided or may not be used for utility purposes, easements shall be provided as may
be advisable for poles, wires, conduits, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, gas lines, water mains and lines, and other
similar purposes.
(B) Rear-yard easements shall be at least twenty (20) feet wide. In the event one-half (1/2) of an easement is
platted, it shall be not less than ten (10) feet in width.
(C) Where a subdivision is transversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be
provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such
watercourse and such further width of construction or both as will be adequate for the purpose. Parallel streets or
parkways may be required in connection therewith.
(D) Twenty (20) foot utility easements shall be provided at the end of cul-de-sacs along major thoroughfares.
Sec. 2.13. Blocks
(A) In general, blocks should have the following dimensions:
Minimum Maximum
Length 600 feet 1,200 feet
Width 240 feet 400 feet
(B) The foregoing dimensions shall be subject to adjustment upon recommendation by the planning and
zoning commission where topography, the character of the proposed development, or other similar conditions,
justify blocks of greater or lesser length and/or width.
(C) Block lengths and widths shall be measured for the street right-of way line.
(D) Wherever blocks are longer than one thousand (1,000) feet, crosswalks may be required at the
approximate center of the block.
Sec. 2.14. Lots
(A) The lot size, width, depth, shape[,] orientation, and minimum building setback lines shall be appropriate
for the location of the subdivision and type of development and use contemplated.
(B) Lot dimensions shall conform to the existing zoning regulations, but in no case shall the width of a lot
designed for residential use be less than fifty (50) feet.
(C) Each lot shall have access and front upon a public street.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 205/362
(D) Double frontage and reverse frontage lots should be avoided except where their use will produce definite
advantages in meeting special situations in relation to topography and proper land use.
(E) Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines.
Sec. 2.15. Marginal Land
When a plat is filed on land that is subject to flooding or has been flooded within the last twenty (20) years and
corrective measures have not been taken to prevent re-flooding, or it has soil conditions unsuitable for building
purposes, said plat shall not be acceptable except where said property is dedicated to the City or other
appropriate municipality subject to its acceptance for a watercourse, water drainage basin, a park or a
conservancy district or for any other purpose of protecting the health, safety and general welfare of the public.
(Ordinance 443 adopted 3/11/85)
Sec. 2.16. Street Construction Standards
All new street construction must conform to recognized engineering requirements [and] not be less than either a
five (5) inch thickness of concrete with a dowel-on curb or two (2) inch thickness of asphalt with concrete curb
and guttering. Reinforcing for concrete streets shall be a minimum of 3/8 inch steel bars on twenty-four (24)
inch centers both ways. For concrete, a minimum of four (4) inches of sand shall be installed for leveling
purposes over a scarified and compacted subgrade of ninety-five (95) percent standard density. All concrete shall
be three thousand (3,000) psi strength. If in the opinion of the City Engineer or City Manager the soil conditions
warrant lime stabilization of the subgrade shall be required. For asphalt streets a six (6) inch flexible base after
thorough compaction will be installed over a scarified and compacted lime stabilized subgrade of ninety-five
(95) percent standard density. Only hot mix, hot lay asphalt concrete will be used for asphalt toppings. All bases
and toppings will be inspected by the City. (Ordinance 751 adopted 5/6/96)
ARTICLE III. PROCEDURE
Sec. 3.01. Preliminary Plats
(A) The subdivider shall submit at least ten (10) copies of the preliminary plat to the City Secretary who shall
distribute them as follows: One (1) copy to the school board, the local gas company, the local electric company,
the local telephone company, division office of Texas State Highway Commission, board of county
commissioners, and four (4) copies to the planning and zoning commission. The planning and zoning
commission shall return one (1) to the subdivider and forward one (1) to the City Council together with its report
and recommendation and retain the other copies for its use and official record.
(B) After receipt of the preliminary plat, the planning and zoning commission shall, within thirty (30) days of
its submission approve, conditionally approve, or reject the plat. The subdivider shall be notified in writing of
this action, together with any conditions of approval or the reasons for rejection.
(C) Approval of the preliminary plat shall not in all cases entitle the subdivider to approval of the final plat.
Upon preliminary approval, if any conditions arise which would cause the preliminary plat to become
unsatisfactory due to health, safety, or welfare of the community, the planning and zoning commission shall
recommend that the final plat be rejected.
Sec. 3.02. Preliminary Plat Data
(A) The preliminary plat shall be drawn on suitable tracing paper or cloth with black waterproof ink or pencil;
however, legible reproduction of said drawings may be submitted.
(B) The plat shall be drawn to a scale of one hundred (100) feet to the inch and shall contain the following
information:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 206/362
(1) Date, scale and north point.
(2) The proposed subdivision name and all intended street names.
(3) The name of the subdivider and/or the engineer or surveyor preparing the plat.
(4) Legal description showing location of plat.
(5) Topographic survey map of the area being subdivided, show, in [showing] contours at two (2)
feet intervals.
(6) A key map showing the location of the plat in the section, township and range in which the plat
is located.
(7) Location and names of adjacent subdivisions and the owners of adjoining parcels of
unsubdivided land.
(8) Location, widths and names of all existing platted or dedicated streets, alleys or other public
ways and easements, railroad and utility rights-of-way, parks[,] watercourses, drainage ditches,
permanent buildings, bridges and other pertinent data as required by the planning and zoning
commission.
(9) The water elevations of adjoining lakes or streams at the date of the survey and the
approximate high and low water elevations of such lakes or streams. All elevations shall refer to the
established U.S. Coast[al] an[d] Geodetic Survey datum.
(10) When a subdivision borders a lake or stream, the distance and bearings of a meander line shall
be established not less than twenty (20) feet back from the ordinary high-water mark of the lake or
from the bank of the stream.
(11) Layout and width of all new streets and rights-of-way, including alleys, highways and
easements, whether private or public, and for public and private utilities.
(12) The exact length of the exterior boundaries of the land to be subdivided.
(13) Approximate dimensions of all lots.
(14) Approximate radii of all curves and lengths of all tangents.
(15) Approximate location and area of property to be dedicated for public use or to be reserved by
deed covenant for use of all property owners in the subdivision with any conditions of such
dedication or reservation.
[(C) Reserved.]
Editor's note–The original ordinance had no subsection (C). This subsection (C) has been created and reserved at the discretion of the
editor.
(D) Data required: The final plat shall contain the following information:
(1) Name of subdivision and the name of the owner, the subdivider, and the engineer or land
surveyor.
(2) Date, north point, scale (written and graphic).
(3) Boundaries of the subdivided area with accurate distances and bearings noted thereon.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 207/362
(4) Exact location of the subdivision and the description of all monuments found or placed in
making the survey.
(5) The lines, names and widths or dimensions, of all proposed street rights-of-way.
(6) The lines, widths and purposes of all easements.
(7) Numbered designation of all lots in the subdivision, with their lines and dimensions accurately
shown.
(8) The names of all adjacent subdivisions.
(9) Certification by the registered professional engineer or land surveyor who designed the plat, as
to the accuracy of the survey and plat.
(10) Dedication by the owner of lands for public use, including streets and walkways.
(11) Exact dimensions of all lots.
(12) Exact radii of all curves and length of all tangents.
(13) Any additional data as may be required by the planning and zoning commission.
[Secs. 3.03, 3.04. Reserved.]
Sec. 3.05. Fees
(A) The subdivider shall pay to the City a preliminary plat and application fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00).
(B) The subdivider shall pay to the City a final plat filing fee of fifty cents ($0.50) per residential lot. When
acreage is involved, such as sites for industrial, housing projects and commercial purposes, the fee shall be
figured at two dollars ($2.00) per acre.
ARTICLE IV. REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
Sec. 4.01. Monuments
(A) Each block corner shall be marked with iron pipes or pins not less than three-quarters (3/4) inch in
diameter and twenty-four (24) inches long at least one (1) inch below finished grade.
(B) Monuments marking property lines and corners shall be replaced at the exact spot from which they were
removed.
Sec. 4.02. Improvements
(A) Any final plat or subdivision located within the corporate limits shall not be approved unless the
subdivider or developer shall provide the facilities listed below or file a surety bond with the City Secretary to
insure the actual construction of such improvements according to the plans and specifications approved by the
City Council and/or City Engineer within a period of time not to exceed one (1) year form [from] date of final
plat approval. Such bond shall equal one hundred (100) percent of the cost of improvements as estimated by the
City Council and/or City Engineer. Conditions stipulated by the bond shall be acceptable to the City Attorney
and City Council. No building shall take place until such facilities have been constructed.
(1) Water mains properly connected with public water supply system shall be provided to insure
adequate water flow for fire protection.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 208/362
(2) A sanitary sewer system properly connected with the existing system in accordance with
standard specifications governing sanitary sewer construction and in accord with requirements of
state and county health departments.
(3) Streets graveled and graded to the full roadway width and established grade; such streets shall
be required to be paved by a stable base material such as concrete or asphalt.
(4) Storm drainage facilities, curbs and gutters to provide adequate surface water drainage for the
area being drained.
(B) All such facilities shall be installed according to plans and specifications of the City.
(C) All lots in residential subdivisions where septic tanks or individual sewerage disposal devices are to be
installed shall not contain less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet and the width of the lot at the building
line shall be a minimum of one hundred (100) feet. All such lots to be serviced by private sewerage facilities
shall comply with the regulations of the county and state boards of health.
Sec. 4.03. Public Sites and Open Spaces
(A) Where a site for a proposed park, playground, playfield, school, library, fire station, or other public use is
proposed by the official city plan, or is deemed by the planning and zoning commission to be necessary, and is
located in whole or in part in a subdivision, the planning and zoning commission may require the reservation of
such area within the subdivision.
(B) The developer shall give the public agency involved sixty (60) days' written notice of the proposed
subdivision, with a copy of such notice to be mailed to the planning and zoning commission. During the sixty
(60) day period, the agency may or may not express its interest in the proposed subdivision in connection with
the provision of appropriate public site. Should such interest be expressed, that agency shall have a period of an
additional thirty (30) days within which to arrange for the acquisition of the public site under consideration.
(C) Where the proposed subdivision is too small to provide space of suitable size for the public site intended,
the site provided may be combined with that provided or to be provided in adjoining areas. This [Thus], in the
aggregate, there will be provided site of suitable size for the purpose intended.
ARTICLE V. REVIEW OF PLAT
Sec. 5.01. Planning and Zoning Commission Action
(A) The planning and zoning commission shall review the final plat for conformance with the preliminary plat
and shall prepare a set of written recommendations to be submitted to the City Council at the time the final plat
is considered.
(B) The planning and zoning commission shall examine the final plat and shall approve or disapprove the plat
within thirty (30) days of the date of its submittal. If the final plat is approved with the modification or waiver or
certain requirements, the planning and zoning commission shall specify the reasons therefor. If the final plat is
disapproved, the grounds for refusal, including citation of the applicable regulations or general plan, shall be
stated on the records of the planning and zoning commission. If the planning and zoning commission fails to act,
a certificate by the City Secretary as to date of submission of plat for final approval and failure of planning and
zoning commission to act thereon within such specified time, shall be sufficient in lieu of written endorsement of
approval.
(C) The action of the planning and zoning commission shall be shown on the final plat, with the date of action
over the signature of the chairman, vice-chairman or secretary.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 209/362
(D) The planning and zoning commission shall transmit to the City Council the tracing and two (2) paper
copies of the final plat, together with four (4) copies of the restrictive covenants, and a listing of all required
improvements indicating they have been installed; or a contract and bond insuring their installation has been
satisfactorily secured by the City Secretary.
(E) The City Secretary shall transmit a copy of the final plat as approved by the planning and zoning
commission to the school board affected and the public utility companies.
(F) After the planning and zoning commission and City Council have approved the final plat, no change shall
be made therein unless said plat is resubmitted for approval of the planning and zoning commission and City
Council.
Sec. 5.02. City Council Action
Before recording the final plat, it shall be submitted to the City Council for approval and for acceptance of
public ways and service and utility easements and land dedicated to public use. This approval of the plat shall be
shown over the signature of the Mayor and attested to by the City Secretary or his deputy. The disapproval of
any plat by the City Council shall be deemed a refusal of the proposed dedication shown thereon.
ARTICLE VI. RECORDING OF PLAT
[Sec. 6.01. Filing of prints and copies.]
After final approval of the plat and the affixing of all required signatures on the original tracing, the subdivider
shall provide the planning and zoning commission with two (2) dark line prints thereof, and one (1) contact
reproducible cloth tracing, said tracing to be filed with the City Secretary. One (1) dark line print shall be
retained in the permanent file of the planning and zoning commission and one (1) shall be sent to the office of
the City Secretary. The applicant shall file within six (6) months after the date of approval by the City Council
the original tracing, one (1) dark line copy on linen-back, and one (1) contact reproducible cloth tracing or film
with the City Secretary.
ARTICLE VII. ADMINISTRATION AND AMENDMENT
Sec. 7.01. Variances and Exceptions
Wherever it would be inadvisable to apply a provision of this ordinance because a tract is of such unusual size,
shape, or character and would render an extraordinary hardship not created or imposed by the owner or
developer, the planning and zoning commission may modify such provisions only to provide that substantial
justice may be done, the public interest secured, and the intent and spirit of these regulations fulfilled; provided
that in no event shall the requirements of procedure or improvements be waived. Such modification this [thus]
granted shall be made at the written request of the developer stating the reasons for such modification and shall
be waived only by three-fourths (3/4) vote of the regular membership of the planning and zoning commission.
Any such modifications thus granted shall be duly entered and recorded in the minutes of the planning and
zoning commission, setting forth therein the reasons which justify the modifications.
Sec. 7.02. Amendment
The City Council may, from time to time, adopt, amend, and make public rules and regulations for the
administration of these regulations to the end that the public be informed and that approval of plats be expedited.
These regulations may be enlarged or amended by the City Council after public hearing, due notice of which
shall be given as required by law.
Sec. 7.03. Validity
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 210/362
If any section, clause, paragraph, provision, or portion of these regulations shall be held invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect any other section, clause,
paragraph, provision, or portion of these regulations.
Sec. 7.04. Repeal
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
Sec. 7.05. Violation and Penalty
No building permit shall be issued for any new structure, or change, improvement, or alteration of any existing
structure, on any tract of land, in a subdivision filed of record after the effective date of these regulations, which
does not comply with all the provisions of these regulations.
A violation of these regulations shall be deemed a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by fine. A person, firm,
or corporation which violates or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of these regulations shall be fined
not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than twenty dollars ($20.00) including costs, for each offense. Each
day a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
INTRODUCED AND PASSED TO THE FIRST READING ON the 9th day of June, A.D. 1969.
PASSED TO THE SECOND AND FINAL READING AND APPROVED on this the 23rd day of June, A.D.
1969.
(Ordinance 138 adopted 6/23/69)
CHAPTER 11
TAXATION
ARTICLE 11.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 11.02 PROPERTY TAX†
Sec. 11.02.001 Tax exemption for homestead of elderly persons
The first six thousand six hundred sixty dollars ($6,660.00) of the assessed taxable value of the residence
homestead of persons sixty-five (65) years of age or older on January 1st of the taxable year shall be exempt
from ad valorem taxes. Said six thousand six hundred sixty dollars ($6,660.00) exemption shall be effective with
tax year 1978. (2004 Code, art. 11.02)
State law reference–Residence homestead tax exemptions, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 11.13.
Sec. 11.02.002 Tax freeze for homestead of elderly or disabled persons
(a) The following terms, when used in this section, shall have the meanings set forth below:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 211/362
Disabled. Has the same meaning as set forth in the Texas Tax Code, section 11.13(m)(1), as it currently exists or
may be amended.
Residence homestead. Has the same meaning as set forth in the Texas Tax Code, section 11.13(j)(1), as it
currently exists or may be amended.
Tax Code. Has the same meaning as set forth in the Texas Tax Code, as it currently exists or may be amended.
(b) There is hereby created and established a tax freeze on the amount of property taxes imposed by the city
on the homesteads of disabled individuals or individuals age sixty-five (65) years of age or older, which shall be
governed by section 11.261 of the Tax Code as follows:
(1) The tax freeze shall become effective beginning with the 2010 tax year and shall remain
effective for each successive tax year until otherwise amended by the city council or other authorized
authority.
(2) The total amount of ad valorem taxes imposed on the residence homestead of a person who
qualified that residence homestead for the exemption in accordance with the Tax Code as that of a
person who is disabled or is sixty-five (65) years of age or older shall not be increased while it
remains the residence homestead of this person or that person's spouse who is disabled or fifty-five
(55) years of age or older.
(3) If the person who is disabled or sixty-five (65) years of age or older dies in a year in which the
person received a residence homestead exemption, the total amount of ad valorem taxes imposed on
the residence homestead shall not be increased while it remains the residence homestead of that
person's surviving spouse if:
(A) The surviving spouse is fifty-five (55) years of age or older at the time of the person's
death;
(B) The residence homestead of the deceased person is also the residence homestead of the
surviving spouse on the date of the person's death; and
(C) The residence homestead remains the residence homestead of the surviving spouse.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained herein, taxes on the residence homestead may be increased
to the extent the value of the homestead is increased by improvements other than repairs and other
than improvements made to comply with governmental requirements.
(5) A person may not receive the tax freeze for more than one residence homestead, no matter
where located, in the same year. A person may designate a new residence homestead within the city
in accordance with the Tax Code.
(6) The limitation on taxes provided by this section may expire in accordance with section
11.261(d) of the Tax Code. If a tax limitation is erroneously allowed, back taxes may be assessed in
accordance with section 11.261(e) of the Tax Code.
(Ordinance 1096 adopted 11/23/09)
Sec. 11.02.003 Freeport goods exemption
The freeport exemption is hereby granted for tax year 1990 and all subsequent years by the city, for industries
within the city limits and/or those which may be eligible for such exemption by virtue of contractual agreements
for pay in lieu of taxes. (2004 Code, art. 11.03)
State law reference–Tangible personal property (freeport goods) tax exemptions, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 11.251.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 212/362
ARTICLE 11.03 SALES AND USE TAX*
Sec. 11.03.001 Adopted
The majority of the qualified voters having voted for the adoption of a one percent local sales and use tax, said
tax is being imposed in the city and shall become effective as provided in V.T.C.A., Tax Code, chapter 321,
subchapter B (321.101 et seq.). (2004 Code, art. 11.04(a))
Sec. 11.03.002 Sale of natural gas and electricity
A one percent (1.0%) sales tax is hereby reimposed upon all sales of natural gas and electricity when sold for
residential or commercial use within the corporate limits of the city. The terms “residential use” and
“commercial use” shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in section 151.317(c) of the Texas Tax
Code, as amended, and as further defined by applicable regulations of the comptroller of currency of the state.
This tax shall be effective upon the earliest date permitted by the regulations of the comptroller of public
accounts of the state set forth in section 3.378(b)(4) of title 34, Texas Administrative Code. (2004 Code, art.
11.04)
State law reference–Authority of municipality to impose tax on sales of gas and electricity, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 321.105.
CHAPTER 12
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
ARTICLE 12.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 12.01.001 Identification of funeral processions
A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by pennant display or by such other
method as may be determined and designated by the traffic division. (2004 Code, sec. 12.02.004)
Sec. 12.01.002 Riding bicycle, skateboard or rollerblades on sidewalk or roadway
(a) No person shall ride a bicycle or skateboard or use rollerblades upon a sidewalk within a business district.
(b) The chief of police is authorized to erect signs on any sidewalk or roadway prohibiting the riding of
bicycles or skateboards or using rollerblades thereon by any person, and when such signs are in place no person
shall disobey the same.
(c) Whenever any person is riding a bicycle or skateboard or using rollerblades upon a sidewalk outside of
business districts, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before
overtaking and passing such pedestrian.
(2004 Code, sec. 12.02.005)
Sec. 12.01.003 Bicycle parking
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk
in a rack to support the bicycle or against a building, in such manner as to afford the least obstruction to
pedestrian traffic. (2004 Code, sec. 12.02.006)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 213/362
State law reference–Parking bicycle on sidewalk, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.302(d).
ARTICLE 12.02 OPERATION OF VEHICLES†
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 12.02.001 Limitations on turning around
The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street in
a business district, in the middle of any block, or at a signalized or controlled intersection. (2004 Code, sec.
12.02.002)
Sec. 12.02.002 One-way streets and alleys
Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys described as follows, vehicular traffic shall move only
in the indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every
intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited:
(1) 100 block of West Cash Street.
(2) 100, 200 and 300 blocks of West Park Avenue.
(3) 400, 500, 600, 700 and 800 blocks of North Park Avenue.
(4) Access roads between Johnson Road and Pacific Avenue.
(5) Access roads between Pacific Avenue and Bell Road.
(6) 200 and 300 blocks of South Park Avenue.
(Ordinance 1246 adopted 3/12/18)
State law reference–One-way roadways, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.059.
Sec. 12.02.003 Through streets; stop and yield intersections
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, drivers of vehicles shall stop or yield, as designated by sign, before
entering any of the following intersections:
STOP SIGNS
Alameda and Colorado 2 north and south
Alameda and Jackson 2 north and south
Alameda and Pacific 2 south and west
Alameda and Third 1 east
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 214/362
Alameda and Yosemite 4 north, south, east, west
Alcott and Pasadena 1 north
Aldine and Pacific 2 east and west
Aldine and Victoria 2 east and west
Aldine and Wall 2 east and west
Aldine and Yosemite 2 east and west
Aldine Court and Third 1 west
Bank and Atlantic 1 west
Bank and Colorado 2 north and south
Bank and First 1 north
Bank and Hawthorne 2 north and south
Bank and Pacific 2 east and west
Bank and Penn 2 east and west
Bank and Victoria 2 east and west
Bank and Yosemite 2 east and west
Bentwood and Johnson 1 west
Bond and Aldine 2 north and south
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 215/362
Bond and Diamond 1 north
Callie and FM 368 North 1 west
Cash and Alcott 1 south
Cash and Atlantic 1 west
Cash and Hawthorne 2 east and west
Cash and Texowa 1 south
Cash and Victoria 4 north, south, east, west
Cash and Wall 1 east
Cash and Yosemite 1 east
Cherokee Trail and Texas 1 south
Chestnut and Colorado 2 east and west
Cheyenne Avenue and Bell Road 1 west
Cheyenne Avenue and Cherokee Trail 4 east, west, north, south
Clara and First 2 east and west
Clara and Pacific 2 east and west
Clara and Third 1 east
Coleman and First 2 east and west
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 216/362
Coleman and Pacific 1 west
Coleman and Third 1 east
Colorado and Lafayette 1 north
Colorado and Louisa 1 north
Cornelia and First 1 west
Cornelia and Fourth 1 west
Cornelia and Third 1 east
Crystal and Bond 2 east and west
Crystal and Colorado 1 east
Crystal and Wall 2 east and west
Daisy and Jackson 1 west
Diamond and Colorado 2 east and west
Diamond and Texowa 1 west
Diamond and Wall 2 north and south
Douglas and Mary 2 north and south
East and West Park and Atlantic 1 west
East and West Park and Bond 2 east and west
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 217/362
East and West Park and Hall 2 east and west
East and West Park and Jackson 2 north and south
East and West Park and Yosemite 2 east and west
Edgehill and Johnson Road 1 east
Emerald and Colorado 1 east
Emerald and Wall 2 east and west
Fourth and Loop 370 1 north
Fourth and South Expressway 1 south
Fourth and Van Horn 2 east and west
Glenda and Louisa 2 south and west
Harley Court and Loop 370 1 west
Hope Lane and FM 368 1 east
Industrial Boulevard and Northwest Access
Road
1 north
Jackson and Bank 2 east and west
Jackson and Chestnut 1 north
Jackson and Clara 4 north, east, south, west
Jackson and Council Drive 1 west
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 218/362
Jackson and Southeast Access Road 1 south
Jackson and Washington 2 north and south
James Drive and FM 368 1 east
Jefferson and Atlantic 1 west
Jefferson and Victoria 2 east and west
Jefferson and Wall 2 east and west
Jefferson and Yosemite 2 east and west
Johnson Road and Magnolia 3 north, east and west
Lafayette and Jackson 2 north and south
Lafayette and Texowa 2 east and west
Lafayette and Wall 2 east and west
Lafayette and Yosemite 2 east and south
Lincoln and Fourth 1 west
Louisa and Fourth 1 west
Louisa and Pacific 1 east
Louisa and Second 2 east and west
Louisa and Van Horn 2 north and south
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 219/362
Loop 370 and Atlantic 1 north and south
Loop 370 and Bank 1 east
Loop 370 and Bond 1 north
Loop 370 and Colorado 1 north
Loop 370 and Emma Drive 1 north
Loop 370 and Foley Drive 1 south
Loop 370 and Foley Drive 1 west
Loop 370 and Glenda Drive 1 north
Loop 370 and Hawthorne 1 north
Loop 370 and Jackson 2 north and south
Loop 370 and Johnson Road 4 north, south, east, west
Loop 370 and Joy Drive 1 north
Loop 370 and Lanelle Drive 1 west
Loop 370 and Magnolia 2 east and west
Loop 370 and Pacific 1 north
Loop 370 and Park Plaza 1 south
Loop 370 and Saratoga 1 north
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 220/362
Loop 370 and Seneca 1 north
Loop 370 and Texowa 1 north
Loop 370 and Third 1 north
Loop 370 and Victoria 4 north, east, south, west
Loop 370 and Wall 2 north and south
Loop 370 and Washington 1 east
Loop 370 and Yosemite 4 north, south, east, west
Magnolia and First 2 north and south
Magnolia and First 4 north, south, east, west
Magnolia and Jackson 2 north and south
Magnolia and Mockingbird 1 north
Magnolia and Pacific 2 east and west
Magnolia and Park Plaza 1 north
Magnolia and Third 2 north and south
Magnolia and Victoria 2 east and west
Magnolia and Yosemite 2 east and west
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 221/362
Magnolia and Yosemite 2 north and south
Manes and First 2 east and west
Manes and Pacific 1 west
Manes and Second 2 east and west
Manes and Third 1 east
Mary and Karen Lane 2 north and west
Mary Drive and Johnson Road 1 east
Newman Avenue and Garden 1 south
Newman Avenue and Texowa 1 west
North Expressway and Douglas Drive 1 north
North Expressway and Johnson Road 2 east and west
North Expressway and Karen Lane 1 north
North Expressway and Rita Lane 1 north
North Park and Alameda 1 north
Pacific and Council Drive 1 east
Park and Atlantic 1 west
Park and Colorado 1 east and west
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 222/362
Park and Crystal 2 north and south
Park and Magnolia 2 north and south
Park and Pacific 1 east
Park and Texas 1 north
Park and Victoria 1 west
Park and Wall 2 east and west
Park and Washington 2 north and south
Park Place Circle and Johnson Road 1 east
Park Place Circle and Johnson Road (north
entrance)
1 east
Pasadena and Atlantic 1 west
Pasadena and Hawthorne 2 north and south
Pasadena and Texowa 1 east
Pecan and Bond 2 east and west
Pecan and Jackson 2 north and south
Pecan and Texowa 1 west
Pecan and Victoria 2 north and south
Pecan and Wall 2 east and west
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 223/362
Penn and Pasadena 1 north
Penn and Ruby 2 north and south
Poe and Wall 2 east and west
Poe and Yosemite 2 east and west
Rebecca and Third 1 east
Richland and Garden 1 north
Richland and Texowa 1 east
Ruby and Atlantic 1 west
Ruby and Bond 2 north and south
Ruby and Colorado 2 east and west
Ruby and Jackson 2 east and west
Ruby and Texowa 2 east and west
Ruby and Victoria 2 east and west
Ruby and Victoria 2 north and south
Ruby and Wall 2 east and west
Ruby and Yosemite 2 east and west
Saratoga and Bank 2 north and south
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 224/362
Saratoga and Cash 2 north and south
Saratoga and Pasadena 2 north and south
Saratoga and Washington 1 south
Seminole Court and Texas 1 south
Seneca and Pasadena 2 north and south
Smith and Wall 2 east and west
Smith Avenue and Yosemite 2 east and west
South Expressway and Cornelia 1 south
South Expressway and Emma Drive 1 south
South Expressway and First 1 south
South Expressway and Johnson Road 2 east and west
South Expressway and Kathleen 1 south
South Expressway and Lincoln 1 south
South Expressway and Louisa 1 south
South Expressway and Pacific 2 east and west
South Expressway and Second 1 south
South Expressway and Third 1 south
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 225/362
South Expressway and Victoria 1 south
Texas and Atlantic 1 west
Texas and Colorado 2 north and south
Texas and Fourth Street 1 east
Texas and Jackson 2 east and west
Texas and Pacific 2 east and west
Texas and Third 1 east
Texas and Victoria 1 east
Texas and Wall 1 south
Third and Aldine 1 east
Third and Louisa 1 east
Third and Texas 1 east
Van Horn and Third 1 west
Vogel and Fourth 1 east
Vogel and Third 1 west
Wagonwheel and Johnson 1 west
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 226/362
Washington and Atlantic 1 west
Washington and Hawthorne 1 south
Washington and Pacific 2 east and west
Washington and Penn 2 north and south
Washington and Victoria 2 east and west
Washington and Wall 2 east and west
Westridge and Johnson 1 east
Yosemite and Chestnut 1 north
Yosemite and Pecan 2 north and south
Yosemite and Washington 2 north and south
YIELD SIGNS
Alameda and First 1 east
Alameda and Victoria 2 east and west
Alameda and Wall 2 east and west
Alcott and Bank 1 north
Aldine and Bond 2 north and south
Aldine and Jackson 2 east and west
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 227/362
Andrea Court and Justin Drive 1 west
Bank and Bond 2 east and west
Bank and Jackson 2 east and west
Bank and Park 1 north
Bank and Wall 2 east and west
Bond and Alameda 2 north and south
Bond and Jefferson 2 north and south
Bond and Lafayette 2 north and south
Bond and Magnolia 2 north and south
Brady Court and Justin Drive 1 west
Brandon Court and Justin Drive 1 east
Cash and Bond 2 north and south
Cash and Seneca 2 north and south
Chestnut and Wall 1 west
Clara and Colorado 2 east and west
Clara and Second 2 east and west
Coleman and Second 2 north and south
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 228/362
Colorado and Aldine 2 north and south
Colorado and Magnolia 2 north and south
Colorado and Washington 2 north and south
Cornelia and Corinne 2 northwest and southeast
Cornelia and Second 2 east and west
Crystal and Jackson 2 east and west
Crystal and Yosemite 2 north and south
Daniel Court and Justin Drive 1 east
Diamond and Bond 1 north
Emerald and Bond 2 east and west
Emerald and Jackson 2 east and west
Emerald and Yosemite 2 east and west
First and Washington 2 north and south
Garden Drive and Hope Lane 1 north
Garden Drive and James Drive 2 north and south
Garden and Texowa 1 west
Garden Drive and Wall 1 west
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 229/362
Hawthorne and Park 2 east and west
Hawthorne and Ruby 2 north and south
Hawthorne and Washington 1 south
Hope Lane and Valley Drive 1 north
Jackson and Diamond 2 north and south
James and Valley 1 north
Jefferson and Colorado 2 east and west
Jefferson and Jackson 2 east and west
Justin Drive and North Park Place Circle 1 south
Lafayette and Colorado 1 west
Lincoln and Corinne 1 south
Louisa and Jackson 1 west
Magnolia and Jackson 2 east and west
Magnolia and Victoria 2 east and west
Magnolia and Wall 2 east and west
Mary and Karen 1 east
Mary Drive and Karen Lane 1 south
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 230/362
Park and Alameda 2 north and south
Park and Aldine 4 north and south
Park and Crystal 2 north and south
Park and Emerald 2 north and south
Park and Jefferson 2 north and south
Park and Lafayette 2 north and south
Park and Pecan 2 north and south
Park and Penn 2 east and west
Park and Ruby 2 north and south
Pecan and Colorado 1 west
Penn and Cash 2 north and south
Penn and Washington 2 north and south
Poe and Jackson 2 east and west
Rebecca and First 2 north and south
Rita Lane and Mary 2 north and south
Saratoga and Park 2 north and south
Seneca and Bank 2 north and south
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 231/362
Seneca and Cash 2 north and south
Seneca and Park 2 east and west
Seneca and Washington 1 south
South and Texas 2 north and south
South Park Place and Douglas/Justin 2 east and west
Surrey Drive and Surrey Drive 1 west
Surrey and Wagonwheel 1 north
Texas and Second 2 north and south
Texas and Yosemite 2 north and south
Texowa and Alameda 2 north and south
Texowa and Bank 1 north
Texowa and Washington 2 north and south
Valley Drive and Hope Lane 1 south
Valley and Texowa 1 west
Van Horn and Glenda 2 north and south
Victoria and Lafayette 2 north and south
Wagonwheel and Johnson Road 1 west
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 232/362
Wall and Valley Drive 1 north
Washington and Alcott 2 north and south
Washington and Bond 2 north and south
Washington and Texowa 2 north and south
Washington and Victoria 2 east and west
West View Lane and Garden 1 east
West View Lane and Garden 1 north
Wood Circle East and Lincoln 2 north and east
Wood Circle North and Lincoln 2 north and east
Yosemite and Diamond 2 north and east
Yucca and Wagonwheel 1 south
(2004 Code, sec. 12.02.008; Ordinance 1102 adopted 5/17/10; Ordinance 1103 adopted 8/9/10; Ordinance 1235
adopted 10/23/17; Ordinance 1257 adopted 12/10/18; Ordinance 1268 adopted 5/13/19)
State law reference–Authority to designate through highways and stop and yield intersections, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, secs.
542.202, 544.003.
Sec. 12.02.004 School zone warning and information signs
Signs warning motorists of impending school zones shall be erected and maintained at such positions within the
city limits along the right-of-way or [so as] to give ample notice of reduced speed limits and pedestrian
walkways. (2004 Code, sec. 12.02.009)
Sec. 12.02.005 Golf carts for holiday parcel delivery
(a) From 12:00 a.m. on November 15th until 11:59 p.m. on December 31st of each year, an employee or agent
of an entity whose primary business is the delivery of parcels may operate golf carts on public rights-of-way that
have speed limits of not more than thirty-five (35) miles per hour. Pursuant to the Texas Transportation Code §
551.405, golf carts so operated may cross intersections, including a road or street that has a posted speed limit
greater than thirty-five (35) miles per hour.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 233/362
(b) Any golf cart operated pursuant to this section must be equipped with headlamps, taillamps, reflectors, a
parking brake, mirror(s) and a slow-moving vehicle sign.
(c) The operator of a golf cart pursuant to this section must possess a valid drivers' license that authorizes said
person to operate a motor vehicle on public highways and roadways and said operator must obey all state and
local traffic laws.
(d) Any golf cart operated pursuant to this section must be insured in a manner consistent with the State of
Texas' standards for motor vehicles.
(e) “Golf cart” and “public highway” have the meanings assigned to them by the Texas Transportation Code §
502.001.
(Ordinance 1150 adopted 11/12/12)
Secs. 12.02.006–12.02.050 Reserved
Division 2. Speed Limits*
Sec. 12.02.051 Increased limits on certain streets
(a) It is hereby determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that the speed permitted
by state law upon the following streets is less than is reasonable and necessary for safe operation of vehicles
thereon by reason of conditions found to exist and it is hereby declared that the prima facie speed limit shall be
as hereinafter set forth on those streets or parts of streets herein designated at all times or at times specified when
signs are erected giving notice thereof:
Atlantic/Bell Road.
(1) 45 mph southbound between East Texas and a point 600 feet north of the intersection with East
Washington.
(2004 Code, sec. 12.02.001)
(2) 40 mph between the eastbound access road of U.S. Highway 287 North south to East
Washington Avenue. (Ordinance 1085 adopted 1/27/09)
FM 368.
(1) 30 mph northbound and southbound along Yosemite, Lafayette, and Colorado between Loop
370 and Emerald.
(2) 40 mph northbound and southbound between Emerald and the south city limits.
Johnson Road. 40 mph northbound and southbound between Business 287 and a point 300 feet south of Edgehill
Trial.
Loop 370.
(1) 50 mph eastbound and westbound between the east city limit and Hawthorne Street.
(2) 40 mph eastbound and westbound between Hawthorne and Texowa.
(3) 35 mph eastbound and westbound between Texowa and Pacific.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 234/362
(4) 40 mph eastbound and westbound between Pacific and a point 227 feet west of Joy Drive.
(5) 30 mph eastbound and westbound between a point 227 feet west of Joy Drive and Johnson
Road.
Pacific.
(1) 40 mph northbound and southbound between the north city limits and West Texas.
(2) 35 mph northbound and southbound between West Texas and West Alameda.
(3) 30 mph northbound and southbound between West Alameda and Loop 370.
West Magnolia. 40 mph eastbound and westbound between Business 287 and Mockingbird.
(2004 Code, sec. 12.02.001)
Sec. 12.02.052 School zones
Speed limit 20 mph 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days: (2004 Code, sec. 12.02.001)
East Cash. Eastbound and westbound between the east side of Bond Street and a point 115 feet on the west side
of Penn Street. (Ordinance 1091 adopted 9/28/09)
East Diamond. Eastbound and westbound between the east side of Bond and the east side of Texowa.
East Park. Eastbound and westbound between the east side of Bond and the east side of Victoria.
Fourth Street. Northbound and southbound between the north side of Vogel Street and a point 300 feet north of
the north side of Lincoln Drive.
(2004 Code, sec. 12.02.001)
Johnson Road. Northbound and southbound between a point two hundred feet (200') north of the north side of
Loop 370 and the north side of Westridge. (Ordinance 1094 adopted 11/9/09)
Loop 370.
(1) Eastbound and westbound between its end at the northwest corner of the high school and a
point two hundred feet (200') east of the east side of Johnson Road.
(2) Eastbound and westbound between a point two hundred and sixteen feet (216') west of Victoria
Street and a point three hundred and twelve feet (312') east of Victoria.
(Ordinance 1094 adopted 11/9/09)
North Victoria Street. Northbound and southbound between the north side of Loop 370 and the south side of
East Bank.
Texowa Street. Northbound and southbound from the south side of Emerald Street to the city limit line of the
Garden Valley Addition.
Third Street. Northbound and southbound between the north side of Vogel Street and the south side of Manes.
(2004 Code, sec. 12.02.001)
Sec. 12.02.053 Decreased limits on certain streets
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 235/362
It is hereby determined upon the basis of a traffic study/investigation that the speed permitted by state law upon
the following streets is more than is reasonable and necessary for the safe operation of vehicles thereon by
reason of conditions found to exist and it is hereby declared that the prima facie speed limit shall be as
hereinafter set forth on those streets or parts of streets herein designated at all times or at times specified when
signs are erected giving notice thereof:
Jackson Avenue. 20 mph northbound and southbound between Louisa Avenue and the southeast access road of
U.S. Highway 287 North.
Texas Avenue. 20 mph eastbound and westbound between Bell Road and Victoria.
(2004 Code, sec. 12.02.011)
ARTICLE 12.03 PARKING*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 12.03.001 Entering or exiting from angle parking space
No entry may be made in an angle parking space on the opposite side of the street, no vehicle shall leave an
angle parking place so as to proceed in the opposite direction, and no entrance to or exit from an angle parking
place shall be made so as to cross the centerline of the street. (2004 Code, sec. 12.03.001)
Sec. 12.03.002 Parking across designated angle parking spaces
No person shall park any type of vehicle and/or trailer across any designated angle parking spaces upon any
public street or right-of-way. (2004 Code, sec. 12.03.009)
Sec. 12.03.003 Parking for certain purposes prohibited
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of:
(1) Displaying such vehicle for sale.
(2) Washing, greasing, or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency.
(2004 Code, sec. 12.03.002)
Sec. 12.03.004 Obstructing traffic; parking large vehicles
No person shall park any vehicle upon a street or alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave
available less than ten (10) feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic.
Additionally, no person shall park any vehicle in excess of seven (7) feet in height or thirty (30) feet in length
upon the right-of-way of any designated street within the city limits except for loading or unloading of said
vehicle. (2004 Code, sec. 12.03.003)
Sec. 12.03.005 Parking prohibited at all times on certain streets
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets
described as follows:
Johnson Road. On the east side of Johnson Road between Loop 370 (old Iowa Park Highway 287) and
Westridge Lane.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 236/362
Loop 370. Along or within ten (10) feet of the south or north side of the roadway of Loop 370 (old U.S.
Highway 287) within the city, extending from Atlantic Street to Johnson Road.
North First Street. On both sides of the 1000 block (between Clara and Louisa).
North Fourth Street. Along the east and west sides of North Fourth Street between Loop 370 and Van Horn
Street.
North Victoria Avenue.
(1) Along the west side of North Victoria Avenue, extending from the north right-of-way of East
Highway to a point sixty-five (65) feet to the north.
(2) Along the east side of North Victoria Avenue, extending from the north right-of-way of East
Highway to a point eighty-five (85) feet to the north.
West Park Avenue. Along the north side of West Park Avenue, extending from the west right-of-way of North
Wall Street to a point fifty (50) feet to the west.
(2004 Code, sec. 12.03.004)
Sec. 12.03.006 Parking prohibited during certain hours on certain streets
When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle between the hours
specified herein of any day except Sundays and public holidays within the district or upon any of the streets
described as follows:
Cash Street. On the north side of Cash Street between Victoria Avenue and the Iowa Park Middle School's circle
drive exit, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
Texowa Street. On the east and west sides of Texowa Street between Cash Street and Pasadena Street, between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
(2004 Code, sec. 12.03.005)
Sec. 12.03.007 Fire lanes at apartment complexes
When curbs and other designated areas are marked by an apartment complex within the city, and notice of that
marking is provided to the city manager requesting that a no parking fire lane be established for certain
designated areas in and immediately around the apartment complex, the city manager will notify the chief of
police so that a no parking fire lane may be enforced by appropriate police action. (2004 Code, sec. 12.03.007)
Sec. 12.03.008 Parking in area designated for disabled persons
(a) A person commits an offense if the person is neither temporarily or permanently disabled nor transporting
a temporarily or permanently disabled person and parks a vehicle with special license plates or displaying a
removable windshield identification card in a parking space or parking area designated specifically for the
disabled by the city or by a person who owns or controls private property used for parking.
(b) A person commits an offense if the person parks a vehicle displaying neither special license plates nor a
removable windshield identification card in a parking space or parking area designated specifically for the
disabled by the city or by a person who owns or controls private property used for parking.
(c) A person commits an offense if the person parks a vehicle so that the vehicle blocks an access or curb
ramp or any other architectural improvement designated to aid the disabled.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 237/362
(d) A person commits an offense if he lends a removable windshield identification card issued to him pursuant
to state law to a person who uses the removable windshield identification card in violation of this section.
(e) An offense under this section is a class C misdemeanor.
(f) In a prosecution of an offense under this section, it is presumed that the registered owner of the motor
vehicle that is the subject of the prosecution is the person who parked the vehicle at the time and place the
offense occurred.
(g) As used in this section, the following terms shall have the respective meanings assigned to them herein:
Parking space or parking area designated specifically for the disabled. One or more spaces or areas designated
for parking for disabled persons in accordance with the requirements of V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, chapter
681, as amended and modified from time to time.
Removable windshield identification card. The removable windshield identification card issued to disabled
persons which is more particularly defined and described in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, section 681.002, as
amended and modified from time to time.
Special license plates. License plates issued for motorcycles and vehicles which have been specifically modified
by the manufacturer to be operated by disabled persons as that term is more particularly defined and described
V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, section 504.201, as amended and modified from time to time.
(h) This section shall be construed so as to make the offenses and penalties set forth in said state statute
applicable to public and private property as provided herein.
(2004 Code, sec. 12.03.008)
State law reference–Privileged parking for disabled persons, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, ch. 681.
Secs. 12.03.009–12.03.040 Reserved
Division 2. Loading and Unloading
Sec. 12.03.041 Definitions
As used in this division, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them:
Alley entrance. A building that abuts on or has an entrance to a public alley, that provides access to a street or
other thoroughfare for vehicles used in handling and loading and unloading merchandise.
Loading zone. A space in front of a business location to be used for the purpose of loading and unloading
merchandise by the owner of the business adjacent thereto (or passengers, in passenger loading zones), and may
be used by any carrier for the purposes of loading or unloading merchandise to be delivered or shipped from
such location.
Space. An area of twenty-one (21) feet parallel to the curb, or, in the event that the space is in an area where
angle parking is permitted, the same shall be eleven (11) feet parallel to the curb.
(2004 Code, sec. 12.03.021)
Sec. 12.03.042 Use of loading zones
No vehicles other than those used in the loading and unloading of merchandise and in the transportation thereof
shall be parked in any loading zone. (2004 Code, sec. 12.03.022)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 238/362
Sec. 12.03.043 Allocation of loading zones
Loading zones shall be allocated by the traffic engineer to business establishments on the following basis:
(1) Appliance stores: With alley entrance, no space. Without alley entrance, one (1) space.
(2) Army and navy stores: With alley entrance, no space. Without alley entrance, one (1) space.
(3) Automobile dealers with garages in connection: Driveway only.
(4) Automobile garages: Driveway only.
(5) Automobile storage concerns: One (1) entrance and one (1) exit.
(6) Auto stores: With alley entrance, no space. Without alley entrance, one (1) space.
(7) Bus lines: Parking space for not to exceed three (3) buses at each authorized stop.
(8) Cleaning and dye works: With alley entrance, no space. Without alley entrance, one (1) space.
(9) Clothing stores: With alley entrance, no space. Without alley entrance, one (1) space.
(10) Department stores: With alley entrance, no space. Without alley entrance, one (1) space.
(11) Filling stations: One (1) entrance, one exit.
(12) Furniture stores: With alley entrance, one (1) space. Without alley entrance, two (2) spaces.
(13) Hardware stores: With alley entrance, no space. Without alley entrance, one (1) space.
(14) Hotels: One (1) space for each entrance.
(15) Household storage concerns and trucking institutions: With alley entrance, one (1) space.
Without alley entrance, one (1) space for each two (2) vehicles operated, limited to two (2).
(16) Laundries: One (1) space for each two (2) vehicles operated.
(17) Liquor stores: With alley entrance, no space. Without alley entrance, one (1) space.
(18) Meat markets: With alley entrance, no space. Without alley entrance, one (1) space.
(19) Newspapers: Same as the presently existing contract.
(20) Oil well supply houses: With alley entrance, one (1) space. Without alley entrance, two (2)
spaces.
(21) Office supply stores: With alley entrance, no space. Without alley entrance, one (1) space.
(22) Paint stores: With alley entrance, no space. Without alley entrance, one (1) space.
(23) Wholesale paint stores: With alley entrance, one (1) space. Without alley entrance, two (2)
spaces.
(24) Parking lots: One (1) entrance and one (1) exit.
(25) Restaurants: With alley entrance, no space. Without alley entrance, one (1) space.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 239/362
(26) Theaters: In compliance with state law.
(27) Welding and repair shops: With alley entrance, no space. Without alley entrance, one (1)
space.
(28) Wholesale supply houses: With alley entrance, one (1) space. Without alley entrance, two (2)
spaces.
(29) Music stores: With alley entrance, no space. Without alley entrance, one (1) space.
(30) Wholesale tire dealers and repair stations: With inside driveway and repair facilities, two (2)
spaces for driveway and two (2) spaces for parking cars or trucks for repair. With no inside driveway
facilities, four (4) spaces.
(31) Other business requiring loading zones: With alley entrance, no space. Without alley entrance,
one (1) space.
(2004 Code, sec. 12.03.023)
Sec. 12.03.044 Parking in loading zone
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious
unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone
during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading and
unloading of materials exceed thirty (30) minutes. (2004 Code, sec. 12.03.024)
Sec. 12.03.045 Permit for loading or unloading at angle to curb
(a) The city is authorized to issue special permits authorizing loading or unloading merchandise or materials at
an angle to the curb, subject to the terms and conditions of such permit. Such permits may be issued either to the
owner or lessee of real property or to the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to such person the privilege as
therein stated and authorized herein.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of the special terms or conditions of
any such permit.
(2004 Code, sec. 12.03.025)
Sec. 12.03.046 Loading zones designated
When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no vehicle other than those used in the loading and
unloading of merchandise and in the transportation of passengers shall be parked and left unattended in any
loading zone between the hours specified herein of any day except Sunday and public holidays within the district
or upon any of the streets described as follows:
Cash Street.
(1) On the north side of Cash Street between the Iowa Park Middle School's circle drive entrance
and exit and on the south side of Cash Street between Victoria Avenue and Texowa Street, all
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
(2) On the north and south side of Cash Street between Texowa Street and Alcott Street between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
Victoria Avenue. On the east side of Victoria Avenue between Cash Street and Park Street between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 240/362
(2004 Code, sec. 12.03.026)
ARTICLE 12.04 TRUCK ROUTES
Sec. 12.04.001 Definitions
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall, for the purpose of this article, have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them: (2004 Code, sec. 12.02.010(a))
Point of origin. That location at which any truck traffic originates; however, points of origin must be located
within a zone designated for commercial and/or industrial operations.
Point of destination. That location at which any truck traffic has to stop for delivery of services or terminates
said truck traffic; however, a point of destination in which the truck traffic terminates must be located with a
zone designated for commercial and/or industrial operations.
(Ordinance 1078, sec. 1, adopted 2/9/09)
Pole trailer. Every vehicle without motive power designed to be drawn by another vehicle and attached to the
towing vehicle by means of a reach or pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle, and
ordinarily used for transporting long or regularly shaped loads such as poles, pipes, or structural members
capable generally of sustaining themselves as beams between the supporting connections.
Semitrailer. Every vehicle without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or
property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its
load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.
Trailer. Every vehicle without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property
and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle.
Truck routes. Those routes which are designated by this article for the use of truck traffic.
Truck tractor. Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so
constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
(2004 Code, sec. 12.02.010(a))
Truck traffic. The operation of a truck tractor or any combination of a truck tractor, trailer, semi-trailer or pole
trailer. (Ordinance 1078, sec. 2, adopted 2/9/09)
Sec. 12.04.002 Designation
For the purposes of this article, those streets and thoroughfares within the corporate limits of the city which are
enumerated as follows are hereby designated as truck routes:
Route Extent
Bell Road (FM 1814) North city limits to south city limits
Council Drive FM 368 to North Jackson Avenue
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 241/362
FM 368 North city limits to south city limits
Industrial Drive Northwest Access Road to terminus
Johnson Road North city limits to West Smith Street
Loop 370 Northwest city limits to east city limits
North First Street Southwest Access Road to West Manes Avenue
North Jackson Avenue Southwest Access Road to Council Drive
North Yosemite Street West Washington Avenue to Loop 370
South Jackson Avenue Loop 370 to West Smith Street
West Magnolia Avenue Johnson Road to Loop 370
West Manes Avenue North First Street to FM 368
West Park Avenue FM 368 to North Yosemite Street
West Smith Street West city limits to South Jackson Avenue
(Ordinance 1269 adopted 5/13/19)
Sec. 12.04.003 Use required
No person shall operate truck traffic upon any roads, avenues, streets, or thoroughfares within the corporate
limits of the city except on those which are designated as truck routes in section 12.04.002. (2004 Code, sec.
12.02.010(c))
Sec. 12.04.004 Exceptions
The provisions of this article notwithstanding, in those instances where any truck traffic, originating within the
corporate limits of the city, shall have as its point of origin or point of destination a point located off a designated
truck route, the truck shall read or apply [sic] the destination by the most direct route possible. If such truck
traffic shall originate outside the corporate limits of the city and enter the city at a point which is not on a
designated truck route, it shall proceed to the nearest point on a designated truck route by the most direct route
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 242/362
possible. In those cases where truck traffic originates off a designated truck route, whether inside or outside the
corporate limits of the city, and the destination of the truck traffic is nearer the point of origin or point of
destination than is the nearest point on a designated truck route by the most direct route possible, it shall not be
necessary to proceed to the nearest designated truck route. (Ordinance 1078, sec. 3, adopted 2/9/09; Ordinance
adopting Code)
Sec. 12.04.005 Vehicles traveling to and from truck terminal
Vehicles restricted to truck routes may depart from a point on such designated truck route for the purpose of
traveling to and from a truck terminal, provided that such vehicle proceeds by the most direct route to or from
the applicable truck terminal. (2004 Code, sec. 12.02.010(e))
Sec. 12.04.006 Vehicles loading or unloading at location off truck route
Truck traffic restricted to the streets designated as truck routes may depart from such truck routes where it is
necessary to load or unload at a location or locations situated off designated truck routes. However, such truck
traffic shall not leave any designated truck route until such has reached a point on some designated truck route
which is nearest the applicable place of loading or unloading by the most direct route possible. After leaving a
designated truck route to load or unload, truck traffic may continue off truck routes to as many points of
destination as necessary. Provided further, however, that if, in the course of making the necessary stops for
loading and unloading, the truck traffic shall cross a designated truck route, then, in that event, such truck shall
not again leave any designated truck routes until it has reached a point on some designated truck route which is
nearest to the next place of loading and unloading by the most direct route possible. (2004 Code, sec.
12.02.010(f))
Sec. 12.04.007 Signs and markings
The city traffic engineer shall erect appropriate signs and markings advising motorists of the truck routes
established by this article. (2004 Code, sec. 12.02.010(g))
Sec. 12.04.008 Alternate routes
Whenever any street or roadway designated as a truck route is under repair, or otherwise temporarily out of use,
the city traffic engineer shall be authorized to designate alternate truck routes. (2004 Code, sec. 12.02.010(h))
ARTICLE 12.05 PARADES
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 12.05.001–12.05.030 Reserved
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 12.05.031 Definitions
As used in this division, the following terms shall mean as follows:
Parade. Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or procession of any kind, or any similar
display, in or upon any street in this city.
Parade permit. A permit as required by this division.
(2004 Code, sec. 12.02.003(a)
Sec. 12.05.032 Exceptions
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 243/362
This division shall not apply to:
(1) Funeral processions.
(2) Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, providing
such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities.
(3) A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.
(2004 Code, sec. 12.02.003(b))
Sec. 12.05.033 Required
No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade unless a parade permit shall have been
obtained from the chief of police. (2004 Code, sec. 12.02.003(c))
Sec. 12.05.034 Application
(a) A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with the chief of police not less than
five (5) days nor more than ten (10) days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade, on forms
provided by such officer.
(b) The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such parade;
(2) If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name,
address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized and
responsible heads of such organization;
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade chairman and
who will be responsible for its conduct;
(4) The date when the parade is to be conducted;
(5) The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point;
(6) The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles which, will constitute such
parade, the type of animals, and a description of vehicles;
(7) The hours when such parade will start and terminate;
(8) A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets
proposed to be traversed;
(9) The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade;
(10) The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any such assembly area or
areas;
(11) The interval of space to be maintained between units of such parade;
(12) If the parade is designed to be held by or on behalf of or for any person other than the
applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file with the chief of police a communication in writing
from the person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his
behalf;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 244/362
(13) Any additional information which the chief of police shall find reasonably necessary to a fair
determination as to whether a permit should issue.
(c) The chief of police, where good cause is shown therefor, shall have the authority to consider any
application hereunder which is filed less than five (5) days before the date such parade is proposed to be
conducted.
(2004 Code, sec. 12.02.003(d))
Sec. 12.05.035 Standards for issuance
The chief of police shall issue a permit as provided for hereunder when, from a consideration of the application
and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that:
(1) The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of
other traffic contiguous to its route;
(2) The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers
of the city to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent
normal police protection to the city;
(3) The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances
as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the
proposed line of march and areas contiguous thereto;
(4) The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not
unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous
to such assembly areas;
(5) The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en
route to a fire;
(6) The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to
provoke disorderly conduct or to create a disturbance;
(7) The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination
expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route.
(2004 Code, sec. 12.02.003(e))
Sec. 12.05.036 Notice of denial
If the chief of police disapproves the permit application, he shall mail to the applicant, within three (3) days after
the date upon which the application is filed, a notice of his action. (2004 Code, sec. 12.02.003(f))
Sec. 12.05.037 Alternative permit
The chief of police, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct
of the parade on a date, at a time, or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant
desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within two (2) days after notice of the action of the chief of police,
file a written notice of acceptance with the chief of police. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the
requirements of and shall have the effect of a parade permit under this division. (2004 Code, sec. 12.02.003(g))
Sec. 12.05.038 Contents
Each parade permit shall state the following information:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 245/362
(1) Starting time;
(2) Minimum speed;
(3) Maximum speed;
(4) Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade;
(5) The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade;
(6) The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof;
(7) Such other information as the chief of police shall find necessary to the enforcement of this
division.
(2004 Code, sec. 12.02.003(h))
Sec. 12.05.039 Possession
The parade chairman or other person heading or leading such activity shall carry the parade permit upon his
person during the conduct of the parade. (2004 Code, sec. 12.02.003(i))
Sec. 12.05.040 Compliance with permit conditions and applicable laws
A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and
ordinances. (2004 Code, sec. 12.02.003(j))
Sec. 12.05.041 Revocation
The chief of police shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued hereunder upon application of the
standards for issuance as herein set forth. (2004 Code, sec. 12.02.003(k))
CHAPTER 13
UTILITIES
ARTICLE 13.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 13.02 SOLID WASTE†
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 13.02.001 Definitions
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 246/362
Garbage. All putrescible wastes, except sewage and body wastes, including all meat, vegetable and fruit refuse
and carcasses of small dead animals and dead fowl from any premises.
Multifamily dwelling unit. As defined in the comprehensive zoning ordinance.
Premises. Business houses, boarding houses, offices, theaters, hotels, restaurants, cafes, eating houses, tourist
camps, apartments, sanitariums, rooming houses, schools, private residences, vacant lots and other places where
refuse, either garbage or rubbish, accumulates.
Refuse. All wastes, including garbage and rubbish.
Rubbish. Tin cans, bottles, papers, tree limbs (which shall be cut into lengths not exceeding three (3) feet), etc.,
from any premises.
(2004 Code, sec. 6.07.001)
Sec. 13.02.002 Compliance
The collection of garbage or rubbish or any kind of junk within the city is prohibited except as provided for in
this article. (2004 Code, sec. 6.07.002)
Sec. 13.02.003 Frequency of pickup
The city will have its solid waste collection contractor collect from the businesses and residential areas of the
city not less than once weekly all garbage and rubbish, provided it is properly placed for collection. (2004 Code,
sec. 6.07.008)
Sec. 13.02.004 Location of containers; disposal of waste generally
The city will have its solid waste collection contractor place containers in each alleyway or in the vicinity of
each business or residence in a convenient location to insure easy access by the customer. Is shall be the duty of
every person, firm or corporation owning, managing, operating leasing or renting any premises or any place
where garbage or rubbish accumulates to deposit all garbage or rubbish that may accumulate between collections
in the nearest containers. (2004 Code, sec. 6.07.009)
Sec. 13.02.005 Use of container by unauthorized person
(a) It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to place their garbage, refuse or rubbish in any solid waste
container owned by the city's sanitation collection contractor. An unauthorized person shall be construed to
mean “any individual that does not pay garbage or rubbish rates to the city.”
(b) Any person violating this provision, upon conviction in the municipal court, shall be punished by a fine as
provided in section 1.01.009 of this code, and each violation shall be deemed a separate offense.
(2004 Code, sec. 6.07.010)
Sec. 13.02.006 Portable trash containers; placement of containers for collection
Outside of multifamily residential units, all residences and some small businesses will be provided portable or
roll-out trash containers for their disposal of solid waste. The following regulations will govern their use:
(1) All applicable provisions contained under article 13.03 of the code shall also govern residential
and business units utilizing portable trash containers.
(2004 Code, sec. 6.07.011)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 247/362
(2) Portable trash containers shall be placed at the curb or in close proximity of the public right-ofway
by the resident or business beginning no earlier than 5:00 p.m. on the before the scheduled day
of collection. After collection, the resident or business shall return the portable container(s) to the
residential or business structure no later than 8:00 a.m. the day after the scheduled collection day.
(Ordinance 1245 adopted 3/12/18)
(3) Portable trash containers shall be placed in a position accessible to the equipment required to
service the container. Such placement must be entirely free of the risk of entanglement in overhead
electrical wiring or possible damage to parked vehicles left on city streets. Failure to comply with the
placement regulations will result in no refuse pickup service for that day's scheduled collection.
(4) The portable trash container must not be used for any purpose other than the storing and
collecting of garbage.
(5) All portable trash containers are the property of the city's solid waste collection contractor, and
the resident and business are responsible for its care. The city's contractor will provide for
maintenance, repairs and for replacement of the portable containers due to normal wear and tear. The
city may assess any residence or business for replacement or repair costs to portable trash containers
due to the resident's or business's intentional or negligent damage or loss of the container.
(6) Additional portable trash containers will be furnished at the discretion of the city. The charge
for the additional container will be one-half the normal monthly rate set for such residence or
business in addition to the standard monthly rate.
(7) The unauthorized use of commercial solid waste containers by anyone other than the business
to which it is assigned is prohibited.
(2004 Code, sec. 6.07.011)
Sec. 13.02.007 Deposit of waste in container; draining and wrapping garbage
It shall be the duty of every person owning, managing, operating, leasing or renting any premises to place the
daily accumulations of garbage and rubbish in the containers required, and it shall be the duty of every person
placing garbage in any such containers to eliminate, as far as possible, all water and liquid from such garbage
and to securely wrap garbage in paper before placing same in such container. (2004 Code, sec. 6.07.012)
Sec. 13.02.008 Meddling with containers
The meddling with refuse containers or in any way pilfering, scattering the contents or junking in any alley or
street within the city is prohibited. (2004 Code, sec. 6.07.013)
Sec. 13.02.009 Excessive accumulations
The places of excessive accumulations of garbage and rubbish such as from skinning and dressing plants for
fowl may be excluded from the service provided by the city, and such accumulations shall be removed and
disposed of at the expense of the owner or person having same in charge; provided, the owner or person having
such accumulations in charge shall secure from the city a written permit for removal and disposal of same. Said
permit shall be issued only after the issuing officer has satisfied himself that the applicant is capable of
complying with the requirements of this article. The permit may be revoked by the issuing officer when deemed
necessary for the public welfare. (2004 Code, sec. 6.07.015)
Sec. 13.02.010 Heavy or bulky accumulations
(a) Residential heavy or bulky accumulations of items that will not fit into the roll-out trash containers,
including rubbish, brush, grass trimmings, tree limbs, furniture and white goods will be picked up curbside once
per month by the city's solid waste collection contractor. Residents must call the service provider no later than
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 248/362
4:30 p.m. on the day before bulk collection day in order to schedule a pickup. (Ordinance 1238, sec. 1, adopted
11/13/17)
(b) The city will make available the rental of a designated truck on days, nights, or weekends for the disposal
of heavy and bulky accumulations of garbage and rubbish. For weekend rental, the truck will be parked at the
mutually agreeable location on Friday and removed on Monday, except for city holidays. Persons will be
allowed to place any refuse permitted by ordinance in the truck.
(c) The rental fee for use of a city truck provided in subsection (b) above shall be as set forth in the fee
schedule in appendix A of this code.
(d) The designated truck shall be restricted to residential users only.
(2004 Code, sec. 6.07.016; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 13.02.011 Petroleum products; contaminated filters
Petroleum base products and filters contaminated with petroleum base products, whether from garages or filling
stations or individual residences, shall be removed and disposed of at the expense of the person controlling same
in the manner and by the method directed by the city. No petroleum base products or filters contaminated with
petroleum base products shall be deposited in the landfill or any trash receptacle owned and collected by the city.
(2004 Code, sec. 6.07.017)
Sec. 13.02.012 Disposal areas
The disposal of garbage or rubbish or any refuse material within the city except at the city disposal ground or at
such other places as may be directed by the city is prohibited. (2004 Code, sec. 6.07.018)
Sec. 13.02.013 Method of disposal
The disposal of garbage and rubbish shall be by an approved landfill and cover. No burn barrels or other
containers of burned material of residential or commercial types shall be accepted at the sanitary landfill. (2004
Code, sec. 6.07.019)
Sec. 13.02.014 Tire disposal
The disposal of any and all used tires in any trash receptacle owned and collected by the city's solid waste
collection contractor is prohibited. (2004 Code, sec. 6.07.020)
Secs. 13.02.015–13.02.050 Reserved
Division 2. Rates and Charges
Sec. 13.02.051 Applicability
The rates and charges for garbage and rubbish collection will be effective and levied upon all services rendered
for each city owned and maintained water meter, and will continue until altered or adjusted by the city council.
(2004 Code, sec. 6.07.007)
Sec. 13.02.052 Single-family units inside city
(a) The monthly charge for solid waste collection and disposal services from each single-family residential
unit within the city limits will be as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 249/362
(b) The additional monthly charge for each additional roll-out container placed at the residence of each singlefamily
unit within the city limits will be as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code.
(c) The city manager shall collect these solid waste collection and disposal fees as a separate item on each
water bill or by any other practical billing means.
(2004 Code, sec. 6.07.003)
Sec. 13.02.053 Premises other than single-family residential
Fees to be generally charged, assessed and collected from each business, industry, multifamily living complex,
school, church, civic organization and other nonprofit organizations based on the number of weekly pickups will
be as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code. (2004 Code, sec. 6.07.004)
Sec. 13.02.054 Large dead animals
There is hereby established a fee as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A this code for the collection and
disposal of each dead large animal within the city. This fee shall be paid either directly to the city or to the
contractor engaged by the city for remittance to the city. The term “large animal” shall include horses, mules,
donkeys, cattle, sheep, goats, hogs and other animals of like or larger size. (2004 Code, sec. 6.07.005)
Sec. 13.02.055 Collection outside city
The garbage and rubbish collection rates for residences and businesses outside the city will be as set forth in the
fee schedule in appendix A of this code. (2004 Code, sec. 6.07.006)
ARTICLE 13.03 WATER AND SEWER SERVICE*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 13.03.001 Definitions
As used in this article, the term “multiple-family dwelling unit” shall mean a building or portion thereof
containing three (3) or more dwelling units and designed for or used by three (3) or more families; the term also
includes the word “apartments.” (2004 Code, sec. 13.02.002)
Sec. 13.03.002 New water service outside city restricted
(a) It is the policy of the city council that new water service outside the city limits shall be provided only as
provided in subsections (b) and/or (c) of this section.
(b) The city council will honor its commitments for outside water service to those residents who were granted
taps along the water main from Wichita Falls for private individual (non-subdivision) use.
(c) Any individual, corporation or association desiring to receive water service from the water system
operated by the city who does not qualify for service by virtue of subsection (b) of this section must submit a
written application to the city manager stating the exact location, the number of meters, the nature of the service
(e.g., residential, commercial, industrial, etc.) and the estimated volume of water needed. The city manager shall
present this information to the city council at a regular or special city council meeting in the form of a public
hearing. After due consideration, the city council shall determine whether it is in the best interest of the city to
allow the requested service.
(d) Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the council's option to seek professional
recommendations regarding the request (e.g., legal, engineering, etc.). The city council shall be the final
authority on the acceptance or rejection of a request for outside service.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 250/362
(2004 Code, sec. 13.02.001)
Sec. 13.03.003 Platting requirements for service outside city
(a) Any request to the city for water and/or sewer service outside the corporate city limits must be
accompanied by a registered surveyor's plat indicating the plat of the area and its relationship to the city and
showing all proposed water and sewer lines and their relative locations to existing water and sewer lines. Such
plats must be accompanied by an engineer's letter giving a professional opinion on the capacity of the existing
system to handle the proposed additions. Additionally, the plat must show any dedicated streets, alleys and/or
easements and their relationship to existing streets, alleys and/or easements within the city limits.
(b) The city council shall take no action on any requests until platting requirements are met in full, and the
council shall take no affirmative action on any such requests unless the area to be served and the submitted plat
fully comply with the zoning and subdivision requirements within the city most closely adjoining the proposed
service area. The council may vary from these requirements if it documents in its minutes the reasons for such
exception.
(2004 Code, sec. 13.02.014)
Sec. 13.03.004 Water taps
(a) For connection to the city water line, there shall be a charge for water taps as set forth in the fee schedule
in appendix A of this code.
(b) The charge for all water meters and taps greater than four (4) inches will be determined by the city on an
individual basis.
(c) The actual cost of providing and repairing utility cuts or borings across paved streets shall be added to the
tap fee when applicable.
(d) Every water meter and tap will be set on the property line by the city when possible, and the property
owner is responsible for extending their line to this point. All water meters shall become the property of the city
upon installation, and the city will be responsible for maintenance of same.
(2004 Code, sec. 13.02.003)
Sec. 13.03.005 Sewer taps
(a) The charges for a tap on the sewer line of the city shall be as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of
this code.
(b) The actual cost of providing and repairing utility cuts or borings across paved streets shall be added to the
tap fee when applicable.
(c) Every sewer tap will be made at the city's sewer main by the city whenever possible, and the property
owner is responsible for extending their line to the collection main.
(2004 Code, sec. 13.02.004)
Secs. 13.03.006–13.03.050 Reserved
Division 2. Rates and Charges
Sec. 13.03.051 Meter deposit; connection fee
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 251/362
(a) All customers will be required to make a meter deposit prior to connection or turn-on of service. Meter
deposits will be as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code.
(b) Customers moving from a service address inside the city to a service address outside the city shall be
required to make the required higher deposit. Customers moving from a service address outside the city to a
service address inside the city shall be reimbursed the difference in the required deposit, provided that they have
a payment history in good standing (as defined by the collections office) for the previous six (6) months.
(c) All customers will be required to pay a connection fee as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this
code in addition to the required meter deposit before service is provided. Any meter which is turned on prior to
the payment of the meter deposit and connection fee is subject to being removed, and the user will be subject to
the additional fees imposed by section 13.03.058 of this article and the fees provided for in the fee schedule
found in appendix A of this code.
(d) Customers moving into a service address inside the city who have left an outstanding utility bill will be
required to make a meter deposit as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code along with paying
the previous balance prior to connection of the service. Customers moving into a service address outside the city
who have left an outstanding utility bill will be required to make a meter deposit as set forth in the fee schedule
in appendix A of this code along with paying the previous balance prior to connection of the service.
(e) No one may assume responsibility for the payment of water, sewer or garbage charges owed by any
individual to the city unless the person assuming responsibility first pays all past-due charges owing of that
individual.
(2004 Code, sec. 13.02.005)
Sec. 13.03.052 Water rates inside city
The monthly water rates or charges for services furnished by the waterworks system to a customer within the
city shall be as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code. (2004 Code, sec. 13.02.006)
Sec. 13.03.053 Water rates outside city
The monthly rates or charges for service furnished by the waterworks system to a consumer outside the city shall
be as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code. (2004 Code, sec. 13.02.007)
Sec. 13.03.054 Multiple units receiving water through one meter
Where more than one (1) dwelling unit, business or other structure is at the present time receiving water through
one meter, a monthly minimum for water, sewer and trash shall be charged for each dwelling, unit, duplex or
business serviced by that meter. The only exception to this multiple-minimum requirement is when two
businesses or a business and a residence share one (1) structure and the ingress and egress for both occupancies
is the same; the structure will be billed for commercial use only of the services provided by the city. (2004 Code,
sec. 13.02.008)
Sec. 13.03.055 Sewer rates inside city
The charge for sanitary sewer service shall be determined by the water consumption. For all users except
residential users, the monthly sewer charge shall be based on the monthly water usage billed in the same month.
For each residential user, the monthly sewer charge for each month from April through the following December
shall be the same and shall be based on the average monthly water usage metered in the preceding months of
January, February and March. The monthly sewer rates shall be as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of
this code. (2004 Code, sec. 13.02.009)
Sec. 13.03.056 Sewer rates outside city
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 252/362
The charge for sanitary sewer service shall be determined by the water consumption. For all users, except
residential users, the monthly sewer charge shall be based on the monthly water usage billed in the same month.
For each residential user, the monthly sewer charge for each month from April through the following December
shall be the same and shall be based on the average monthly water usage metered in the preceding months of
January, February and March. The monthly sewer rates shall be as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of
this code. (2004 Code, sec. 13.02.010)
Sec. 13.03.057 Delinquent accounts
(a) Such rates and charges hereby fixed and prescribed shall be paid monthly by the users of the waterworks
and the sanitary sewer system to the city manager and shall carry a due date of fifteen (15) days after the billing
date. Thereafter it shall be considered delinquent.
(b) If such bill has not been paid by the twenty-first day after the billing date, a contact shall be made by first
class mail or by handing a notice on the front door of the delinquent address. The method of contact shall be
determined by the city manager. The contact shall notify the delinquent utility customer that the account is
delinquent, the amount due to reinstate the account in good standing (including a contact fee) and a date on
which the service will be discontinued.
(c) The contact fee shall be assessed effective on the twenty-first day after the billing date. The contact fee
shall be as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code.
(d) If an account is delinquent three (3) times within any six-month period, a new meter deposit shall be
required equal to the highest three (3) months' bills during the six-month period in which they were delinquent.
The increased deposit shall be subject to all the rules governing any other meter deposit.
(2004 Code, sec. 13.02.011)
Sec. 13.03.058 Resumption of service after disconnection
Such service may be resumed upon payment of the balance due, but there shall be charged and collected a
reconnection charge as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code. If the party turns the water back
on without paying the bill and the meter has been locked or removed, the charge will be as set forth in the fee
schedule in appendix A of this code for a reconnection of service, which charge shall be collected before
reconnection of service is made, and such person shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1.01.009.
(2004 Code, sec. 13.02.012)
Sec. 13.03.059 Bulk water rates for sales from dock at water plant
(a) Charges for water picked up at the dock at the water plant shall be as set forth in the fee schedule in
appendix A of this code.
(b) Water plant personnel will lock and unlock the dispenser valves. Drivers will be responsible for loading
their own water.
(c) Industries and/or businesses who pick up on a regular basis may open an account at city hall and be billed
on a monthly basis for water received. All other individuals and/or businesses must pay by check or money
order, payable to the city, at the time of pickup.
(2004 Code, sec. 13.02.013)
Sec. 13.03.060 Transfer of service
Any residential or commercial customer who wishes to relocate his residence or business from an existing
account to another address within the system that is already prepared for delivery of service shall pay a transfer
fee as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code for each such transfer. This fee may be paid prior
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 253/362
to the relocation, or be billed. Failure to pay the transfer fee shall be considered the same as failure to pay for
water used. (2004 Code, sec. 13.02.015)
Sec. 13.03.061 Meter verification and accuracy test
(a) No charge will be made for an inspection on meter reading verifications if the city manager verifies a gross
discrepancy or a water customer requests not more than one (1) inspection during any six-month period. When a
meter verification inspection finds no discrepancies and it is the customer's second or more inspection in a sixmonth
period, the customer will be charged as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code.
(b) A fee as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code will be charged to the water customer for
each accuracy test performed on a meter providing the test does not result in a finding that the meter
overregistered in excess of two percent (2%). Any test resulting in a finding that the meter overregistered in
excess of two percent will result in the following actions:
(1) An adjustment will be made to the customer's utility bill for that month according to an
estimated amount of normal water usage for the same period in previous years; and
(2) The meter found registering in excess of two percent will be replaced.
(c) All water meters found to be registering within an accuracy level of two percent (2%) plus or minus will
be considered accurate.
(d) Meter accuracy verifications will be performed as three separate tests using ten (10) gallons, twenty (20)
gallons and fifty (50) gallons intervals.
(2004 Code, sec. 13.02.016)
ARTICLE 13.04 INDUSTRIAL WASTE*
Sec. 13.04.001 Definitions
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them:
Approving authority. The water and sewer superintendent (or other official designated by the city council) of the
city, or his duly authorized deputy, agent or representative.
BOD. The quantity of oxygen, expressed in parts per million by weight, utilized in the biochemical oxidation of
organic matter under standard laboratory conditions for five (5) days at a temperature of twenty (20) degrees
centigrade. The laboratory determinations shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard
Methods.
Building drain. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from
soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning three (3) feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
Building sewer. The extension from the building drain to the sewer or other place of disposal.
City. The city or any authorized person acting in its behalf.
Contractual agreement. The agreed charges which are made on those persons discharging industrial wastes
which in the opinion of the approving authority require special consideration.
Domestic sewage. Waterborne wastes normally discharging into the sanitary conveniences of dwellings
(including apartment houses and hotels), office buildings, factories and institutions, free of stormwater, surface
water and industrial wastes.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 254/362
Garbage. Solid wastes and residue from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling,
storage and sale of food products and produce.
Industrial waste. Waterborne solid, liquid or gaseous wastes resulting from and discharged, permitted to flow or
escaping from any industrial, manufacturing or food processing operation or process or from the development of
any natural resource, or any mixture of these with water or domestic sewage as distinct from normal domestic
sewage.
Natural outlet. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater.
Normal. Normal sewage for the city in which the average concentration of suspended materials and five-day
BOD is established at two hundred fifty (250) parts per million each, by weight.
Parts per million. A weight-to-weight ratio; the parts-per-million value multiplied by the factor eight and three
hundred forty-five one-thousandths (8.345) shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water.
Person. As defined in section 1.01.004, including agents, servants or employees.
pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration expressed in moles per liter. It
shall be determined by one of the procedures outlined in Standard Methods.
Properly shredded garbage. The waste from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that has been
shredded to such degree that all particles shall be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in
public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
Public sewer. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties shall have equal rights and interest, controlled
by public authority.
Sanitary sewer. A sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a combination of both, and into which
stormwaters, surface waters and groundwaters or unpolluted industrial wastes are not intentionally passed.
Sewage. A combination of the water-carried waste from residences, business buildings, institutions and
industrial establishments, together with such groundwater, surface water and stormwater as may be present.
Sewage service charge. The charge made on all users of the public sewer system whose wastes do not exceed in
strength the concentration values established as representative of normal sewage.
Sewage treatment plant. Any city-owned facility, devices and structures used for receiving and treating sewage
from the city sanitary sewer system.
Sewage works. All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage and industrial wastes, and
would include sewerage, as well as the sewage treatment facilities.
Sewer. A pipe or conduit for carrying sanitary sewage.
Sewer system. The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection, transportation and pumping of sewage
and industrial wastes.
Standard Methods. The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the latest edition at the time of
analysis of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, as prepared, approved and
published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the
Water Environment Federation.
Storm sewer or storm drain. A sewer which carries stormwaters and surface waters and drainage but excludes
sewage and polluted industrial wastes.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 255/362
Stormwater runoff. That portion of the rainfall that is drained into the sewers.
Surcharge. The charge in addition to the charges agreed upon in the contractual agreement which is made on
those persons whose waste loadings exceed the agreed maximum loadings in the contractual agreement.
Suspended solids. Solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids,
and which are removable by a laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of suspended solids shall
be made in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods.
Unpolluted water or waste. Water or waste containing none of the following: emulsified grease or oil; acids or
alkalis, phenols or other substances imparting taste and odor in receiving water; toxic or poisonous substances in
suspension, colloidal state or solution; and noxious or otherwise obnoxious odorous gases. It shall contain not
more than ten (10) parts per million each of suspended solids and BOD. The color shall not exceed fifty (50)
parts per million.
Watercourse. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.
(2004 Code, sec. 13.03.001)
Sec. 13.04.002 Admission into public sewers
(a) Approval required. Review and acceptance of the approving authority shall be obtained prior to the
discharge into the public sewers of any wastes and waters having:
(1) A five-day twenty-degrees centigrade biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) greater than two
hundred fifty (250) ppm average per day, but not to exceed three hundred (300) ppm per day.
(2) Suspended solids containing greater than two hundred fifty (250) ppm.
(b) Pretreatment. Where required, in the opinion of the approving authority, to modify or eliminate wastes that
are harmful to the structures, processes or operation of the sewage disposal works, the person shall provide, at
his expense, such preliminary treatment or processing facilities as may be determined necessary to render his
wastes acceptable for admission to the public sewers.
(c) Grease, oil and sand interceptors. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided for the proper
handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand and other
harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwellings.
All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the approving authority and shall be located as to be
readily and easily accessible for easy cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of
impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of
substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in place,
shall be gastight and watertight. Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the
owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times.
(d) Submission of information. Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating to proposed
preliminary treatment or processing facilities shall be submitted for approval of the approving authority prior to
the start of their construction, if the effluent from such facilities is to be discharged into the public sewers.
(2004 Code, sec. 13.03.002)
Sec. 13.04.003 Prohibited discharges
(a) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface
drainage, downspouts, yard drains, yard fountains and ponds or lawn sprays into any sanitary sewer. Stormwater
and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm
sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the approving authority. Unpolluted process water may be discharged
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 256/362
upon prior written approval of the approving authority to a storm sewer or natural outlet or into the sanitary
sewer system by an indirect connection whereby such discharge is cooled, if required, and flows into the sanitary
sewer at a rate not in excess of three (3) gallons per minute, provided the waste does not contain materials or
substances in suspension or solution in violation of the limits prescribed by this article. In cases where, in the
opinion of the approving authority, the character of the sewage from any manufacturer or industrial plant
building or other premises is such that it will damage the system or cannot be treated satisfactorily in the system,
the approving authority shall have the right to require such user to dispose of such waste otherwise and prevent it
from entering the system.
(b) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged either directly or indirectly any of the following
described substances, materials, waters or wastes:
(1) Any liquid having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (65
degrees centigrade).
(2) Any water or waste which contains wax, grease or oil, plastic or other substance that will
solidify or become discernibly viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32) degrees and one
hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit.
(3) Any solids, liquids, or gases which by themselves or by interaction with other substances may
cause fire or explosion hazards, or in any other way be injurious to persons, property or the operator
of the sewage disposal works.
(4) Any solids, slurries or viscous substances of such character as to be capable of causing
obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage
works, such as ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics,
wood, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, lime slurry, lime residues, slops,
chemical residues, paint residues, or bulk solids.
(5) Any garbage that has not been properly comminuted or shredded. If properly comminuted or
shredded, then it may be accepted under provisions established in section 13.04.002.
(6) Any noxious or malodorous substance which, either singly or by interaction with other
substances, is capable of causing objectionable odors, or hazard to life; or forms solids in
concentrations exceeding limits established in this section; or creates any other condition deleterious
to structures or treatment processes; or requires unusual provisions, alteration, or expense to handle
such materials.
(7) Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 10.5 or having any corrosive
property capable of causing damage or hazards to structures, equipment, or personnel of the sewage
disposal works.
(8) Any wastes or waters containing suspended or dissolved solids of such character and quantity
that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant or
in the public sewage works.
(9) Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance such as plating or heat treating
wastes in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, to constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, or to create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment
plant.
(10) Substances measured by “grab sample” in excess of the maximum concentrations as shown
below (stated in milligrams per liter):
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 257/362
Antimony 0.01
Arsenic 0.3
Barium 4.0
Beryllium 0.01
Cadmium 0.2
Chromium (total) 5.0
Cobalt 1.0
Copper 2.0
Iron 0.3
Lead 1.5
Manganese 3.0
Mercury 0.01
Nickel 3.0
Phenols 0.005
Selenium 3.0
Silver 0.2
Tin 1.0
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 258/362
Uranyl ion 5.0
Zinc 6.0
(11) Any radioactive wastes greater than allowable releases as specified by current United States
Bureau of Standards handbooks dealing with the handling and release of radioactivity.
(c) Except in quantities or concentrations or with provisions as stipulated herein, it shall be unlawful for any
person to discharge waters or wastes to the sanitary sewer containing:
(1) Free or emulsified oil and grease exceeding on analysis an average of one hundred (100) parts
per million (833 pounds per million gallons) of either or both or combinations of free or emulsified
oil and grease, if, in the opinion of the approving authority, it appears probable that such wastes:
(A) Can deposit grease or oil in the sewer lines in such manner to clog the sewers;
(B) Can overload skimming and grease-handling equipment;
(C) Are not amenable to bacterial action and will therefore pass to the receiving waters
without being affected by normal sewage treatment processes; or
(D) Can have deleterious effects on the treatment process due to the excessive quantities.
(2) Any radioactive wastes greater than the allowable releases as specified by current United States
Bureau of Standards handbooks dealing with the handling and release of radioactivity.
(3) Cyanides or cyanogen compounds capable of liberating hydrocyanic gas on acidification in
excess of one-half (0.5) part per million by weight as CN in the wastes from any outlet into the public
sewers.
(4) Materials which exert or cause:
(A) Unusual concentrations of solids or composition, as, for example, in total suspended
solids of inert nature (such as fuller's earth) and/or in total dissolved solids (such as sodium
chloride or sodium sulfate);
(B) Excessive discoloration;
(C) Unusual biochemical oxygen demand or an immediate oxygen demand;
(D) High hydrogen sulfide content; or
(E) Unusual flow and concentration;
shall be pretreated to a concentration acceptable to the city, if such wastes can cause
damage to collection facilities, impair the process, incur treatment cost exceeding those of
normal sewage, or render the water unfit for stream disposal or industrial use. Where
discharges of such wastes to the sanitary sewer are not properly pretreated or otherwise
corrected, the approving authority may (i) reject the wastes or terminate the service of
water and/or sanitary sewer, (ii) require control of the quantities and rates of discharge of
such wastes, or (iii) require payment of surcharges for excessive cost for treatment
provided such wastes are amenable to treatment by normal sewage plant facilities
operated by the city.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 259/362
(2004 Code, sec. 13.03.003)
Sec. 13.04.004 Control of admissible wastes
(a) Permit. Any person desiring to deposit or discharge any industrial waste mixture into the sewers or sewer
works of the city, or any sewer connected therewith, or who was so doing, shall make application to the
approving authority for a permit therefor upon application forms to be obtained from the approving authority.
(b) Control chambers. Any person discharging or desiring to discharge an industrial waste mixture into the
sewers or sewer works of the city, or any sewer connected therewith, shall provide and maintain in a suitable
accessible position on his premises, or such premises occupied by him, an inspection chamber or manhole near
the outlet of each sewer, drain, pipe, channel, or connection which communicates with any sewer or sewer works
of the city or any sewer connected therewith. Each such manhole or inspection chamber shall be of such design
and construction which will prevent infiltration by groundwaters and surface waters or introduction of slugs of
solids, by installation of screens with maximum openings of one inch, but of such sufficient fineness to prevent
the entrance of objectionable slugs of solids to the sanitary sewage system, and shall be so maintained by
persons discharging wastes so that any authorized representative or employee of the city may readily and safely
measure the volume and obtain samples of the flow at all times. Plans for the construction of control manholes
or inspection chambers, including such flow-measuring devices as may or may not be required, shall be
approved by the approving authority prior to the beginning of construction.
(c) Measurement of flow. The water consumption during the previous month, as determined from the meter
records of the water department, shall be the valid basis for computing the sewage flow, unless actual sewage
flow is measured by a recording meter of a type approved by the approving authority. The persons shall install
and maintain such device in proper condition to accurately measure such flow. Upon failure to do so, the water
consumption shall be the basis for charges. When water is contained in a product or is evaporated or is
discharged as unpolluted waste in an uncontaminated condition to surface drainage, an application may be made
for a reduction in the volume of waste discharged to the public sewer, provided supporting data satisfactory to
the approving authority is furnished. This data shall include a flow diagram, destination of water supply and/or
waste, supported by submetering data installed on such process piping at the expense of the person.
(d) Sampling of wastes. Sampling of the effluent of waste discharges may be accomplished manually or by the
use of mechanical equipment to obtain a composite sample which would be representative of the total effluent.
Samples shall be taken at intervals to be established by the contractual agreement between the person and the
approving authority, or at such intervals as determined by the approving authority as necessary to maintain a
control over the discharges from the establishment. The method used in the examination of all bacteriological
wastes to determine suspended solids, BOD and prohibited wastes shall be those set forth in section 13.04.002.
(2004 Code, sec. 13.03.004)
Sec. 13.04.005 Damaging or tampering with sewage works
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, uncover, deface or tamper
with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part of the municipal sewage works. Any person
violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. (2004 Code, sec.
13.03.005)
Sec. 13.04.006 Contractual agreements; imposition of surcharge
Persons discharging industrial wastes which in the opinion of the approving authority require special
consideration will be required to enter into a contractual agreement with the city, which will include the
following:
(1) Necessary provisions for pretreatment.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 260/362
(2) Maximum loads for treatment capacity:
(A) Hydraulic: million gallons/day.
(B) BOD: lbs./day.
(C) Suspended solids: lbs./day.
(D) Grease: 100 ppm (maximum permitted).
(3) Charges based on the linearly proportional cost of waste treatment facilities utilized to treat the
industrial wastes of each industry.
(4) Charges based on the linearly proportional cost of the maintenance and operating cost that is
attributed to the industrial wastes treated for each industry. In the event the agreed-upon maximum
loads are exceeded, a surcharge will be applied to the loads in excess of the loads agreed upon as
follows: Under contractual agreements, the surcharge will be applied to loads in excess of the loads
agreed upon as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code.
(2004 Code, sec. 13.03.006)
Sec. 13.04.007 Billing of surcharge
Industrial waste surcharges provided for in this article shall be included as a separate item on the regular bill for
water and sewer charges and shall be paid monthly in accordance with the existing practices. Surcharges shall be
paid at the same time that the water, sewer and sanitation charges of the person become due, and payment for
water, sewer and sanitation services shall not be accepted without payment also of sewer service charges and
surcharges. (2004 Code, sec. 13.03.007)
Sec. 13.04.008 Failure to pay bills
Failure to pay monthly bills for water and/or sanitary sewer services when due, or failure to pay the established
sewer charge for industrial waste when due, or repeated discharge of prohibited waste to the sanitary sewer, shall
be sufficient cause to disconnect any and all services to the water and/or sanitary sewer mains of the city, and the
same penalties and charges now or hereafter provided for by the ordinances of the city for failure to pay the bill
for water service when due shall be applicable in like manner in case of failure to pay the established surcharge
for industrial waste discharged to the sanitary sewer mains as established in section 13.04.006. (2004 Code, sec.
13.03.008)
Sec. 13.04.009 Right of entry; notice of violation; disconnection of service
The approving authority, bearing credentials and identification, shall be permitted to gain access to such
properties as may be necessary for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in
accordance with provisions of these regulations. Any person found to be violating any provision of this article
shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time
limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
shall be guilty of violation of the service contract and shall be summarily disconnected from the sanitary sewer
and/or water service. Such disconnection and reconnection shall be at the total expense of the customer. Where
acids and chemicals damaging to sewer lines or treatment processes are released to the sewer causing rapid
deterioration of these structures or interfering with proper treatment of sewage, the approving authority is
authorized to immediately terminate services by such measures as are necessary to protect the facilities. (2004
Code, sec. 13.03.009)
Sec. 13.04.010 Penalty; liability for loss or damage
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 261/362
(a) If any person shall violate any of the provisions of this article, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction in the municipal court, shall be punished by a fine as provided in section 1.01.009 of this code.
Each day of such violation shall be deemed a separate offense.
(b) Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense,
loss or damage occasioned by the city by reason of such violation.
(2004 Code, sec. 13.03.010)
Sec. 13.04.011 Reward for arrest and conviction of violators
The city hereby offers a reward of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for information leading to the arrest and
conviction of any person(s) found guilty of disposing unauthorized liquid waste into the city's sanitary sewer
system. This reward is a standing offer and shall be paid out of the water and sewer fund account of the city.
(2004 Code, sec. 13.03.011)
ARTICLE 13.05 DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLAN*
Sec. 13.05.001 Policy, purpose and intent
(a) In order to conserve the available water supply and protect the integrity of water supply facilities, with
particular regard for domestic water use, sanitation, and fire protection, and to protect and preserve public
health, welfare, and safety and minimize the adverse impacts of water supply shortage or other water supply
emergency conditions, the city hereby adopts the following regulations and restrictions on the delivery and
consumption of water.
(b) Water uses regulated or prohibited under this drought contingency plan (the plan) are considered to be
non-essential and continuation of such uses during times of water shortage or other emergency water supply
condition are deemed to constitute a waste of water which subjects the offender(s) to penalties as defined in
section 13.05.010 of this plan.
Sec. 13.05.002 Public education
The city will periodically provide the public with information about the plan, including information about the
conditions under which each stage of the plan is to be initiated or terminated and the drought response measures
to be implemented in each stage. This information will be provided by publication in the local paper, radio and
televised announcements, or mailed notification to customers, as appropriate to the situation.
Sec. 13.05.003 Coordination with regional water planning groups
The service area of the city is located within the Region B Regional Water Planning Area, and the city has
provided a copy of this plan to the Region B Regional Water Planning Group.
Sec. 13.05.004 Implementation
The mayor, or his/her designee, is hereby authorized and directed to implement the applicable provisions of this
plan upon determination that such implementation is necessary to protect public health, safety, and welfare. The
mayor, or his/her designee, shall have the authority to initiate or terminate drought or other water supply
emergency response measures as described in this plan.
Sec. 13.05.005 Applicability
The provisions of this plan shall apply to all persons, customers, and property utilizing water provided by the
city. The terms “person” and “customer” as used in the plan include individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, and all other legal entities.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 262/362
Sec. 13.05.006 Definitions
For the purposes of this plan, the following definitions shall apply:
Aesthetic water use. Water use for ornamental or decorative purposes such as fountains, reflecting pools, and
water gardens.
Commercial and institutional water use. Water use which is integral to the operations of commercial and nonprofit
establishments and governmental entities such as retail establishments, hotels and motels, restaurants, and
office buildings.
Conservation. Those practices, techniques, and technologies that reduce the consumption of water, reduce the
loss or waste of water, improve the efficiency in the use of water, or increase the recycling and reuse of water so
that a supply is conserved and made available for future or alternative uses.
Customer. Any person, company, or organization using water supplied or distributed by the city.
Domestic water use. Water use for personal needs or for household or sanitary purposes such as drinking,
bathing, heating, cooking, sanitation, or for cleaning a residence, business, industry or institution.
Drought contingency plan. A strategy or combination of strategies for temporary supply management and
demand management responses to temporary or potentially recurring water supply shortages and other water
supply emergencies. A drought contingency plan may be a separate document identified as such or may be
contained within another water management document.
Industrial water use. The use of water in processes designed to convert materials of lower value into forms
having greater usability and value.
Landscape irrigation use. Water used for the irrigation and maintenance of landscaped areas, whether publicly
or privately owned, including residential and commercial lawns, gardens, golf courses, parks, rights-of-way and
medians.
Municipal use. The use of potable water within or outside a municipality and its environs whether supplied by a
person, privately-owned utility, political subdivision or other entity as well as the use of sewage effluent for
certain purposes including the use of treated water for domestic purposes, fighting fires, sprinkling streets,
flushing sewers and drains, watering parks and parkways and recreational purposes, including public and private
swimming pools, the use of potable water in industrial and commercial enterprises supplied by a municipal
distribution system without special construction to meet its demands and for the watering of lawns and family
gardens.
Non-essential water use. Water uses that are not essential, nor required for the protection of public and welfare,
including:
(1) Irrigation of landscaped areas, including parks, athletic fields and golf courses;
(2) Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle;
(3) Use of water to wash down any sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts, or
other hard-surfaced areas;
(4) Use of water to wash down buildings or structures for purposes other than immediate fire
protection;
(5) Flushing gutters or permitting water to run or accumulate in any gutter or street;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 263/362
(6) Use of water to fill, refill, or add to any indoor or outdoor swimming pools or Jacuzzi-type
pools;
(7) Use of water in a fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes except where necessary to
support aquatic life;
(8) Failure to repair a controllable leak(s) within a reasonable period after having been given notice
directing the repair of such leak(s); and
(9) Use of water from hydrants for construction purposes or any other purposes other than
firefighting and flushing of line to maintain a potable water supply.
Public water provider. An individual or entity that supplies water to the public for human consumption.
Retail water supplier. An individual or entity that for compensation supplies water to the public for human
consumption. The term does not include an individual or entity that supplies water to itself or its employees or
tenants as an incident of that employee service or tenancy when that water is not resold to or used by others.
Wholesale public water supplier. An individual or entity that for compensation supplies water to another for
resale to the public for human consumption. The term does not include an individual or entity that supplies water
to itself or its employees or tenants as an incident of that employee service or tenancy when that water is not
resold to or used by others.
Sec. 13.05.007 Triggering criteria for initiation and termination of drought response stages
(a) The city council shall monitor water supply and/or demand conditions and shall determine when
conditions warrant initiation or termination of each stage of the plan. The initiation or termination of a stage of
the plan will be implemented through regular or special called sessions of the council. Public notification of the
initiation or termination of drought response stages shall be by means of publication in the local paper, radio and
televised announcements, or mailed notifications, as appropriate to the situation.
(b) The triggering criteria described below are based on the ability of the city to deliver treated water to the
water customers. Other than cases of catastrophic failure or contamination of part or all of the system, the
limiting factor is the potable water capacity of the city's wholesale water purchase agreement with the City of
Wichita Falls and/or restrictions applied by the City of Wichita Falls on its water customers.
(1) Stage 1: Drought watch conditions.
(A) Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements
and water use restrictions in section 13.05.008 for stage 1 of this plan when:
(i) The City of Wichita Falls declares a stage 1 drought watch; or
(ii) When demand on the City of Iowa Park Public Water Supply exceeds the design for
three (3) consecutive days or exceeds ninety percent (90%) of its design; or
(iii) The Iowa Park water supply system is unable to deliver water due to a mechanical
failure or damage to major water system components which require more than seventytwo
(72) hours to repair when dry weather conditions exist and continued dry weather is
expected over the course of the repair period; and/or
(iv) When required to comply with the water restrictions implemented by the City of
Wichita Falls.
(B) Requirements for termination. Stage 1 of the plan may be rescinded when stage 1
conditions no longer exist and no sooner than sixty (60) days after the implementation of stage
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 264/362
1 restrictions.
(2) Stage 2: Drought warning conditions.
(A) Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements
and water use restrictions in section 13.05.008 for stage 2 of this plan when:
(i) The City of Wichita Falls declares a stage 2 drought warning; or
(ii) When demand on the City of Iowa Park Public Water Supply exceeds the design for
three (3) consecutive days or exceeds ninety percent (90%) of its design; or
(iii) The Iowa Park water supply system is unable to deliver water due to a mechanical
failure or damage to major water system components which require more than forty-eight
(48) hours to repair when dry weather conditions exist and continued dry weather is
expected over the course of the repair period; and/or
(iv) When required to comply with the water restrictions implemented by the City of
Wichita Falls.
(B) Requirements for termination. Stage 2 of the plan may be rescinded when stage 2
conditions no longer exist and no sooner than sixty (60) days after the initiation of stage 2
restrictions. Upon termination of stage 2, stage 1 becomes operative if those conditions exist.
(3) Stage 3: Drought emergency conditions.
(A) Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements
and water use restrictions in section 13.05.008 for stage 3 of this plan when:
(i) The City of Wichita Falls declares a stage 3 drought emergency;
(ii) When demand on the City of Iowa Park Public Water Supply exceeds the design for
four (4) consecutive weeks or exceeds ninety percent (90%) of its design; or
(iii) The Iowa Park water supply system is unable to deliver water due to a mechanical
failure or damage to major water system components which require more than twentyfour
(24) hours to repair when dry weather conditions exist and continued dry weather is
expected over the course of the repair period; and/or
(iv) When required to comply with the water restrictions implemented by the City of
Wichita Falls.
(B) Requirements for termination. Stage 3 of the plan may be rescinded when stage 3
conditions no longer exist and no sooner than sixty (60) days after the initiation of stage 3
restrictions. Upon termination of stage 3, stage 2 becomes operative if those conditions exist.
(4) Stage 4: Drought disaster conditions.
(A) Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements
and water use restrictions in section 13.05.008 for stage 4 of this plan when:
(i) The City of Wichita Falls declares a stage 4 drought disaster;
(ii) When demand on the City of Iowa Park Public Water Supply exceeds one hundred
percent (100%) of its design; or
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 265/362
(iii) The Iowa Park water supply system is unable to deliver water due to a mechanical
failure or damage to major water system components which require more than twelve (12)
hours to repair when dry weather conditions exist and continued dry weather is expected
over the course of the repair period; and/or
(iv) When required to comply with the water restrictions implemented by the City of
Wichita Falls.
(B) Requirements for termination. Stage 4 of the plan may be rescinded when stage 4
conditions no longer exist and no sooner than sixty (60) days after the initiation of stage 4
restrictions. Upon termination of stage 4, stage 3 becomes operative if those conditions exist.
(5) Stage 5: Drought catastrophe conditions.
(A) Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements
and water use restrictions in section 13.05.008 for stage 5 of this plan when:
(i) The City of Wichita Falls declares a stage 5 drought catastrophe; or
(ii) When required to comply with the water restrictions implemented by the City of
Wichita Falls.
(B) Requirements for termination. Stage 5 of the plan may be rescinded when stage 4
conditions no longer exist and no sooner than sixty (60) days after the initiation of stage 5
restrictions. Upon termination of stage 5, stage 4 becomes operative if those conditions exist.
Sec. 13.05.008 Water use restrictions
(a) Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or other entity, at any time of the year, to:
(1) Operate outside spray-type irrigation on any day of the week between 10:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
Landscape watering is permitted any time with a handheld hose that is equipped with a positive shutoff
nozzle, soaker hose, bucket, watering can, bubbler or drip irrigation system.
(2) Wash any motor vehicle at any location other than a commercial carwash, car dealership, detail
shop or automotive shop unless the hose is equipped with a positive shut-off nozzle. Such nozzle
shall stop the flow of water through the hose when released by the operator.
(3) Install new irrigation systems unless they are designed by a licensed professional recognized by
the state to design such systems and these systems shall be designed so as to be water conserving.
Each new system shall utilize zonal irrigation, drip irrigation, subsurface irrigation and/or water
conserving features as appropriate. When application for the irrigation permit is made by anyone
other than a licensed irrigation specialist or landscape architect, the irrigation system designed by a
licensed professional recognized by the state to design such systems plans shall be made available to
the city building officials.
(4) Fail to repair a controllable leak, including but not limited to broken sprinkler head, a broken
pipe or a leaking valve.
(b) Restrictions during drought response stages. The mayor, or his/her designee, shall monitor water supply
and/or demand conditions and, in accordance with the triggering criteria set forth in section 13.05.007 of this
plan, shall determine when a watch, warning, emergency, disaster or catastrophe condition exists and shall
implement the following actions by providing notice in accordance with the provisions of section 13.05.007.
(1) Stage 1 - Drought watch conditions.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 266/362
(A) Goal. Achieve a five percent (5%) reduction in the daily water demand.
(B) Water use restrictions. Under the threat of penalty for violation, the following water use
restrictions shall apply to all water customers:
(i) All potable water customers of the city are hereby limited three (3) days per week
for the irrigation of any and all landscaped areas as follows:
a. Water customers south of Loop 370/Old Iowa Park Highway are allowed to
irrigate landscaped areas on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays only;
b. Water customers north of Loop 370/Old Iowa Park Highway but south of U.S.
Highway 287 North are allowed to irrigate landscaped areas on Tuesdays, Thursdays
and Saturdays only; and
c. Water customers north of U.S. Highway 287 North are allowed to irrigate
landscaped areas on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays only.
(ii) All sidewalk, driveway and/or parking lot washings are prohibited except to
alleviate immediate health or fire hazards.
(iii) The addition of potable water for architectural features is restricted to Tuesdays and
Fridays only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m.
(iv) The filling, refilling or adding of potable water to privately owned pools, spas
and/or Jacuzzis are limited to the hours of 6:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight on Mondays,
Wednesdays and Sundays only.
(v) The parks department will reduce their use of potable water for irrigation purposes
to no more than two (2) times per week.
(vi) Any water use restrictions imposed by the City of Wichita Falls upon its wholesale
water customers.
(2) Stage 2 - Drought warning conditions.
(A) Goal. Achieve a fifteen percent (15%) reduction in the daily water demand.
(B) Water use restriction. All requirements of stage 1 shall remain in effect during stage 2.
Under threat of penalty for violation, the following water use restrictions shall also apply to all
water customers:
(i) All potable water customers of the city are hereby limited one (1) day per week for
the irrigation of any and all landscaped areas as follows:
a. Water customers south of Loop 370/Old Iowa Park Highway are allowed to
irrigate landscaped areas on Mondays only;
b. Water customers north of Loop 370/Old Iowa Park Highway but south of U.S.
Highway 287 North are allowed to irrigate landscaped areas on Wednesdays only;
c. Water customers north of U.S. Highway 287 North are allowed to irrigate
landscaped areas on Fridays only.
(ii) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or other entity to run an
outdoor spray-type irrigation system on any day of the week during the hours of 10:00
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 267/362
a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Landscape watering utilizing a handheld hose with an automatic shutoff,
a bucket or a watering can is permitted any time.
(iii) All motor vehicle washing, including watercraft and motorcycles, is prohibited at
all times except for commercial carwashes and service station facilities.
(iv) All sidewalk, driveway and/or parking lot washings are prohibited except to
alleviate immediate health or fire hazards.
(v) The parks department will reduce their use of potable water for irrigation purposes
to no more than one (1) time per week.
(vi) During stage 2 drought conditions, the city council may institute an excess fee for
all water used in excess of 15,000 gallons per month per residence or business that are not
designated as a water-based business or that are not under a wholesale water contract with
the city. The council upon implementation of stage 2 restrictions will determine the fee
per thousand gallons of water.
(vii) Any water use restrictions imposed by the City of Wichita Falls upon its wholesale
water customers.
(3) Stage 3 - Drought emergency conditions.
(A) Goal. Achieve a thirty-five percent (35%) reduction in the daily water demand.
(B) Water use restrictions. All requirements of stage 2 shall remain in effect during stage 3.
Under the threat of penalty of violation, the following water use restrictions apply to all water
customers:
(i) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or other entity to operate an
automated sprinkler irrigation system on their assigned watering day of the week except
during the hours of 2:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m.
(ii) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or other entity to operate a
hose-end sprinkler system, including a hand-held hose, a soaker hose or a drip irrigation
system, on their assigned watering day of the week except during the hours of 7:00 p.m. to
11:00 p.m.
(iii) The addition of potable water for architectural features is prohibited.
(iv) All motor vehicle washing, including watercraft, is prohibited at all times except
for commercial carwashes or service station facilities. All self-serve or full service
carwashes will be required to close the vehicle washing portion of their business on one
(1) day each week. The scheduled day of closure shall coincide with the day that said
business is authorized to irrigate landscaped areas.
(v) It shall be unlawful for a self-serve or full service carwash to wash and clean any of
its bays with potable water, except on Fridays.
(vi) It shall be unlawful for any car dealership to wash its inventory on any day other
than the day said business is authorized to irrigate landscaped areas.
(vii) It shall be unlawful to operate any water feature on any residential pool, including,
but not limited to, fountains, waterfalls, descents, arcs and slides. When repairing a pool,
said pool shall only be drained to a level necessary to effect the repair and no farther;
owners of pools that follow this restriction will be allowed to refill their pool after the
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 268/362
repair. Owners or operators of any public, commercial or residential pool are restricted
from draining the pool once it is closed for the season.
(viii) It shall be unlawful for any food establishment to thaw food with water; food
must be thawed by another method that is approved by the Wichita County Public Health
District. It is also unlawful for a food establishment to clean kitchen or food handling
areas with spray hoses; the cleaning of said kitchen or food handling areas shall be
accomplished by means of brooms and mops only.
(ix) During stage 3 drought conditions, the city council may institute an excess fee for
all water used in excess of 12,000 gallons and 15,000 gallons per month per residence or
business that are not designated as a water-based business or that are not under a
wholesale water contract with the city. The council upon implementation of stage 3
restrictions will determine the fee per thousand gallons of water,
(x) Any water use restrictions imposed by the City of Wichita Falls upon its wholesale
water customers.
(4) Stage 4 - Drought disaster conditions.
(A) Goal. Achieve a forty-five percent (45%) reduction in the daily water demand.
(B) Water use restrictions. All requirements of stage 3 shall remain in effect during stage 4.
Under threat of penalty of violation, the following water use restrictions shall also apply to all
water customers:
(i) The use of potable water for any outdoor use other than the need to eliminate an
immediate health or safety threat is strictly prohibited at any time.
(ii) Meters for irrigation only water systems to residences and businesses shall be either
locked or removed.
(iii) The use of potable water for agricultural purposes is prohibited.
(iv) Water service provided through fire hydrant meters for construction purposes are
hereby suspended and said meters will be removed.
(v) Use of the city's bulk water station is limited to residential and commercial accounts
that have no access to a private connection of a public water system. Water taken from the
bulk water station by these customers will be for essential use only and those found to be
in violation of this requirement will be prohibited from using the city's bulk water system.
(vi) During stage 4 drought conditions, the city council may institute an excess fee for
all water used in excess of 10,000 gallons, 12,000 gallons and 15,000 gallons per month
per residence or business that are not designated as a water-based business or that are not
under a wholesale water contract with the city. The council upon implementation of stage
4 restrictions will determine the fee per thousand gallons of water.
(vii) Any water use restrictions imposed by the City of Wichita Falls upon its wholesale
water customers.
(5) Stage 5 - Drought catastrophe conditions.
(A) Goal. Achieve a fifty-five percent (55%) reduction in the daily water demand.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 269/362
(B) Water use restrictions. All requirements of stage 4 shall remain in effect during stage 5.
Under threat of penalty of violation, the following water use restrictions shall also apply to all
water customers:
(i) All motor vehicle washing, including watercraft, is prohibited at all times except for
commercial carwashes or service station facilities. All self-serve or full service carwashes
will be required to close the vehicle washing portion of their business each Sunday and
Monday.
(ii) During stage 5 drought conditions, the city council may institute an excess fee for
all water used in excess of 8,000 gallons, 10,000 gallons, 12,000 gallons and 15,000
gallons per month per residence or business that are not designated as a water-based
business or that are not under a wholesale water contract with the city. The council upon
implementation of stage 5 restrictions will determine the fee per thousand gallons of
water.
(iii) Any water use restrictions imposed by the City of Wichita Falls upon its wholesale
water customers.
Sec. 13.05.009 Exemptions
The restrictions set forth in section 13.05.008 shall not apply to the following uses of water:
(1) To alleviate conditions threatening health, safety, or welfare of the public.
(2) For municipal operations of flushing water lines for public health purposes.
(3) For the suppression of fires.
(4) Any use of rain water, water obtained from a private well or reservoir for any purpose.
Sec. 13.05.010 Enforcement; violations; penalty
(a) No person shall allow the use of water from the city for residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural,
governmental or any other purpose in a manner contrary to any provision of this plan or in an amount in excess
of that permitted by the drought response stage in effect at the time pursuant to action taken by the city council,
in accordance with provisions of this plan.
(b) Any person who violates this plan is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a
fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). Each day that one or
more of the provisions of this plan is violated shall constitute a separate offense. If a person is convicted of three
or more distinct violations of this plan, the city manager shall, upon due notice to the customer, be authorized to
discontinue water serve to the premises where such violations occur. Services discontinued under such
circumstances shall be restored only upon payment of a reconnection charge, as set forth in the fee schedule in
appendix A of this code, and any other costs incurred by the city in discontinuing service. In addition, suitable
assurance must be given to the city manager that the same action shall not be repeated while this plan is in effect.
Compliance with this plan may also be sought through injunctive relief in the district court system.
(c) Any person, including a person classified as a water customer of the city, in apparent control of the
property where a violation occurs or originates shall be presumed to be the violator and proof that the violation
occurred on the person's property shall constitute a rebuttable presumption, that the person in apparent control of
the property committed the violation, but any such person shall have the right to show that he/she did not
commit the violation. Parents shall be presumed to be responsible for violations of their minor children; proof
that a violation, committed by a child, occurred on property with parent's control, shall constitute a rebuttable
presumption that the parent committed the violation, but any such parent may be excused if he/she proves that
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 270/362
they had previously directed the child not to use the water as it was used in the violation of this plan and that the
parent could not have reasonably known of the violation.
(d) Any employee of the city, police officer or other city employee designated by the city manager or his/her
designee may issue a citation to a person that he/she reasonably believes to be in violation of this plan. The
citation shall be prepared in duplicate and shall contain the name and address of the alleged violator, if known,
the offense charged and shall direct him/her to appear in municipal court on the date shown on the citation,
which date shall not be less than three (3) days nor more than fifteen (15) days from the date the citation was
issued. The alleged violator shall be served a copy of the citation. Service of the citation shall be complete upon
delivery of the citation to the alleged violator, to an agent or employee of the violator's immediate family or to a
resident of the violator's residence. The alleged violator shall appear in municipal court to enter a plea of guilty
or not guilty for the violation of this plan. If the alleged violator fails to appear in municipal court, a warrant for
his/her arrest may be issued. A summons to appear may be issued in lieu of an arrest warrant. These cases shall
be expedited and give preferential setting in municipal court before all other cases.
Sec. 13.05.011 Variances
(a) The city council will review hardship and special cases that cannot strictly comply with this article to
determine whether the case warrants a variance to stage 2, or a subsequent stage, of the plan.
(b) A variance may be granted only for reasons of economic hardship. In this section, economic hardship
means a threat to an individual's or business' primary source of income. inconvenience or the potential for
damage to an individual's or business' landscaping is not an economic hardship.
(c) Until the city council has acted on an application, the applicant must comply with all provisions of this
chapter.
(d) If the city council determines there is an economic hardship, the council shall authorize the
implementation of equitable water use restrictions by the applicant that further the purposes of the plan. The
special water use restrictions authorized by the council in each special or hardship case must be set forth on the
face of the variance. If the variance is granted, the customer must keep a copy of the variance in a location that is
accessible and visible to the public.
(e) A variance issued by the city council under stage 2 of the plan becomes invalid on implementation of a
subsequent stage of the plan. A variance expires under its own terms and conditions or when another stage of the
plan is in effect. A separate application for a variance must be submitted at each stage, unless a single variance is
granted with separate conditions applicable to separate stages.
(f) Any person, corporation or association that is issued a variance must provide proof of the variance on
demand by any peace officer or person authorized by the city to enforce this article. On conviction of a person,
corporation, or association of violating any provision of this article, the city council may revoke any variance
previously granted. The council shall notify the applicant of the proposed revocation five (5) working days
before taking the action, and an applicant must be given the opportunity to be heard by the council before it
takes action.
Sec. 13.05.012 Waiver of landscape irrigation restrictions for new lawns
A waiver of the landscape irrigation restrictions of section 13.05.008 may be granted for the irrigation of new
lawns whereby watering would be permitted to maintain adequate growth until the lawn grasses are established,
but not to exceed a thirty (30) day time period. This waiver will not be available when the city is under stage 4
and 5 drought response measures. Any person desiring such a waiver must make application to the city and pay
a non-refundable fee as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this code. The applicant must
agree to pay a water rate of fifteen dollars ($15.00) per thousand gallons for all consumption over twelve
thousand (12,000) gallons as registered by the water meter. In the event the city must implement stage 4 or stage
5 drought response measures or water restrictions imposed by the City of Wichita Falls, homeowners with
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 271/362
waivers and who have not completed their thirty-day watering cycle shall be refunded their permit fee pro-rated
on the number of days the permit was valid. Daily watering under this waiver is limited to the hours of 7:00 p.m.
until 10:00 a.m. Extensions to said waiver may be granted by variance only through the city council.
Sec. 13.05.013 Required language in wholesale water contracts
Every wholesale water contract entered into or renewed after the adoption of this plan, including any contract
extensions, will contain language notifying parties of the contract, that in a case of shortage of water resulting
from a drought, the water to be distributed shall be divided in accordance with the Texas Water Code section
11.039.
Sec. 13.05.014 Curtailment of supply to wholesale water customers
In the event of an extended shortage of water or the supply of water available to the city from its wholesale
water supplier is diminished over an extended period of time so that it becomes necessary to ration the water
sold to the residences and businesses of the city, the supply of water to the city's wholesale water customers shall
be reduced or diminished by a pro rata curtailment during each stage of the plan based on the wholesale
customer's contractual limits as provided in Texas Water Code section 11.039.
Sec. 13.05.015 Utilization of alternative water sources
At such time when there is a shortage in the supply of water available to the municipality, the city will utilize
those available alternative water sources that have prior approval from the Texas Commission on Environmental
Quality's executive director. The city maintains a wholesale water purchase agreement with the City of Wichita
Falls that allows the city to receive up to five million two hundred and five thousand gallons per day.
(Ordinance 1259 adopted 2/11/19)
ARTICLE 13.06 ON-SITE SEWAGE DISPOSAL*
Sec. 13.06.001 Generally
The city clearly understands the technical criteria, legal requirements, and administrative procedures and duties
associated with regulating on-site sewage facilities, [and] does adopt and will fully enforce chapter 366 of the
Texas Health and Safety Code and chapters 7 and 37 of the Texas Water Code, and associated rules referenced in
section 13.06.004 of this article. (2004 Code, sec. 13.05.001)
Sec. 13.06.002 Area of jurisdiction
(a) The rules adopted by this article shall apply to all the incorporated areas of the city.
(b) These rules shall apply to those incorporated cities or towns that have executed intergovernmental
contracts with the city.
(2004 Code, sec. 13.05.002)
Sec. 13.06.003 Compliance with state rules
Any permit issued for an on-site sewage facility within the jurisdictional area of the city must comply with the
rules adopted in section 13.06.004 of this article. (2004 Code, sec. 13.05.003)
Sec. 13.06.004 State rules adopted
The rules, title 30 Texas Administrative Code (TAC) chapter 285 and chapter 30, attached to Ordinance 997,
promulgated by the state commission on environmental quality for on-site sewage facilities, are hereby adopted,
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 272/362
and all officials and employees of the city having duties under said rules are authorized to perform such duties as
are required of them under said rules. (2004 Code, sec. 13.05.004)
Sec. 13.06.005 State rules incorporated by reference
The rules, 30 TAC chapter 30 and 285, and all future amendments and revisions thereto, are incorporated by
reference and are thus made a part of these rules. A copy of the current rules is on file in the city secretary's
office. (2004 Code, sec. 13.05.005)
Sec. 13.06.006 Local rules
The city, wishing to adopt more stringent rules for its on-site sewage facility ordinance, understands that the
more stringent conflicting local rule shall take precedence over the corresponding state commission on
environmental quality requirement. Listed below are the more stringent rules adopted by the city:
(1) A permit shall be required for all on-site sewage facilities, regardless of acreage.
(2) All existing on-site sewage facilities shall be inspected before any sales and/or transfers of
ownership. This includes homes, trailers, lake lots, cabins, and businesses. (This includes private,
conventional, FHA, and VA loans, etc.)
(2004 Code, sec. 13.05.006)
Sec. 13.06.007 Enforcement agency
The Wichita Falls/Wichita County Health District of the city is herewith declared the designated representative
for the enforcement of these rules within its jurisdictional area. The appointed individual(s) must be approved
and certified by the state commission on environmental quality before assuming the duties and responsibilities of
the designated representative of the city. (2004 Code, sec. 13.05.007)
Sec. 13.06.008 Fees
(a) All fees collected for permits and/or inspections shall be made payable to Wichita Falls/Wichita County
Public Health District.
(b) The licensing authority shall establish a fee schedule for the OSSF program within the county and
maintain a copy of such fee schedule at the Wichita Falls/Wichita County Public Health District for inspection
by the public. Such fee schedule shall set reasonable fees for services performed by or at the direction of the
licensing authority and may be amended by the licensing authority from time to time.
(2004 Code, sec. 13.05.008)
Sec. 13.06.009 Appeals
Persons aggrieved by an action or decision of the designated representative may appeal such action or decision
to the city council. (2004 Code, sec. 13.05.009)
Sec. 13.06.010 Penalties
This article adopts and incorporates all applicable penalty provisions related to on-site sewage facilities,
including, but not limited to, those found in chapters 7, 26 and 37 of the Texas Water Code and 30 TAC chapters
30 and 285. (2004 Code, sec. 13.05.010)
ARTICLE 13.07 STORMWATER DRAINAGE UTILITY SYSTEM*
Sec. 13.07.001 Definitions
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 273/362
(a) The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to
them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Benefited property. A lot or tract to which drainage service is made available or which receives water or
wastewater or sanitation service from the city.
Cost of service. As defined by law, includes:
(1) The prorated cost of land, easements, and rights-of-way related to drainage improvements;
(2) The cost of acquisition, construction, repair and maintenance of structures, equipment, and
facilities used in draining the benefited properties;
(3) The cost of architectural, engineering, legal, and related services, plans and specifications,
studies, surveys, estimates of cost and of revenue, and all other expenses necessary or incident to
planning, providing, or determining the feasibility and practicality of structures, equipment, and
facilities used in draining the benefited properties;
(4) The cost of all machinery, equipment, furniture, and facilities necessary or incident to the
provision and operation of draining the benefited properties;
(5) The cost of funding, debt service, financing charges, and interest arising from construction
projects and the start-up of a drainage facility used in draining the benefited properties; and
(6) The administrative costs of a drainage utility system.
Drainage charge.
(1) The levy imposed to recover the cost of service of the city in furnishing drainage for any
benefited property; and
(2) An amount made in contribution to funding of future drainage system construction by the city.
Drainage system. The drainage owned or controlled in whole or in part by the city and dedicated to the service
of benefited property, including provisions for additions to the system.
Service area. The municipal boundaries of the city.
(b) Specific terms used in this article or in the administration of this article not otherwise defined shall have
the respective meanings assigned to them in Texas Local Government Code, section 552.044, as amended.
(2004 Code, sec. 13.06.001)
Sec. 13.07.002 Established
The city does hereby declare under the state constitution and Tex. Loc. Gov't. Code sections 552.041–552.054
(the Municipal Drainage Utility Systems Act) that such act is adopted and amended, from time to time, and it is
declared that the drainage system of the city shall be a public utility. Pursuant to the provisions of Tex. Loc.
Gov't. Code section 552.046, the city incorporates its existing drainage facilities, materials, and supplies into the
system. (2004 Code, sec. 13.06.002)
Sec. 13.07.003 Provision of service
(a) The city council finds that the city shall establish a schedule of charges against all eligible real property in
the proposed service area.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 274/362
(b) The city council finds that the city will provide drainage for all eligible real property in the service area
subject to charges under chapter 552 of the Texas Local Government Code and upon payment of drainage
charges, unless exempted in this article.
(c) The city council finds that the city will offer drainage service on nondiscriminatory, reasonable, and
equitable terms.
(2004 Code, sec. 13.06.003)
Sec. 13.07.004 Schedule of charges
(a) The schedule of charges under this article is based on studies, staff review, and the projects and work
program approved by the city council. Future revisions will be made only after a separate hearing has been held
with notices properly published.
(b) The schedule of charges is based on a methodology that is nondiscriminatory, reasonable, and equitable.
The properties are established as a class unless individual calculation is believed to be necessary. The source of
the impervious area data is the city, and the stormwater runoff factors are based on engineering quantifications.
The fee for all properties is computed using the same formula, which places all properties on the basis of a
single-family living unit equivalent (SFLUE).
(1) A SFLUE is defined as the impervious area of an average residential lot, which is 3,500 square
feet.
(2) The proposed monthly SDUS fee is $1.50 per SFLUE.
(3) Applied to a commercial piece of property with an impervious area of 35,000 square feet, the
SDUS fee would be $15.00, computed as follows:
(A) 35,000 square feet impervious;
(B) 35,000 square feet of impervious area divided by 3,500 square feet of impervious area
per SFLUE;
(C) Equals 10 SFLUEs times $1.50 per SFLUE;
(D) Equals $15.00 per month.
(4) The fee schedule is applied with the following results:
(A) For single-family residential, condominiums and townhouses classifications: $1.50 per
month per utility customer.
(B) For nonresidential: The fee will be based on the impervious land area of the property as
determined by the city if the water service is provided through master meters. In the case of
multiple master meters, the sum of the drainage charges for the entire property may be placed
on the same utility bill. The maximum monthly fee shall not exceed $200.00 per month. All
properties which have a functional stormwater detention facility installed as approved by the
city's engineer will receive a 25 percent reduction in the monthly fee. Stormwater detention
facilities shall be calculated and sized on the basis of the runoff from a 100-year return
frequency storm. Such calculation shall be made in accordance with the modified rational
hydrograph method of analysis as discussed in Urban Stormwater Management Special Report
No. 49 as published by the American Public Works Association, or another method approved
by the city's engineer.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 275/362
(C) All-weather surfaces: The drainage utility service fee for any portion of a lot which
consists of an all-weather surface shall be computed at one-half (1/2) of the rate that would be
applicable to an impervious surface area. For purposes of this section, an “all-weather surface”
shall mean a surface used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or vehicle and/or equipment storage
or parking which is not paved with concrete, asphalt or other paving material determined by the
city to be impervious.
(2004 Code, sec. 13.06.004)
Sec. 13.07.005 Exemptions
The following categories of utility customers shall be exempt from this article and the charges hereby imposed:
(1) A lot or tract which is owned by one or more of the following governmental entities: the state,
the county or a school district.
(2) Property which is required to be exempted from this article pursuant to Tex. Loc. Gov't. Code
section 552.053(c), as amended.
(2004 Code, sec. 13.06.005)
Sec. 13.07.006 Billing; payment of charges; expenditures
(a) The city will bill for drainage services on the monthly utility bill along with water, sewer, and solid waste
services.
(b) There will be no separate deposit required by utility customers.
(c) In the case of a delinquent payment of the monthly utility bill, which includes the drainage charge, the city
is authorized by Tex. Loc. Gov't. Code section 552.041 et seq., and by this article, to discontinue service of all
city utilities for nonpayment, even if the amount in dispute is the drainage charge component of the monthly
utility bill.
(d) The city shall identify and separate all drainage utility income.
(e) The monies received from utility drainage charges shall be used only for purposes that are directly or
indirectly related to the utility drainage system, as provided by law, including those costs of service defined in
section 13.07.001 above.
(2004 Code, sec. 13.06.006)
Sec. 13.07.007 Appeals
(a) Disputes regarding the administration of the drainage system shall be determined, in the first instance, by
the city's public works director. Any person disputing the decision of the public works director may appeal the
decision of the public works director to the city manager by compliance with the following procedures: The
disputing party must deliver a written notice of appeal to the city manager and the public works director within
ten days of the date of the decision by the public works director. The notice must specify the decision appealed
from and the reason the disputing party believes the decision is incorrect. The city may develop forms for use in
such appeals and, if such forms have been developed, then the disputing party must use those forms in
prosecuting their appeal.
(b) The city manager shall sustain the decision of the public works director if there is substantial evidence to
support the decision. The city manager may reverse or modify the decision of the public works director if the
city manager determines:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 276/362
(1) That the decision of the public works director does not comply with this article or the
Municipal Drainage Utility Systems Act, as amended;
(2) That an error was made with regard to the category of land development, the area of
imperviousness of the land development, or the size of the developed property; or
(3) That the property is unimproved and therefore not subject to the stormwater drainage utility
system fee.
(c) The city manager shall render a written decision on such appeals within 30 days after receiving a written
notice of appeal from the landowner. All such decisions by the city manager shall be final.
(2004 Code, sec. 13.06.007)
CHAPTER 14
ZONING
ARTICLE 14.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 14.02 ZONING ORDINANCE†
Sec. 14.02.001 Adopted
The zoning ordinance of the city, Ordinance 155, adopted by the city on June 22, 1970, as amended, is included
at the end of this chapter as exhibit A. Due to the nature of the zoning ordinance and the technicalities involved
in adopting or amending it, such ordinance is printed herein as it appeared in exhibit A to chapter 14 of the 2004
Code of Ordinances, with only nonsubstantive formatting and style changes. Capitalization, punctuation and
numbering of articles, sections and subsections have been retained as printed in the 2004 Code. Subsequent
amendments will be inserted in their proper place and denoted by a history note following the amended section.
The absence of a history note indicates the material is unchanged from the original. Obviously misspelled words
have been corrected without notation. Any other material added for purposes of clarification is enclosed in
brackets. (Ordinance adopting Code)
EXHIBIT A
ZONING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 155
ARTICLE I. TITLE, PURPOSE, INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION, JURISDICTION,
SEVERABILITY AND REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES
Sec. 101.1. Title
This ordinance shall be known as and may be cited and referred to as the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Iowa
Park, Texas.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 277/362
Sec. 102.1. Purpose
This ordinance is enacted for the purposes of promoting the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the
community; lessening congestion in the streets, securing safety from fire, panic and other dangers; providing
adequate light and air; preventing the overcrowding of land; avoiding undue concentration of population;
facilitating the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public
requirements; conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the
community; and promoting the development of the community in accordance with a comprehensive plan.
Sec. 103.1. Interpretation and Application
As concerns interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be held to be minimum
requirements. Where this ordinance imposes a greater restriction than is imposed or required by other provisions
of rules or regulations or ordinance, the provisions of this ordinance shall control. Terms and words are to be
used and interpreted as defined in Article III of this ordinance. Words used in the present tense include the
future; the singular shall include the plural, and the plural the singular, the word “building” shall mean as well
the word “structure”; the word “used” shall include “arranged,” “designed,” “constructed” “altered”
“converted,” “rented,” “leased,” or “intended to be used,” and the word “shall” is mandatory and not directory,
except where the natural construction of the writing indicates otherwise.
Sec. 104.1. Jurisdiction
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect in the corporate limits and the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the
City of Iowa Park, Texas. Territory annexed to the corporate limits of the City of Iowa Park, Texas, subsequent
to the effective date of this ordinance shall immediately be subject to the provisions of this ordinance and shall
be deemed to be designated as A-G, General Agricultural District, until altered or reclassified in the manner
provided by law.
Sec. 105.1. Severability Clause
In case any portion of this ordinance shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, the remainder of the
ordinance shall not thereby be invalid, but shall remain in full force and effect.
Sec. 106.1. Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances
It is not intended by these regulations to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with existing
provisions of other laws or ordinances, or with private restrictions placed upon property by covenant, deed,
easement, or other private agreement. Where this ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon land, buildings or
structures than is imposed or required by other ordinances, covenants or agreements, the provisions of these
regulations shall govern. Where other ordinances impose a greater restriction than is imposed herein, the
provisions of such other ordinances shall govern. (Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82; Ordinance 756 adopted
9/9/96)
ARTICLE II. ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
Sec. 201.1. Zoning Districts Established
In order to accomplish the purposes set forth in section 102.1, the municipality is hereby divided into zoning
districts described hereafter:
A-G General Agricultural district
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 278/362
RA-1 Single-Family Residential district
RA-2 Residential district
R-1 Single-Family Residential district
R-2 Residential district
R-3 General Residential district
C-C Convenience Commercial district
C-A/R Automotive Commercial and Commercial Recreation
district
C-G General Commercial district
I-L Light Industrial district
I-H Heavy Industrial district
P-1 Public Use district
P-2 Special Public Use district
P-D Planned Development district
F-D Floodway Supplemental district
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82; Ordinance 594, sec. 1, adopted 2/13/89)
Sec. 201.2. Zoning Map Incorporated
The location and boundaries of the zoning districts shall be established by ordinance and shall be delineated and
shown on a map entitled “Zoning Map of the City of Iowa Park, Texas”; and the zoning map is hereby
incorporated as a part of this ordinance, the same as if all notations, references, and other information shown
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 279/362
thereon shall be a part of these regulations, the same as if all such matters and information were fully described
herein.
The original of said map shall bear even date with the passing of these regulations; shall be signed by the Mayor
and attested by the City Secretary, under the seal of the city; and shall be kept in the office of the City Secretary
in the city hall.
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 201.3. District boundaries Established
In determining the location of Zoning District boundaries on the map accompanying and made a part of these
regulations, the following rules shall apply:
(A) Where boundaries are shown to follow streets or alleys, the centerlines of such streets or
alleys, as they exist at the time of adoption of these regulations, shall be the zoning boundary; or
(B) Where boundaries are shown to enter or cross platted blocks, property lines of lots, as they
exist at the time of adoption of these regulations, shall be the zoning boundary; or
(C) Where boundaries are shown on unsubdivided property, the location shall be determined by
scale shown on the map, unless dimensions are given on the map.
(D) In the event of uncertainty in the exact boundaries of any district as shown on the zoning map
of the City of Iowa Park, Texas, the planning and zoning commission, upon written application or
upon its own motion, shall recommend the location of such boundaries to the board of adjustment,
and the board of adjustment shall make the final determination.
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 201.4 Maintenance of Official Zoning Map
It shall be the duty of the City Secretary to maintain an up-to-date official zoning map of the City of Iowa Park,
Texas including all amendments directly adopted by the City Council.
ARTICLE III. DEFINITIONS
Sec. 301. Interpretation of Words and Terms
Words and Phrases not defined in this article shall have their ordinarily accepted meaning or such meaning as the
context may apply, or as defined herein.
Accessory use or Structure. A use or structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and
subordinate to, the principal use or structure.
Adult arcade. A business which offers its customers in one or more viewing booths motion or still pictures
characterized by exposure of specified anatomical areas.
Adult bookstore/film store. A business in which a substantial portion of its stock in trade consists of books,
videos, tapes, cassettes, photographs, slides, magazines, and other periodicals which are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on specific sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or both.
Adult business. Any business activity which offers the opportunity to view specified sexual activity or view, or
touch, for entertainment, specified anatomical areas. Such definition further includes but is not limited to adult
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 280/362
arcade, adult bookstore/film store, adult cabaret, adult lounge, adult motel or hotel, adult retail store, and an
adult theater.
Adult cabaret. A business which offers to customers live performances characterized by exposure of specified
anatomical areas.
Adult lounge. An adult cabaret which serves alcoholic beverages.
Adult motel or hotel. A business which offers its customers a sleeping room or sitting room for a period of time
less than ten (10) hours and provides motion picture or still picture entertainment characterized by exposure of
specified anatomical areas.
Adult retail store. A business in which a substantial portion of the stock in trade consists of items or products
other than printed matter characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas, or both.
Adult theater. A business with a capacity of more than five (5) persons which offers customers motion or still
picture or live entertainment or performances characterized by exposure of specified anatomical areas.
Agriculture. The use of land for agricultural purposes including farming, dairying, pasturage, horticulture,
animal and poultry husbandry and the necessary accessory uses for packing, treating or storing the produce;
provided, however, that the operation of any such accessory [use] shall be secondary to that of normal
agricultural activities, and provided further that the above uses shall not include the commercial feeding of swine
or other animals, stockyards or commercial feed lots for cattle.
Alley. A minor right-of-way dedicated to public use not more than thirty (30) feet wide affording a secondary
means of access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation.
All-weather material. A hard-surface, dust-free material, capable, during ordinary use, of withstanding, without
substantial deterioration, under normal weather conditions [sic].
Automobile or trailer sales area. An open area, other than a street, used for the display, sales or rental [of] new
or used motor vehicles or trailers in operable condition and where no repair work is done.
Automobile repair, major. General repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of engines, motor vehicles or trailers;
collision services including body, frame or fender straightening or repair; overall painting or paint shop; vehicle
steam cleaning.
Automobile repair, minor. Incidental replacement of parts and motor service to passenger cars and trucks not
exceeding one and one-half (1-1/2) ton capacity.
Automobile service station or filling station. Any area used for retail sale of gasoline or oil fuels or automobile
accessories, and incidental services including facilities for lubricating, and washing and cleaning, but not
including painting, major repair, or the sale of butane or propane fuels.
Automobile wash or automatic carwash. A building or structure or chain conveyor, blowers, steam cleaners and
other mechanical devices used primarily for the purpose of washing motor vehicles.
Block. In describing the boundaries of a district, the word “block” refers to the legal description. In all other
cases, the work “block” refers to the property abutting on one side of the street between two (2) intersecting
streets or between an intersecting street and a railroad right-of-way or between an intersecting street and a
watercourse.
Board. The board of adjustment of the City of Iowa Park, Texas.
Board of adjustment. The board of adjustment of the City of Iowa Park, Texas; also referred to as the “board.”
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 281/362
Boarding house and rooming house. Where meals or lodging are provided for persons other than the family or
their relatives and excluding facilities for transient persons such as hotels, motels, inns and other such facilities.
Building. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls that is used or intended to be used for the
shelter or enclosure of persons, animals or property.
Building, accessory. See Accessory use or structure.
Building height. The vertical distance from the average line of the highest and lowest points of that portion of
the lot covered by the building to the highest point of copying [coping] of a flat roof, or the deck line of a
mansard roof or the average height of the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof.
Building line. A line established beyond which no part of a building shall project, except as otherwise provided
by this ordinance.
Building, principal. A building or buildings in which the principal use of the building site is conducted. In any
residential district, any dwelling shall be deemed to be the principal building on the building site.
Bulletin board. Any sign announcing the activities of an educational, religious, institutional or similar use.
Carport. An open-sided automobile shelter which presents no obstacle to view or flow of air.
Cemetery. Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the human dead and dedicated for cemetery
purposes.
Child-care facility. A facility that provides care, training, education, custody, treatment, or supervision for a
child who is not related by blood, marriage, or adoption to the owner or operator of the facility, for all or part of
the twenty-four-hour day, whether or not the facility is operated for profit or charges for the services it offers.
Child-care institution. A child-care facility that provides care for more than twelve (12) children for twenty-four
hours a day, including facilities known as children's homes, halfway houses, residential treatment camps,
emergency shelters and training or correctional schools for children.
City council. The official legislative body of the City of Iowa Park, Texas.
City planning commission. The Iowa Park city planning commission, also referred to as “planning commission.”
The city planning commission shall also be the zoning commission for the City of Iowa Park.
Clinic. A place used for the care, diagnosis and treatment of sick, ailing, infirm and injured persons and those in
need of surgical or medical attention but who are not customarily provided with board and room or kept
overnight on the premises.
Club. A nonprofit association of persons who are bona fide members, paying regular dues, and organized for
some common purpose, but not including a group organized solely or primarily to render a service customarily
carried on as a commercial enterprise.
Commercial vehicle. Any type of motor vehicle classified as having a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of
26,001 or more pounds, any combination of vehicles weighing 26,001 pounds or greater when towing a trailer
weighing more than 10,000 pounds, any vehicle or combination of vehicles used to transport quantities of
hazardous materials that require warning placards under Department of Public Safety regulations, any vehicle
designed to transport sixteen (16) or more passengers (including driver).
Comprehensive plan. The official city plan of the City of Iowa Park, Texas, also refers to the specific document,
“General Plan, Iowa Park, Texas.”
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 282/362
Convalescent home. Also, a nursing home, a rest home; a home for the aged, recuperating, chronically ill, or
incurable persons, in which two (2) or more persons not of the immediate family are received, kept, or provided
with food and shelter or care for compensation, but not including hospitals, clinics, or similar institutions
devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of disease or injury.
Coverage. The lot area covered by all buildings located thereon, including the area covered by all overhanging
roofs.
Dwelling. Any building or portion thereof designed or used as a residence of one or more persons, but not
including a tent, cabin, trailer coach, mobile home, boarding or rooming house, hotel or motel.
Dwelling, multifamily. A building or portion thereof containing three (3) or more dwelling units and designed for
or used by three (3) or more families; also includes the word “apartments.”
Dwelling, single-family. A building containing one dwelling unit and designed for or used exclusively by one (1)
family.
Dwelling, two-family. A building containing two (2) dwelling units and designed for or used exclusively by two
(2) families; also includes the word “duplex.”
Dwelling unit. A room or group of rooms arranged, intended or designed as a habitable unit, containing kitchen,
bath and sleeping facilities for not more than one (1) family living independently of any other family.
Essential services. The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by public utilities or municipal or other
governmental agencies of underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water transmission or distribution
systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewer,
pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, and other similar equipment
and accessories thereof, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate services by such public utilities or
municipal or other governmental agencies or for the public health or safety or general welfare, but not including
buildings.
Family. One or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit; provided, that unless all members are related by
blood, marriage, or adoption, no such family shall contain over five (5) persons; but further provided, that
domestic servants may be housed on the premises without being designated as a family.
Flood hazard area. The land area adjoining a floodway which is not reasonably required to carry and discharge
the floodwater of the one-hundred-year frequency flood but which would be inundated by the floodwater of the
one-hundred-year frequency flood, based upon full urbanization of the watershed.
Floodway. The channel of a watercourse or drainway and those portions of the adjoining lands which are
reasonably required to carry and discharge the floodwater of the one-hundred-year frequency flood.
Floor area. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building or buildings, measured from
the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerlines of walls separating two (2) buildings.
Foster family home, family day home, and agency home. A facility which provides care for not more than six (6)
children at any given time.
Foster group home, day-care center, group day-care home, or registered family home. A facility which provides
care for no more than twelve (12) children at any given time.
Frontage. The lineal measurement of a lot boundary which is abutting a street.
Garage apartment. A dwelling for one (1) family erected as a part of a private garage.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 283/362
Garage, parking. Any building or portion thereof used for the storage of four (4) or more automobiles in which
any servicing which may be provided is incidental to the primary use for storage purposes, and where repair
facilities are not provided.
Garage, private. A detached accessory building or a portion of the principal building used or intended for use by
the occupants of the premises for storage of passenger vehicles or trailers.
Garage, public. The structure or portion thereof, other than a private garage, used for the storage, sale, hire, care,
repairing or refinishing of any vehicles.
Garage, repair. A building in which are provided facilities for the care, servicing, repair or equipping of
automobiles.
Height. The vertical measurement of any structure on any parcel of land measured from the average elevation of
the lot or parcel to the uppermost point of the structure.
Home occupation. Any occupation carried on solely by the inhabitants of a dwelling which is clearly incidental
and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes, which does not change the character thereof, and
which is conducted entirely within the main or accessory building; provided that no trading and merchandising
is carried on and in connection with which there is no display of merchandise or advertising sign other than one
non-illuminated nameplate, not more than two (2) square feet in area, attached to the main or accessory building,
and no mechanical equipment is used except such as is customarily used in purely domestic or household
purposes. A tea room, restaurant, rest home, clinic, barbershop, beauty shop, doctor's or dentist's office, childcare
institution, tourist home or cabinet shop, metal shop, lawn mower repair, or auto repair garage shall not be
deemed a home occupation.
Hospital. See medical facilities.
Hotel. A building or group of buildings under one ownership containing six (6) or more sleeping rooms
occupied or intended or designed to be occupied as the more or less temporary abiding place of persons who are
lodged with or without meals for compensation, but not including trailer parks, or camp, hospital, asylum,
orphanage, or building where persons are housed under restraint.
Industry. Storage, repair, manufacture, preparation or treatment of any article, substance, or any commodity for
commercial use.
Institutional uses. Those uses organized, established, used or intended to be used for the promotion of a public,
religious, educational, charitable, cultural, social, or philanthropic activity and normally operated on a nonprofit
basis.
Interpretation. A determination of the meaning of the zoning regulations or their application, or a determination
of the correct location of the zoning district boundaries, based upon an appeal from a decision of the enforcing
officer and expressed as a board of adjustment ruling, which becomes a permanent guide in the enforcement of
the zoning regulations.
Junk or salvage yard. A place where waste, discarded or salvage materials are bought, sold, exchanged, bailed
[baled], packed, disassembled or handled, including all wrecking yards, house wrecking yards, used lumber
yards and places or yards for storage of salvaged house wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment;
but not including such places where such uses are conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building, and
not including pawnshop and establishments for the sale, purchase, or storage of used furniture and household
equipment, used cars in operable condition, or salvage material incidental to manufacturing operations.
Kennel. Any structure or premises on which three (3) or more dogs over four (4) months of age are kept.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 284/362
Loading space. A space on the same lot as the principal use of at least ten (10) feet in width and thirty (30) feet
in length and having a vertical clearance of at least fourteen (14) feet, designated for the temporary parking of
commercial vehicles while loading or unloading merchandise or materials.
Lot. A piece or parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal building or a group of such
buildings and accessory buildings or utilized for a principal use and uses accessory thereto, together with such
open spaces as required by this ordinance, and having access on a public street.
Lot, corner. A lot which has at least two (2) adjacent sides abutting on a street, provided that the interior angle at
the intersection of such two (2) sides is less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees.
Lot depth. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
Lot, double frontage. A lot having a frontage on two (2) non-intersecting streets, as distinguished form [from] a
corner lot.
Lot, interior. A lot other than a corner lot.
Lot line. Any boundary of a lot.
Lot line, front. The boundary of a lot which abuts a public street. Where the lot abuts more than one street, the
owner may select the front lot line.
Lot line, rear. The boundary of a lot which is most distant from and most nearly parallel to the front lot line.
Lot line, side. Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
Lots of record. A separate and distinct parcel designated on a legally recorded subdivision plat or a legally
recorded deed filed in the records of Wichita County, State of Texas.
Lot, wedge shaped. A lot situated so that the front is either wider or narrower than the rear of the lot.
Mean lot elevation. The average elevation of a lot.
Medical facilities.
(a) Nursing home, rest or convalescent homes: See Convalescent home.
(b) Dental or medical clinic: A building used for the examination and treatment of the physically
ill, provided that no facilities are provided for patients remaining overnight except under emergency
conditions, except as provided for in section 405.2 [sic].
(c) Dental [or] doctor's office: The same as dental or medical clinic, including the various dental
and medical specialties.
(d) Hospital: An institution providing physical and mental health services primarily for human
inpatient medical or surgical care for the sick or injured, and including related facilities such as
laboratories, outpatient departments, training facilities, central service facilities, and staff offices
which are an integral part of the facilities.
(e) Public health center: A facility primarily utilized by a health unit for providing public health
services, including related facilities.
Mobile home. A detached residential dwelling unit designed for transportation, after fabrication, on streets or
highways on its own wheels; and arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling, complete and ready
for occupancy, except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, location on jacks or other
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 285/362
temporary or permanent foundations, and connection to utilities; and not taxable on the basis of conventional
structures which are taxed according to ad valorem tax criteria; whether or not its wheels, rollers, skids, or other
rolling equipment have been removed, and whether or not any addition thereto has been built on the ground,
which conforms to the city's codes such as: building, housing, fire prevention, electrical, plumbing and
mechanical.
Mobile home lot. A portion of a mobile home park allocated to the exclusive use of the occupants of a single
mobile home.
Mobile home park. A parcel of land under single ownership which has been planned and improved for
placement of mobile homes or [to] be occupied as residences.
Modular unit. A factory-fabricated transportable building unit designed to be used by itself, or to be
incorporated with similar units at a fixed building site into a modular structure to be used for residential,
commercial, educational or industrial purposes.
Motel. An area containing one (1) or more buildings designed or intended to be used as temporary sleeping
facilities of one (1) or more transient persons.
One-hundred-year frequency flood. A flood having an average frequency of occurrence once in one hundred
(100) years, although the flood may occur in any year, based on statistical analyses of stream flow records
available for the watershed and analyses of rainfall and runoff characteristics in the general region of the
watershed, as determined by the city engineer, or as determined by the U.S. Corps of Engineers, and confirmed
by the city engineer, or as determined by a registered professional engineer and certified by the city engineer.
Open space. Area included in any side, rear, or front yard, or any other unoccupied space on a lot that is open
and unobstructed to the sky except for the ordinary projection of cornices and eaves of porches.
Owner. The individual or entity that intends to own and operate the small wind energy system in accordance
with this ordinance [Ordinance 1064 (section 411.1)].
Parcel. A “lot” as defined herein.
Parking space. A permanently surfaced area of not less than two hundred (200) square feet, either within a
structure or in the open, exclusive of driveways or access drives, for the parking of motor vehicles.
Planning commission. The planning and zoning commission of the City of Iowa Park, Texas.
Recreation vehicle. Any type of motor vehicle or trailer which includes living quarters designed for
accommodation, including, but not limited to, motor homes, camper vans, caravans, travel trailers, camping
trailers, fifth-wheel trailers, popup campers and truck campers.
Roll-off container or equipment. Any open top dumpster, equipment or enclosed container designed to be hauled
on a roll-off truck or trailer utilizing wheels to facilitate rolling the container or equipment into place, including,
but not limited to general purpose containers, storage containers, construction and demolition waste dumpsters,
trash compacters, tank containers and roll-off equipment.
Rooming house. See boarding house.
Rotor Diameter. The cross-sectional dimension of the circle swept by the rotating blades.
Sign. Any word, lettering, part of letters, figures, numerals, phrases, sentences, emblems, devices, designs,
pictures, trade names or trademarks by which anything is made known, such as are used to designate an
individual, a firm, an association, a corporation, a profession, a business, a service, a commodity or product,
which are visible from any public street or right-of-way and designed to attract attention. “For Sale” and “For
Rent” shall be deemed signs within the meaning of this definition, but the term “sign” shall not include the flag,
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 286/362
pennant, or insignia of any nation, state, city or other political, educational, charitable, philanthropic, civic,
professional, religious or like campaign, drive, movement or event used for a public purpose in the public
interest.
Sign, display surface area. The net geometric area of the surface of the sign upon, against or through which the
message is displayed or illustrated, including the outward extremities of all letters, figures, characters and
delineations, provided that only one (1) face of a double-faced sign shall be included in the computation of
display surface area.
Sign, illuminated. A sign designed to give forth any artificial light, or designed to reflect light from one or more
sources, natural or artificial.
Sign, projecting. A sign erected on the face or outside wall of a building which projects out at any angle
therefrom.
Sign, temporary. Signs of temporary nature used to advertise the premises for sale, rent or lease.
Small Wind Energy System. A wind energy conversion system consisting of a wind turbine, tower and associated
control or conversion electronics which has a rated capacity of not more than one hundred (100) kilowatts, is
intended to primarily reduce on-site consumption of utility power and has a total height of one hundred and
seventy feet (170') or less.
Special exception. A use or a design element of a use which is not permitted by right in a particular district
because of potential adverse effect, but which if controlled in the particular instance as to its relationship to the
neighborhood and to the general welfare, may be permitted by the board of adjustment, where specifically
authorized by these regulations, and in accordance with the substantive and procedural standards of the code.
Specified anatomical areas. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitalia, pubic region, buttock,
human genitalia in a discernible erect state, even if completely and opaquely covered; or any combination of the
aforementioned.
Specified sexual activities. Depiction of male genitalia in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; female
genitalia; acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse, oral copulation, sodomy, bestiality; touching of human
genitalia, pubic region, buttock, anus; or any combination of the aforementioned.
Story. That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next
above it; or, if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.
Street. A public right-of-way more than thirty (30) feet in width which provides the primary public means of
access to abutting property and used primarily for vehicular circulation.
Street, arterial. Any street designated on the thoroughfare plan as a primary arterial, secondary arterial, or
collector street.
Street, minor. Any street not designated on the thoroughfare plan as an arterial street.
Structural alteration. Any change in the structural members of a building, such as walls, columns, beams or
girders.
Structure. Any thing constructed, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground or attachment to
something having a permanent location on the ground (not including sidewalks, driveways and similar
improvement areas).
Supplemental District. A zoning district to be mapped as an overlay to a use district and which modifies or
supplements the regulations of the general district, in recognition of distinguishing circumstances such as unit
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 287/362
development or flooding propensity, while maintaining the character and purpose of the general use district area
over which it is superimposed.
Thoroughfare plan. The part of the comprehensive plan referring to transportation development goals, principles,
and standards; also includes use of the words “major street plan” and “trafficways plan.”
Total Height. The vertical distance from ground level to the tip of a wind generator blade when the tip of said
blade is at its highest point.
Tower. The vertical component of a wind energy conversion system that elevates the wind turbine generator and
attached blades above the ground.
Trailer. Any unpowered vehicle designed to be towed by a powered vehicle, including, but not limited to,
transport, flatbed, low-boy, dumping, construction, landscape, tank, cargo, utility, vehicle- or equipment-hauling,
boat- or recreational vehicle-hauling, horse, livestock, concession, mobile home, camping or travel trailer.
Turbine. The parts of the wind system including the blades, generator and tail.
Variance. A privileged relaxation of the development control provisions of these regulations, granted by the
board of adjustment where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the
applicant, a literal enforcement of the regulations would result in unnecessary and undue hardship and would
prevent the substantial enjoyment of property rights as shared by nearly [nearby] properties which do conform to
the development control provisions.
Viewing booth. An enclosure or partial enclosure which contains any electrical or mechanical devise [device],
which displays or projects any film, videotape or photographic reproduction into the viewing area of motion or
still pictures characterized by exposure of specified anatomical areas, and which enclosure or partial enclosure is
authorized for occupancy by the Standard Building Code standards by no more than five (5) persons.
Wind Generator. The blades and associated mechanical and electrical conversion components mounted on top of
the tower.
Yard. A required space on a lot unobstructed except as expressly permitted.
Yard, front. A yard extending across the full width of a lot from side lot line to side lot line abutting on a street,
into which a building may not protrude.
Yard, rear. A yard extending across the rear of a lot measured from side lot line to side lot line.
Yard, side. A yard extending from front yard to the rear year abutting the side lot line, into which no building
may protrude.
Zoning commission. See city planning commission.
(Ordinance 364, sec. 1, adopted 10/12/81; Ordinance 365, sec. 1, adopted 10/12/81; Ordinance 375 adopted
4/12/82; Ordinance 694, sec. 1, adopted 2/14/94; Ordinance 1064, sec. 1, adopted 9/22/08; Ordinance 1256, sec.
1, adopted 11/12/18)
ARTICLE IV. GENERAL PROVISIONS APPLYING TO ALL OR TO SEVERAL DISTRICTS
Sec. 401.1. Limitation On Use–Application of Regulations in Districts Authorized
No land, building, structure, or improvement shall be used and no building, structure or improvement shall be
made, erected, constructed, moved, altered, enlarged, or rebuilt which is designed, arranged, or intended to be
used or maintained for any purpose or in any manner except in accordance with the use, height, area, coverage,
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 288/362
yard, space, and other requirements established in the district in which such land, building, structure, or
improvement is located, and such use is authorized, except as provided by Article V, Nonconformities.
Sec. 401.2. Same–Application of Regulations to the Uses of a More Restricted District
Whenever the specific district regulations pertaining to one district permit the uses of a more restricted district,
such uses shall be subject to the conditions set forth in the regulations of the more restricted district, unless
otherwise specified.
Sec. 401.3. Same–Residential Uses Restricted to Residential Lots
It is intended that these regulations be interpreted as not permitting a dwelling unit to be located on the same lot
with or within a structure used or intended to be used primarily for nonresidential purposes except that one
accessory residential unit may be provided for a night watchman, motel manager, or similar purpose where
essential to the main use of the lot.
Sec. 402.1. Division of Lots
An improved lot shall not hereafter be divided into two (2) or more lots unless all lots resulting from such
division comply with all the applicable yard, space, area, parking and loading regulations of the zoning district
in which located.
Sec. 403.1. Use of Yards
No building, structure or improvement shall be permitted to encroach upon required yard spaces set forth in the
provisions of this ordinance; provided, however, that surfaced parking facilities, signs, fences, child-care largemuscle
activity equipment such as a slide, swing, see-saw, volleyball and net, badminton sets, tetherballs, and
ping-pong sets, and gasoline pumping service units may be permitted to occupy required yard space unless
otherwise prohibited in those districts permitting such improvements and provided that no inoperable vehicle
may be stored in the front yard of a lot in a residential district.
The words “inoperable vehicle” as used hereinabove shall apply to vehicles, motor or otherwise, not maintained
in an operative condition due to partial destruction, depreciation, obsolescence or having missing parts, or being
parts of automobiles, trucks, tractors, trailers, campers or other mobile units, self-propelled or otherwise, unless
stored or held by a city licensed and permitted yard operating under Ordinance No. 56 (Code section 9-26
[4.05.031]).
(Ordinance 365, sec. 1, adopted 10/12/81)
Sec. 403.2. Permitted Yard Obstructions
Obstructions are permitted in required yards as follows:
(A) Cornices, canopies, eaves, fireplaces and similar architectural features may project no more
than two (2) feet into a required yard.
(B) Fire escapes may project not more than four and one-half (4-1/2) feet into a required yard.
(C) Fences, hedges, plant materials and walls may be located in any yard provided they are set
back off the front property line a distance of ten (10) feet and corner traffic visibility is maintained in
accordance with the City of Iowa Park's traffic code. (Chapter 18 [12] of the Code of Ordinances)
(D) Signs which are permitted as necessary uses in residential districts, may be located within any
yard which is bounded by a public street.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 289/362
(E) In residential districts, detached accessory buildings may be located in a required rear yard
provided the building does not cover more than twenty percent (20%) of the area of the minimum
required rear yard.
(F) Swimming pools, tennis courts, and fallout or tornado shelters.
(G) Mobile home hitches.
(H) Carports.
(I) Customary accessory structures, such as clothes lines, barbecue pits, and playground
equipment.
(Ordinance 364, sec. l, adopted 10/12/81; Ordinance 818 adopted 12/14/98)
Sec. 403.3. Accessory Use Conditions; General
(A) An accessory building erected as an integral part of the principal building shall be made structurally a part
thereof, shall have a common wall therewith, and shall comply with the requirements applicable to the principal
building.
(B) A detached accessory building shall not be located in front or side yard or encroach upon a minimum
building setback line, but this limitation shall not apply to carports, provided the minimum required from [front]
yard or setback line is observed.
(C) Within the rear yard, a detached accessory building shall be located at least three (3) feet from any interior
lot line.
(Ordinance 364, sec l, adopted 10/12/81)
Sec. 403.4. Child-Care Facility Yards
It is the purpose of these provisions to recognize the necessity of child-care facilities in residential and other
districts and to promote the public safety and enjoyment of property rights by establishing rules and regulations
governing the use of yards whether privately, publicly, or commercially owned and operated.
(A) Permits and approval: No yard shall be used or furnished with large-muscle activity equipment
until a zoning clearance permit has been issued. No permit shall be issued unless the proposed use of
the yard and equipment shall comply with applicable local and state department of human resources
regulations.
(B) Requirements: A yard may contain large-muscle activity equipment in accordance with the
following requirements:
(1) Equipment must comply with the Texas Department of Human Resources regulations.
(2) Equipment shall not infringe upon applicable minimum yard setback space.
(3) A wall or fence shall be constructed not less than six (6) feet in height with at least two
(2) exits. One exit shall be away from the house.
(4) When a swimming pool or hot tub is provided, the same shall be enclosed by a fence at
least six (6) feet high and shall be built so that children cannot climb over it. Gates shall be
locked at all times. Machinery rooms near all pools shall be locked.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 290/362
(5) All lighting of the yard shall be shielded or directed to face away from adjoining
residences. Direct rays form [from] the lights shall not be visible from adjacent properties.
(6) No broadcasting system shall be used for the operation of the child-care facility.
(7) The home grounds and equipment shall be clean, and in good repair, and kept with the
children's health and safety in mind.
(8) The house and yard shall be kept free of stray animals.
(9) A protected parking area shall be provided for vehicles where loading and unloading
children takes place.
(Ordinance 365, sec. 1, adopted 10/12/81)
Sec. 403.5. Use of Yards of Swimming Pools [and Hot Tubs]
It is the purpose of these provisions to recognize an outdoor swimming pool as a potential attractive business
and to promote the public safety and enjoyment of property rights by establishing rules and regulations
governing the location and improvements of swimming pools or hot tubs, whether privately, publicly or
commercially owned or operated.
(A) Permits and approvals: No swimming pool or hot tub shall be constructed or used until a
swimming pool or hot tub building permit and a zoning clearance permit have been issued therefor.
No building permit and no final zoning clearance permit shall be issued unless the proposed sanitary
facilities and water supply comply with applicable local and state health department regulations.
(B) Requirements: A swimming pool may be constructed and operated when:
(1) The pool does not infringe upon any applicable minimum yard setback space;
(2) A wall or fence, not less than six (6) feet in height, with self-latching gates at all
entrances, completely encloses either the pool area or the surrounding yard area;
(3) All lighting of the pool is shielded or directed to face away from adjoining residences. If
lights are not individually shielded, they shall be so placed, or the enclosing wall or fence shall
be so designed, that direct rays from the lights shall not be visible from adjacent properties; and
(4) No broadcasting system is used for the purpose of advertising the operation of the pool or
hot tub, or for the attraction of persons to the premises. This shall not prevent a public address
system necessary or useful to the supervising of the pool and safety of swimmers.
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 404.1. Street Access
No principal building shall hereafter be constructed on a lot which does not abut a public dedicated street.
Sec. 405.1. Trailers and Commercial Vehicles–Storage and Parking in Residential Districts
Commercial vehicles, trailers, and roll-off-containers or equipment as defined in Section 301 of this article, of
all types, shall not be parked or stored on any residential street, any lot occupied by a dwelling or on any lot in
any residential district except in accordance with the following provisions:
(A) No more than one (1) commercial vehicle, which does not exceed one and one-half (1-1/2)
tons rated capacity, per family living on the premises shall be permitted; and in no case shall a
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 291/362
commercial vehicle used for hauling explosives, gasoline, or liquefied petroleum products be
permitted.
(B) No more than one (1) trailer of any type or recreation vehicle per family living on the premises
shall be permitted upon the public right-of-way and/or between the street and the front and/or side
yard building limit line, and said trailer or recreation vehicle shall not be parked or stored for more
than forty-eight (48) hours during a ninety (90) day period, unless it is parked behind the front and/or
side yard building limit line. A recreation vehicle or trailer shall not be occupied permanently while it
is parked or stored in any area within the incorporated limits, except in a mobile home park
authorized under the ordinance of the City of Iowa Park, Texas however; a recreation vehicle or
trailer may be occupied temporarily for a period not to exceed fourteen (14) days during a ninety (90)
day period, subject to the parking and storage requirements stated in this section.
(C) Commercial vehicles and trailers used for demolition or to haul or store building, electrical,
mechanical or plumbing supplies and equipment may be parked or stored on a lot or on the adjacent
public right-of-way of a lot in which there is an open permit for demolition, construction or
maintenance.
(D) Roll-off containers or equipment may not be left on a public right-of-way unless securely
mounted to a street-legal roll-off truck or trailer in accordance with subsections (A), (B) and (C),
above.
(E) Any roll-off container used as a pre-fabricated accessory building, and not mounted to a rolloff
truck or trailer, may be placed on a lot with a building permit and in accordance with all zoning
and set-back regulations for the district in which it is placed.
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82; Ordinance 380, sec. l, adopted 7/12/82; Ordinance 1055 adopted 6/23/08;
Ordinance 1256, sec. 2, adopted 11/12/18)
Sec. 405.2. Same–Display in Commercial and Industrial Districts
Commercial vehicles and trailers of all types may be displayed in such commercial districts allowing sales of
said vehicles or in such industrial districts allowing their manufacture; provided, however, said vehicles may not
be used for dwelling purposes except in a mobile home park authorized under the ordinances of the City of Iowa
Park, Texas. Temporary occupancy of commercial vehicles may be allowed at construction sites as field offices,
subject to the city's approval. (Ordinance 380, sec. 1, adopted 7/12/82)
Sec. 406.1. Off-Street Parking–Purpose and Application
It is the intent of these requirements that adequate parking and loading facilities be provided on off-the-street
areas for each use of land within the City of Iowa Park. Requirements are intended to be based on the demand
created by each use. These requirements shall apply to all uses in all districts.
Sec. 406.2. Same–Required Open Space
Off-street parking space may be a part of the required open space associated with the permitted use, unless
otherwise prohibited; provided, however, the off-street parking requirements shall not be reduced or encroached
upon in any manner.
Sec. 406.3. Same–Location
The off-street parking lot shall be located within two hundred (200) feet, exclusive of street and alley widths, of
the principal use and shall have direct access to a street or alley.
Sec. 406.4. Same–Joint Parking and Off-Site Parking Facilities
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 292/362
Whenever two (2) or more uses are located together in a common building, shopping center or other integrated
building complex, the parking requirements may be complied with by providing a permanent common parking
facility, cooperatively established and operated, which contains the requisite number of spaces, for each use.
Owners of two (2) or more businesses and/or other uses on separate lots may jointly provide for their individual
parking needs through a joint facility and/or facilities, provided that the total number of spaces so provided shall
not be less than the sum of the individual requirements and that each business and/or other use is within two
hundred (200) feet of the parking facility.
Sec. 406.5. Same–Size of Off-Street Parking Space
The size of a parking space for one vehicle shall consist of a rectangular area having dimensions of not less than
ten (10) feet by twenty (20) feet plus adequate area for ingress and egress.
Sec. 406.6. Same–Amount of Off-Street Parking and Loading Required
Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided in all districts in accordance with the following
schedule:
(A) Dwelling, single-family or duplex: Two (2) parking spaces for each separate dwelling unit
within the structure.
(B) Dwelling, multifamily: The number of spaces provided shall not be less than one and one-half
(1-1/2) times the number of units in the dwelling.
(C) Boarding or rooming house or hotel: One (1) parking space for each sleeping room.
(D) Hospitals: One (1) space for each four (4) patient beds, exclusive of bassinets, plus one (1)
space for each staff or visiting doctor, plus one (1) space for each three (3) employees including
nurses, plus adequate area for the parking of emergency vehicles.
(E) Medical or dental clinics or offices: Six (6) spaces per doctor plus one (1) space for each two
(2) employees.
(F) Convalescent or nursing homes: One (1) space for each six (6) patient beds plus one (1) space
for each staff or visiting doctor plus one (1) space for each two (2) employees including nurses.
(G) Community center, theater, auditorium, church sanctuary: One (1) parking space for each four
(4) permanent seats, based on maximum seating capacity, or each fifty (50) square feet of floor area
in rooms without permanent seating but intended to be used for assembly purposes.
(H) Convention hall, lodge, club, library, museum, place of amusement or recreation: One (1)
parking space for each fifty (50) square feet of floor area used for assembly or recreation in the
building.
(I) Office building: One (1) parking space for each three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor
area in the building, exclusive of the area used for storage, utilities and building service.
(J) Commercial establishments not otherwise classified: One (1) parking space for each one
hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space used for retail trade in the building and including all
areas used by the public.
(K) Industrial establishments: One (1) off-street parking space for each five hundred (500) square
feet of gross floor area or one (1) off-street parking space for each two (2) employees, whichever is
greater, and one (1) loading or unloading berth for each twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet or
fraction thereof of gross floor area.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 293/362
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 406.7. Same–Paved Surface Required
All parking spaces shall be paved with a sealed surface permanent pavement and maintained in a manner that no
dust will result from continued use.
Sec. 406.8. Same–Off-Street Parking Lots Located Within or Adjacent to a Residential District
Whenever off-street parking lots for more than six (6) vehicles are to be located within or adjacent to a
residential district, the following provisions shall apply:
(A) All sides of the lot within or abutting the residential district shall be enclosed with a screening
wall or fence as specified under sections 407.1 and 407.2.
(B) No parking shall be permitted within a front yard when the parking lot is located in a
residential district.
(C) Driveways used for ingress and egress shall be confined to and shall not exceed twenty-five
(25) feet in width, exclusive of curb returns.
(D) All of the lot used for parking and driveway purposes shall be paved with a sealed surface
pavement and maintained in such a manner that no dust will be produced by continued use.
(E) Whenever lighting is provided, it shall be arranged so that all light is deflected from adjoining
residential uses.
(F) No sign of any kind shall be erected except information signs used to guide traffic and to state
the condition and terms of the use of the lots. Only non-intermittent white lighting of signs shall be
permitted.
Sec. 407.1. Screening Wall or Fence–Specifications
When the provisions of this ordinance require the construction of a screening wall or fence as a condition for the
initiation and subsequent continuance of a use, the screening wall or fence:
(A) Shall be constructed, designed, and arranged to provide visual separation of uses, irrespective
of vegetation;
(B) Shall not be less than five (5) feet nor more than eight (8) feet in height, and
(C) Shall be constructed with all braces and supports on the interior.
Sec. 407.2. Same–Maintenance
The screening wall or fence shall be maintained by the owner of the zoning lot containing the use requiring the
construction of the screening. Failure to maintain after notice by the City Secretary shall constitute an offense
hereunder.
Sec. 408.1. Sewer Service
No structure or use in any district shall be erected or commenced which does not have a connection to the public
sewer system, unless and until the county public health officer certifies that a septic tank or any substitute
disposal system can be installed and operated effectively. As a basis for making his decision, the public health
officer may require such percolation tests as he deems to be necessary. Such tests are to be made at the expense
of the property owner.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 294/362
Sec. 409.1. Uses in Newly Annexed Areas: Interim Controls
Uses in all territory hereafter annexed to the City shall be subjected to the regulations of the most restrictive
district until the original zoning district of such territory is established by council. The planning and zoning
commission shall, as soon as practicable after annexation of any territory, institute proceeding on its own motion
to establish original zoning districts throughout the newly annexed territory; and the procedure to be followed
shall be the same as is provided by law for the adopting of original zoning districts governing other parts of the
municipality. (Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 410.1. Sale of Household Effects and Personal Belongings
(A) In connection with the residential occupancy of a dwelling and/or the property on which the dwelling is
located, the tenants thereof may offer their personal belongings and household effects for sale to the general
public; provided, however, the interval between such sales shall be at least six (6) months, and no sale period
shall extend for more than three (3) consecutive calendar days.
(B) In addition to the sales permitted by this section, an individual may conduct a sale of the type described in
this section if the sale is specifically authorized by the City Council on behalf of a community organization and
the sale is conducted in accordance with the authority granted by the City Council.
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82; Ordinance 935, sec. 1, adopted 3/8/04)
Sec. 411.1. Small Wind Energy Conversion Systems
Small Wind Energy Systems shall be a permitted use in all zoning classifications where structures of any type
are allowed, subject to the following requirements:
(A) A building construction permit shall be required for the installation of a small wind energy
system.
(B) Notice of an application for permit to install a small wind energy system shall be provided to
property owners within two hundred feet (200') of the property on which the system is to be located.
Proof of said notice will become a part of the construction/installation permit.
(C) Tower heights of not more than one hundred and forty feet (140') shall be allowed on parcels or
tracts of land between one and five acres in size. For property sizes larger than five acres, there is no
limitation on tower height, except as imposed by FAA regulations, provided that the application
includes evidence that the proposed height does not exceed the height recommendation by the
manufacturer or distributor of the system.
(D) Setbacks for the system tower shall be no closer to the property line than one and one-tenth (1-
1/10) times the height of the system and no part of the system, including guy wire anchors, may
extend closer than ten feet (10') to the property boundary. Additionally, the outer and innermost guy
wires must be marked and clearly visible to a height of six feet (6') above the guy wire anchors.
(E) Building construction/installation permit applications for small wind energy systems shall be
accompanied by a line drawing of the electrical components in sufficient detail as to allow for a
determination that the manner of installation conforms to the National Electric Code.
(F) Decibel levels for the system shall not exceed fifty decibels (50 dBA) measured at the closest
neighboring inhabited dwelling, except during short-term events such as utility outages and severe
windstorms.
(G) The building construction/installation permit application must also include standard drawings
and an engineering analysis of the system's tower along with certification by a professional,
mechanical, civil or structural engineer.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 295/362
(H) The wind energy system shall comply with all applicable Federal Aviation Administration
requirements including Part 77 of Title 14 of the Code of Federal Aviation Regulations regarding
installations close to airports.
(I) No grid-interconnected wind energy system shall be installed until evidence has been given that
the utility company has been informed of the customer's intent to install a grid-connected customerowned
generator. Off-grid wind energy systems shall be exempt of this requirement.
(J) The tower shall be designed and installed so as to not provide step bolts or a ladder readily
accessible to the public for a minimum height of eight feet (8') above the ground.
(K) All signs, other than the manufacturer's or the installer's identification, appropriate warning
signs or owner identification on a wind generator, tower, building or any other structure associated
with a small wind energy system visible from any public right-of-way shall be prohibited.
(L) A small wind energy system tower and generator shall not be artificially lighted unless such
lighting is required by the Federal Aviation Administration.
(M) The Owner of the property on which a small wind energy system is located shall maintain a
current homeowner's insurance policy with general liability coverage for bodily injury and property
damage with limits of at least three hundred thousand dollars per occurrence and three hundred
thousand dollars in the aggregate. Certificates shall be made available to the City of Iowa Park upon
request.
(N) If the proposed small wind energy system meets the criteria outlined in subsections (A)
through (L), this regulation requires the City's Division of Code Compliance and Chief Building
Official to approve the permit application for the small wind energy system by right and no public
hearing will be required. For those proposed small wind energy systems that do not meet the criteria
of these subsections, a zoning variance from the City's Board of Adjustment and a public hearing will
be required. The City's variance request fees will be applicable for those small wind energy systems
requiring a construction/installation variance.
(O) A small wind energy system that is out-of-service for a continuous twelve (12) month period
will be deemed to have been abandoned. The Chief Building Official may issue a Notice of
Abandonment to the owner of a small wind energy system that it has been deemed to be abandoned.
The owner shall have the right to respond to the Notice of Abandonment within thirty (30) days from
the Notice receipt date. The Chief Building Official shall withdraw the Notice of Abandonment and
notify the owner that the Notice has been withdrawn if the owner provides information that
demonstrates the small wind energy system has not been abandoned.
(P) If the small wind energy system is determined to be abandoned, the owner of said small wind
energy system shall remove the wind generator from the tower at the owner's sole expense within
three (3) months of receipt of Notice of Abandonment. If the owner fails to remove the wind
generator from the tower, the Chief Building Official may pursue a legal action to have said wind
generator removed at the owner's sole expense.
(Ordinance 1064, sec. 2, adopted 9/22/08)
ARTICLE V. NONCONFORMITIES
Sec. 501.1. Intent
The general public, the planning and zoning commission, and the board of adjustment are directed to take note
that nonconformities in the use and development of land and buildings are to be avoided, or eliminated where
now existing, wherever and whenever possible, except when necessary to preserve property rights established
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 296/362
prior to the date these regulations became effective as to the property in question, and when necessary to
promote the general welfare and to protect the character of surrounding property. It shall be the responsibility of
the commission and the board to assist the City Council in achieving this goal, by advising the council of their
recommendations thereon. As necessary, the council shall from time to time, on its own motion or upon cause
presented by interested property owners, inquire into the existence, continuation or maintenance of any
nonconforming use within the city. (Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 502.1. Nonconforming Lots of Record
(A) Continuance of nonconforming lots: Subject to all limitations herein set forth, any nonconforming lot may
continue without change in boundaries, and may be utilized or developed; provided, that the uses and
development are otherwise authorized by these regulations. No new structure shall be placed thereon, except in
conformity with the applicable controls of the district in which the lot is located.
(B) Discontinuance of nonconforming lots: Any lot which is made conforming, by combining with other lots
for purpose of sale or development, or by subdividing or resubdividing, thereafter shall be recognized as a
confirming [conforming] lot and shall comply in full with the provisions of these regulations.
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 503.1. Nonconforming Structures
Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance that could not
be built under the terms of this ordinance by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, or other
characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, such structure may be continued so long as it remains
otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
(A) Continuance of nonconforming structures. Subject to all limitations herein set forth, any
nonconforming structure may be occupied and operated and maintained in a state of good repair, but
no nonconforming structure shall be enlarged or extended unless the enlargement or extension can
be, and is, made in compliance with all of the provisions herein established for structures in the
district in which the nonconforming structure is located.
(B) Accidental damage to building. If a building occupied by nonconforming uses is destroyed by
fire or elements, it may not be reconstructed or rebuilt, except to conform with provisions herein. In
the case of partial destruction by fire or other causes, not exceeding fifty percent (50%) of its value,
the enforcing officer may issue a permit for reconstruction. If greater than fifty percent (50%) and
less than total, the board of adjustment may grant a permit for repair, but not for enlargement of the
building.
(C) Obsolescence of structure. The right to operate and maintain any nonconforming structure
shall terminate and shall cease to exist whenever the nonconforming structure becomes obsolete or
substandard under any applicable ordinance of the city, and the cost of placing such structure in
lawful compliance with the applicable ordinance exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the replacement cost
of such structure on the date that the enforcing officer determines that such structure is obsolete or
substandard.
(D) Determination of replacement cost. In determining the replacement cost of any nonconforming
structure, there shall not be included the cost of land or any factors other than the nonconforming
structure itself.
(E) Repairs and alterations. Repairs and alterations may be made to a nonconforming building or
structure; provided, however, no structural alteration shall be made except those required by law or
ordinance, unless the building is changed to a conforming use; and provided, that no additional
dwelling units shall be added where the nonconforming use results from there being more dwelling in
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 297/362
which the building is located [sic]. The board of adjustment may grant, as a special exception, an
application to extend or enlarge a building occupied by a nonconforming use of the lot occupied by
such building, provided such grant does not serve to prevent the return of such property to a
conforming use.
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 504.1. Nonconforming Uses of Structures
If a lawful use of a structure, or of structure and premises in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption
or amendment of this ordinance that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this ordinance, the
lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
(A) No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this ordinance in the district in which it
is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered
except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located.
(B) Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were
manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption or amendment of this ordinance,
but not [no] such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building.
(C) Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is
superseded by a permitted use shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which
such structure is located, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed.
(D) When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in combination, is
discontinued or abandoned for six (6) consecutive months, the structure, or structure and premises in
combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformance with the regulations of the district in
which it is located.
(E) Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in combination, removal
or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land.
Sec. 505.1. Nonconforming Uses of Land
Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance, lawful uses of land exist that are no
longer permissible under the terms of this ordinance as enacted or amended, such uses may be continued so long
as they remain otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
(A) No such conforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot or
parcel occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance.
(B) No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased or extended to occupy a greater area
of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance.
(C) If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than thirty
(30) days, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this
ordinance for the district in which such land is located.
Sec. 506.1. Changes in Nonconformity
A nonconforming use of a structure, or of a structure and land in combination, shall not be changed unless
changed to a use permitted in the district in which located; except that the board of adjustment may permit a
change to a more restricted nonconforming use and such change shall be construed as an abandonment of the
former permitted nonconforming use.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 298/362
In order to avoid undue hardship, when at the effective date of this code or amendment thereto, there exists a
lawful child-care facility, and such use would not be permitted by the terms of this code or amendment thereto,
such facility shall be deemed nonconforming and shall be permitted a period of one (1) year to comply with the
district requirements in which the facility is located.
(Ordinance 365, sec 1, adopted 10/12/81)
ARTICLE VI. SPECIFIC DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Sec. 601.1. A-G, General Agricultural District–General Description
The A-G, General Agricultural district, is established for several purposes: (1) to provide for the continued use
of land for predominantly agricultural purposes; (2) to preserve undeveloped areas until they can feasibly be
developed to urban standards and with adequate public safeguards of health, safety, etc.; and (3) to restrict
development in areas subject to severe inundation until such time as it can be shown that these areas are no
longer subject to flooding.
Sec. 601.2. Same–Uses Permitted
Within the A-G, General Agricultural district, the following uses are permitted:
(A) Agriculture, as defined in this ordinance.
(B) Single-family dwellings.
(C) Churches and temples.
(D) Elementary schools and high schools.
(E) Golf courses, but not including golf driving ranges, pitch and putt courses, or miniature golf
courses.
(F) Parks and forest preserves not operated for profit.
(G) Temporary buildings and uses for construction purposes only and not for dwelling purposes,
nor for a period that exceeds the completion of construction.
(H) Accessory buildings or uses incidental to the foregoing principal uses.
(I) Municipal or community recreation centers.
(J) Police or fire stations.
(K) Public buildings or buildings operated in the public interest by a not-for-profit corporation,
including art galleries, post offices, libraries, or museums.
(L) Public or not-for-profit auditoriums, stadiums, arenas, armories, or sanitariums.
(M) Public or private hospitals or sanitariums.
(N) Public or private schools or colleges.
(O) Public utility and service uses including electric substations, gas regulator stations, electric,
gas, telegraph, telephone and water transmission metering and distribution equipment and structures,
microwave relay towers, water reservoirs or pumping stations, and other similar facilities.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 299/362
(P) Carports subject to minimum requirements set out below:
(1) No carport shall be constructed or used until a carport building permit and a zoning
clearance permit have been issued.
(2) No carport shall be constructed or maintained in such a manner as would endanger the
health or safety of the general public.
(3) Carports constructed on residential property shall be no closer than five feet (5') from the
front and/or side property lines.
(4) The carport area shall not exceed five hundred (500) square feet when any portion of said
carport is located in front of any building limit line.
(5) The carport must be customarily incident to and maintained as a part of the principal use.
(6) It must not be hazardous to or impair the use or enjoyment of nearby property in greater
degree than the principal use with which it is associated.
(7) Construction must conform to the city's code for buildings and construction Chapter 5 [3]
of the City's Code of Ordinances.
(8) For the purpose of promoting the health, safety, peace, morals, comfort, convenience,
order and general welfare; preventing overcrowding of land; providing adequate light and air;
conserving the value of buildings and preventing undue encroachment thereon, the City
Secretary shall not permit the construction of a carport if he finds that:
(a) It is intended at some later date to enclose the carport.
(b) Construction will necessitate encroachment upon the private easements for utilities,
refuse collection and other City services.
(Q) Child-care facility which provides care for no more than twelve (12) children at a given time
subject to the minimum requirements set out below:
(1) The structure and use of the building shall permit children fast and safe exits in
emergencies.
(2) No person shall operate a child-care facility or child-placing agency without a license or
registration issued by the regulating and licensing division of the Texas Department of Human
Resources. This does not apply to facilities operated in connection with a shopping center,
business, religious organization, or establishment where children are cared for during short
periods while parents or persons responsible are attending religious services, shopping or
engaging in other activities on or near the premises, including but not limited to retreats or
classes for religious instruction.
(3) One off-street parking space shall be provided for each one thousand (1,000) square feet
of floor space. Unenclosed parking spaces shall be surfaced with an all-weather material.
(Ordinance 364, sec. 1, adopted 10/12/91; Ordinance 365, sec. 1, adopted 10/12/81; Ordinance 986 adopted
10/10/05)
Sec. 601.3. Same–Area and Height Regulations
Minimum
Lot Area
Minimum
Lot
Maximum
Percentage
Maximum
Height
Minimum
Front Yard
Minimum
Side Yard
Minimum
Rear Yard
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 300/362
Frontage Coverage Setback Setback Setback
5 acres 330' 10% 35' 50' 30' 50'
All lots and improvements within the A-G district shall meet the following requirements:
(A) All lots shall have not less than five (5) acres of land, and not more than one (1) principal
building shall be placed on any one (1) lot.
(B) Each lot shall have a frontage of not less than three hundred thirty (330) feet.
(C) Not more than ten (10) percent of the lot area shall be covered with improvements. Paved areas
are not considered improvements within the meaning of this provision.
(D) No improvement or structure shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height above the mean
elevation of the lot.
(E) All structures shall have not less than a fifty (50) foot front yard set back.
(F) All principal structures shall have not less than a thirty (30) foot side yard setback. Accessory
buildings may have side yards of not less than ten (10) feet.
(G) All principal structures shall have not less than a fifty (50) foot rear yard setback. Accessory
buildings may have a rear yard of not less than ten (10) feet.
Sec. 601.4. Same–Signs and Billboards
No signs, posters, bulletin boards, or other similar displays shall be permitted in the A-G district except as
follows:
(A) One bulletin board may be erected on each street frontage of an educational, religious,
institutional, or similar use requiring an announcement of its activities. The bulletin board shall not
exceed twelve (12) square feet in surface area nor fifteen (15) feet in height; and illumination, if any,
shall be by constant light.
(B) One identification sign may be erected on each street frontage of a single-family subdivision or
permitted nonresidential use. The sign shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in surface area nor
fifteen (15) feet in height; and illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.
(C) A real estate sign advertising the sale, rental, or lease of the premises may be erected on each
street frontage of the parcel. The sign shall not exceed eighty (80) square feet in surface area nor
fifteen (15) feet in height; and illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.
Sec. 602.1. R-1, Single-Family Residential District–General Description
The R-1, Single-Family Residential district, is established as a district in which the use of land is for singlefamily
dwellings except as noted. It is the purpose and extent [intent] of this district to promote the development
of and the continued use of the land for single-family dwellings and to prohibit commercial and industrial use or
any other use which would substantially interfere with the development or continuation of single-family
dwellings in this district. The intent is to further discourage any use in this district which would generate traffic
or create congestion on neighborhood streets other than the normal traffic which serves the residents in the area.
This district further encourages only those uses which, because of character of size, would not create additional
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 301/362
requirements and costs for public services in excess of requirements and costs for single-family dwellings.
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 602.2. Same–Uses Permitted
Within the R-1, Single-Family Residential district, the following uses are permitted:
(A) Single-family detached dwelling.
(B) Public schools and private schools where the curriculum is similar in nature and preparation of
course work to the public schools.
(C) Public park or playground.
(D) Agricultural uses of the garden type that are not intended for commercial purposes.
(E) Carports in conformance with section 601.2(P).
(F) Child-care facility in conformance with section 601.2(Q).
(Ordinance 364, sec. 1, adopted 10/12/81; Ordinance 365, sec. 1, adopted 10/12/81; Ordinance 375 adopted
4/12/82)
Sec. 602.3. Same–Uses Permitted Subject to Additional Requirements
The following uses may be established only when authorized by the board of adjustment after a public hearing,
provided they meet the requirements noted for each use in addition to applicable area regulations:
(A) Churches, a minimum lot size of one (1) acre and arterial street frontage as shown on the
thoroughfare plan.
(B) Library, provided it has arterial street frontage a [as] shown on the thoroughfare plan.
(C) Home occupation, provided that it is in keeping with the meaning of “home occupation” as
defined in this ordinance.
(D) Plant nursery, provided that no building or structure is maintained in connection therewith and
no retailing of any material is carried on upon the premises.
(E) Golf course, private or public, or country club, provided that the chief activity is for
recreational purposes, and any commercial activity is accessory or incidental thereto.
(F) Junior high or senior high schools, provided that they have arterial street frontage as shown on
the thoroughfare plan.
(G) Accessory buildings which are not a part of a main building may include one (1) private
garage.
(H) Temporary structures which are incidental to the construction of the main building and will be
removed when the main structure is completed.
(I) Parking lots provided they are within two hundred (200) feet of a commercial or industrial
district.
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 302/362
Sec. 602.4. Same–Area and Height Regulations
Minimum
Lot Area
Minimum
Lot
Frontage
Maximum
Percentage
Coverage
Maximum
Height
Minimum
Front Yard
Setback
Minimum
Side Yard
Setback
Minimum
Rear Yard
Setback
7,000 sq.
ft.
60' 40% 35' 25' 5' interior
lots
10' street
side of
corner lots
20% depth
of lot
All lots and improvements within the R-1 district shall meet the following requirements:
(A) All lots shall have not less than seven thousand (7,000) square feet of lot area, and not more
than one (1) principal building shall be placed on any one (1) lot, except that not less than twelve
thousand (12,000) square feet shall be required for uses other than single-family residences.
(B) Each lot shall have a frontage of not less than sixty (60) feet. The frontage of any wedgeshaped
lot which meets the requirements of minimum lot size may be a minimum of thirty (30) feet;
however, the front building line on the lot shall be a minimum of sixty (60) linear feet measured at an
equal distance parallel to and from the front lot line.
(C) Not more than forty (40) percent of the lot area shall be covered with improvements. Paved
areas are not considered improvements within the meaning of this provision.
(D) No improvement or structure shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height above the mean
elevation of the lot.
(E) All structures shall have not less than a twenty-five (25) foot front yard setback.
(F) For a single-family dwelling of one (1) story, the minimum width of the side yard shall be five
(5) feet for interior lot lines and ten (10) feet for the side yard abutting the side street on a corner lot.
For buildings of more than one (1) story, the minimum width of the side yard on interior lot lines
shall be not less than ten (10) feet. For a principal building other than a single-family dwelling, the
minimum width of the side yard shall be not less than the height of the building, but in no case less
than fifteen (15) feet.
(G) A rear yard of twenty (20) percent of the depth of the lot shall be provided for the principal
building. Detached buildings of accessory use may be located in the rear yard of a main building, in
accordance with the following conditions:
(1) Detached accessory buildings may be located on the rear lot line if a sixteen- foot-wide
alley or larger is adjacent.
(2) Detached accessory buildings may be located eight (8) feet from the centerline of the
alley if the adjacent alley is less than sixteen (16) feet wide.
(3) In the event there is no alley platted within the subdivision, the detached accessory
building may be located five feet (5') from the rear property line.
(H) No principal building (as defined in section 301) shall be constructed or placed on any lot
unless it has a minimum of one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet, exclusive of any garage or
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 303/362
carport.
(Ordinance 332, sec. 1, adopted 5/12/80; Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82; Ordinance 442, sec. 1, adopted
3/11/85; Ordinance 499, sec. 1, adopted 5/12/86; Ordinance 906 adopted 9/9/02)
Sec. 602.5. Same–Signs and Billboards
No signs, billboards, posters, bulletin boards, or other similar displays shall be permitted in the R-1 district
except as follows:
(A) A temporary bulletin board or sign not exceeding twelve (12) square feet in area, pertaining to
the lease, hire or sale of a building or premises, which board or sign shall be removed as soon as the
premises are leased, hired or sold.
(B) One bulletin board may be erected on each street frontage of an educational, religious,
institutional or similar use requiring announcement of its activities. The bulletin board shall not
exceed twelve (12) square feet in surface area nor fifteen (15) feet in height; and illumination, if any,
shall be by constant light.
(C) Official public notices may be erected on affected property.
(D) One (1) non-illuminated nameplate not exceeding two (2) square feet in area and not
containing lettering other than the name of the owner or occupants or name or address of the
premises.
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 603.1. R-2 Residential District–General Description
The R-2 Residential district is designed specifically to provide an area for family housing at a higher density
than permitted in the R-1 district.
The development and continued use of this land for family dwellings is encouraged and the encroachment of
commercial and industrial use, or any other use which would substantially interfere with the development of, or
continuation of, this district as family dwellings is prohibited. This district also discourages any use which
would generate traffic or create congestion on neighborhood streets other than normal traffic which serves the
residents on the street. It also encourages only those uses which, because of character or size, would not create
additional requirements and costs for public services which are in excess of such requirements and costs if the
district were developed solely for family dwellings.
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 603.2. Same–Permitted Uses
(A) Permitted uses in the R-2 Residential district are the same as those in Section 602.2, for the R-1 district.
(B) Multifamily dwelling.
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 603.3. Same–Special Exception Uses
Special exception uses in the R-2 Residential district are the same as those in section 602.3, for the R-1 district.
Also, in addition to applicable area regulations, a mobile home may be permitted as a special exception only
when authorized by the board of adjustment after a public hearing, subject to the minimum requirements set out
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 304/362
below, and such additional safeguards and conditions as may be imposed by the board of adjustment.
(A) Not more than one mobile home dwelling may be located on a lot.
(B) Applicants must own the lot and mobile home, as evidenced by certificate of title and deed,
respectively.
(C) Two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each mobile home dwelling.
(D) The use of liquified petroleum gas is prohibited. (City Ordinance No. 137, as amended.) All
mobile home installations shall meet the requirements of the Texas Department of Labor and
Standards, Mobile Home Division standards and requirements 063.55.67.001 through .013.
(E) In order to ensure against natural hazards such as tornadoes, gale-strength winds, and electrical
storms, etc., mobile home tie-down standards must be met which are in compliance with House Bill
1193, September 20, 1973, as amended.
(F) The mobile home must be completely underskirted with a hard surface, dust-free material
capable, during ordinary use, of withstanding, without substantial deterioration, normal weather
conditions.
(G) Accessory structures or buildings shall be permitted; provided, however, that any structure
shall have a minimum capacity of two hundred (200) cubic feet and shall meet the requirements of
the City's Standard Building Code, Section 412, Storage occupance [occupancy], and section
3.09.006 of the mobile home ordinance [section 3.04.034 of the Code of Ordinances].
(H) A carport will be permitted if the minimum required front yard, side yard, and setback lines are
observed and adhered to.
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 603.4. Same–Area and Height Regulations
Min. Lot
Area
Min. Lot
Frontage
Max.
Percentage
Cov.
Max.
Hgt.
Min.
Front
Yard
Setback
Min.
Side
Yard
Setback
Min.
Rear
Yard
Setback
Singlefamily
6,000 sq.
ft.
50' 40% 35' 25' 5' 20%
Duplex 10,000 60' 35% 35' 25' 5' 20%
Multifamily 10,000
sq. ft. +
2,000
each unit
over two
100' 50% 35' 1'/1
25' min.
1'/1
15' min.
20%
All lots and improvements within the R-2 district shall meet the following requirements:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 305/362
(A) All lots shall have an area of not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet for a single-family
dwelling, ten thousand (10,000) square feet for a two-family dwelling, or ten thousand (10,000)
square feet plus two thousand (2,000) square feet for each dwelling unit over two (2) for multifamily
dwellings. For uses other than dwelling purposes, the lot area shall not be less than ten thousand
(10,000) square feet except as otherwise specified.
(B) Each lot shall have a frontage of not less than fifty (50) feet for single-family dwelling, sixty
(60) feet for two-family dwelling, and one hundred (100) feet for multifamily dwelling and all other
uses.
(C) Not more than fifty percent (50%) of the lot area shall be covered with improvements, except
that duplex shall not exceed thirty-five percent (35%) coverage and single-family improvements forty
percent (40%). Paved areas are not considered improvements within the meaning of this provision.
(D) No improvement or structure shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height above the mean
elevation of the lot.
(E) A minimum front yard setback of twenty-five (25) feet shall be provided on all single-family
and duplex dwellings. One (1) foot of setback for each one (1) foot of height shall be provided for all
uses other than single-family and duplex, but not less than a twenty-five (25) foot front yard shall be
provided.
(F) For dwellings and accessory buildings located on corner lots, there shall be a side yard setback
from the intersecting street of not less than fifteen (15) feet. One (1) foot of setback for each one (1)
foot of height for all uses other than single-family and duplex shall be provided.
(G) A rear yard of twenty percent (20%) of the depth of the lot shall be provided for the principal
building. Detached buildings of accessory use may be located in the rear yard of a main building, in
accordance with the following conditions:
(1) Detached accessory buildings may be located on the rear lot line if a sixteen-foot-wide
alley or larger is adjacent.
(2) Detached accessory buildings may be located eight (8) feet from the centerline of the
alley if the adjacent alley is less than sixteen (16) feet wide.
(3) In the event there is no alley platted within the subdivision, the detached accessory
building may be located five foot (5') from the rear property line.
(H) No principal building (as defined in section 301) shall be constructed or placed on any lot
unless it has a minimum of one thousand (1,000) square feet, exclusive of any garage or carport. This
section shall be interpreted to include mobile homes and modular homes as well as site-built homes.
(Ordinance 332, sec. 1, adopted 5/12/80; Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82; Ordinance 499, sec. 2, adopted
5/12/86; Ordinance 906 adopted 9/9/02)
Sec. 603.5. Same–Signs and Billboards
The control of signs and billboards in the R-2 Residential district is the same as that in section 602.5, for the R-1
district. (Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 603.6. Same–Off-Street Parking
Except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance, all permitted uses in the R-2 Residence district shall comply
with the minimum requirements for off-street parking, of article IV. (Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 306/362
Sec. 604.1. R-3, General Residential District–General Description
The R-3 General Residential district is intended to provide for both low- and high-population density. It is
established as a district in which the principal uses of the land are for multifamily dwellings and similar highdensity
residential development. The intent is to encourage the development and continued use of land for
multifamily dwellings and to prohibit commercial and industrial uses or any other use which would substantially
interfere with the development or continuation of multifamily dwellings in this district. It is further intended to
discourage any use which would generate traffic or create congestion on the neighborhood streets other than the
normal traffic which serves the multifamily dwellings or similar residential uses in this district, and discourage
any use which, because of its character or size, would create additional requirements and costs for public
services which would be in excess of such requirements and costs if the district were developed solely for
multifamily or other similar residential uses. (Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 604.2. Same–Uses Permitted
Within the R-3, General Residential district, the following uses are permitted:
(A) Any use permitted in section 602.2 for the R-1, Single-Family Residential district.
(B) Duplex.
(C) Multifamily dwelling.
(D) Rooming or boarding house.
(E) Mobile home.
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 604.3. Same–Special Exception Uses
The following uses may be established only when authorized by the board of adjustment after a public hearing,
provided they meet the requirements noted for each use, in addition to applicable area regulations.
(A) Convalescent home, rest home, nursing home, and hospitals, public or private, provided they
have frontage on an arterial street as shown on the thoroughfare plan.
(B) Community services, cultural, and utility facilities, provided they are located on a lot of not
less than one acre and have frontage on an arterial street as shown on the thoroughfare plan.
(C) Child-care centers or day nurseries, provided they are located on a lot not less than ten
thousand (10,000) square feet in area and have principal access on an arterial street as shown on the
thoroughfare plan.
(D) Any uses permitted subject to additional requirements in section 602.3 for the R-1, Single-
Family Residential district.
(E) Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above uses when located on the
same lot.
(F) Mobile home park. All mobile parks shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) The applicant, upon making application for a zoning clearance permit, must submit a
detailed site plan locating all mobile home stands, screening or fencing, and plans and
specifications for the proposed park, in a form suitable for making the determinations required
herein.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 307/362
(2) The proposed site shall provide for a minimum of ten (10) mobile home spaces of three
thousand seven hundred forty (3,740) square feet per space. Any mobile home park of twenty
(20) or more sites shall have a minimum frontage of one hundred (100) feet on a street
designated as an arterial or collector street on the thoroughfare plan. All ingress or egress by
automobile shall be on such streets.
(3) The mobile home park shall accommodate primarily permanent occupants, with no more
than forty percent (40%) of the mobile home stands devoted to solely transient purposes. These
solely transient stands are to be located in one area of the park so they will in no way interfere
with the permanent residents.
(4) Front yards of not less than twenty (20) feet and side and rear yards of not less than ten
(10) feet shall be provided on mobile home park sites. The setback from adjacent property line
shall be twenty (20) feet, minimum. The setback from adjacent buildings shall be twenty (20)
feet, minimum.
(5) The mobile home park shall be screened or buffered on all sides with a screening wall or
fence, in accordance with sections 407.1 and 407.2 of this ordinance.
(6) The site shall provide one (1) off-street parking space for each mobile home stand, plus
one (1) additional off-street parking space for every four (4) mobile home stands.
(7) The site shall provide connections for each mobile home stand to all public utilities.
(8) The mobile home park shall at all times operate in compliance with the regulations of the
Code of Ordinances of the City of Iowa Park, Texas, article 3.900 [3.04] of Chapter 3, which, in
the judgment of the health officer, establishes the higher standard for the promotion and
protection of the health and safety of the citizens. The mobile home park, its facilities and
equipment shall be maintained in a good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition at all
times.
(9) Tie-down and ground anchors shall be provided in accordance with regulations of the
City of Iowa Park, which are designed to withstand minimum gale force winds.
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 604.4. Same–Area and Height Regulations
(A) All lots and improvements within the R-3 District shall meet the same requirements as those for the R-2
District, except that no principal building (as defined in Section 301) shall be constructed or placed on any lot
unless it has a minimum of nine hundred (900) square feet, exclusive of any garage or carport.
(B) Mobile homes in the R-3 District (outside of mobile home parks) shall be exempted from subsection (A)
above but shall be required to have a minimum of seven hundred twenty (720) square feet of living space.
(C) Manufactured housing in the R-3 District (outside of mobile home parks) shall be permitted to have a
covered/uncovered porch adjacent to the front of the home as long as the porch can meet a seventeen-foot (17')
setback off the front property line.
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82; Ordinance 499, sec. 3, adopted 5/12/86; Ordinance 591 adopted 1/9/89;
Ordinance 833, sec. 1, adopted 6/14/99)
Sec. 604.5. Same–Signs and Billboards
The control of signs and billboards in the R-3 Residential District is the same as that set forth in Section 602.5
for the R-1 District. (Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 308/362
Sec. 604.6. Off–Street Parking
Except as provided for elsewhere in this article, all permitted uses in the R-3 Residence District shall comply
with the minimum requirements for off-street parking of Article IV. (Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 605.1. C-C, Convenience Commercial District–General Description
The C-C, Convenience Commercial District is intended for a unified grouping in one or more buildings of retail
shops and stores and personal services that provide for the regular needs and are for the convenience of the
people residing in the adjacent residential neighborhoods. It is intended that the convenience center be
developed as a unit with adequate off-street parking space for customers and employees, and with appropriate
landscaping and screening. (Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 605.2. Same–Uses Permitted
Within the C-C District, the following uses are permitted:
(A) Any of the following uses:
Adult business
Artist's supplies and hobby shop
Bakery shop
Barber and beauty shops
Bookstore
Clothing or wearing apparel shops
Drugstore
Dairy products store
Delicatessen
Financial institutions
Florist shop
Gift shop
Grocery store
Hardware store
Jewelry shop
Laundry and dry-cleaning pickup stations
Medical facility
Office, professional and/or general
Pharmacy
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 309/362
Restaurants (not drive-in)
Self-service laundries
Shoe repair shop
Sporting goods store
Tailor shop
Theater
Toy store
Variety store
(B) Any of the uses permitted in Section 604.3, subject to additional requirements as provided.
(C) Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above uses, provided that there
shall be no manufacturing of products other than such as are customarily incidental to retail
establishments.
(D) Any other commercial use deemed by the zoning commission to be of a similar nature to those
listed above.
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82; Ordinance 694, sec. 1, adopted 2/14/94)
Sec. 605.3. Same–Area Regulations
Minimum
Lot Area
Minimum
Lot
Frontage
Maximum
Percentage
Coverage
Maximum
Height
Minimum
Front Yard
Setback
Minimum
Side Yard
Setback
Minimum
Rear Yard
Setback
12,000 sq.
ft.
100' 30% 35' 35' 2'/1' adj. to
residential
district
10'
(A) The parcel of land on which a convenience commercial center is located shall not be less than twelve
thousand (12,000) square feet.
(B) Each lot shall have a frontage of not less than one hundred (100) feet.
(C) Not more than thirty percent (30%) of the lot area shall be covered with improvements. Paved areas are
not considered improvements within the meaning of this provision.
(D) No improvement or structure shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height above the mean elevation of the
lot.
(E) It is intended that the grouping of buildings and parking areas be designed to protect, insofar as possible,
adjacent residential areas. In no case shall the design of the shopping center provide less than the following
standards:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 310/362
(1) All buildings shall be set back from all street right-of-way lines not less than thirty-five (35)
feet.
(2) On the side of a lot adjoining a residential district, there shall be a side yard setback of two (2)
feet for each one (1) foot of height.
(3) All buildings shall be set back from the rear lot line not less than ten (10) feet.
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 605.4. Same–Business Signs
Business signs, poster boards, bulletin boards, or other similar display in the C-C district shall conform to the
following requirements:
(A) In the C-C district, one business sign not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in surface area
and identifying the business or activity conducted on the premises may be erected on each street
frontage of the parcel. In the case of a shopping center containing a group of businesses and/or
activities on one lot, one (1) accessory building sign may be erected on the lot identifying the
shopping center. Such accessory sign shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet in the area. Ground signs
shall not exceed the height of the building in which the principal use is located or twenty (20) feet,
whichever is higher. No business sign shall be located within fifty (50) feet of a residential district if
visible from such district. Illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.
(B) A real estate sign advertising the sale, rental or lease of the premises may be erected on each
street frontage of the development. The sign shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in surface area
nor fifteen (15) feet in height; and illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.
(C) All signs in the C-C district shall be erected upon private property and shall not encroach at
ground level upon any public street or walk except as provided by the applicable codes of the city
and they shall not overhang at a height of less than twelve (12) feet and shall not have a maximum
overhang projecting greater than seventy-two (72) inches.
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 605.5. Location Requirements for Adult Business
(A) A structure housing an adult business shall be located at least one thousand (1,000) feet from any
residential district boundary line, or from any structure used as a residence, church, public or denominational
school, hospital, licensed child-care facility, hotel or motel, park or playground (public), playfields or stadiums
(public), institutions of religious, charitable, or philanthropic nature, and from any other structure housing an
adult business.
(B) Distance requirements are to be measured in a straight line in all directions from the structure housing the
adult business to any residentially zoned district boundary line; to any structure used for a residence, church,
school, or hospital; any lot used for a park; and from structure to structure of those facilities housing adult
businesses.
(C) The measurements to a structure shall be taken from the farthest point that a structure extends in the
direction of the measurement, including overhanging roofs and all other projections or portions of said structure.
(D) Should an adult business be located in conjunction with other buildings in a manner where said adult
business is clearly separated from other portions of the structure (for example, an adult business in a shopping
center), measurements shall be taken from the boundaries of the space occupied by the adult business.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 311/362
(E) Should an adult business be located in a manner where said adult business is situated above the ground
level of a multi-story structure and is clearly separate from other activities within the structure, the adult
business measurements shall be taken from the boundaries of the space occupied by the adult business, thence to
the nearest point of egress (elevator or stairs), thence to the nearest ground floor exit, thence in a straight line in
all directions to any residentially zoned district boundary line; to any structure used for a residence, church,
school, or hospital; any lot used for a park; and from structure to structure of those facilities housing an adult
business.
(F) Viewing booth requirements for an adult business:
(1) Viewing booths in an adult business shall be configured in such a manner that there is an
unobstructed and unobstructable view of the interior area of the viewing booth from outside the
entrance to the viewing booth at all times.
(2) Walls or partitions of viewing booths between two (2) feet and six (6) feet above floor level
shall have no holes or voids in such walls or partitions.
(3) A viewing booth shall at all times be illuminated with not less than that amount of light
provided by a 20-watt bulb.
(4) It shall be the duty of the person accepting payment from customers of an adult business to
ensure that the viewing booth requirements in this section are in compliance at all times.
Sec. 605.6. License Required for Adult Business; Fees Established
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, operate, or permit to be operated for his benefit, an adult
business as defined by section 301 of the Code of Ordinances [this ordinance] of the City of Iowa Park without
first having obtained a license as required herein, which license shall at all times be displayed in some
conspicuous place within the licensed premises.
(B) The annual license fee for each adult business is two hundred dollars ($200.00), which shall be paid
before a license may be issued.
Sec. 605.7. [License for Adult Business–] Application and Issuance
(A) A license for an adult business shall be obtained from the Chief of Police by completing an application
and meeting the requirements of this article.
(B) The application shall be sworn to and acknowledged and shall state:
(1) The street address of the premises to be licensed.
(2) The full name, date of birth, driver's license number and residence of the applicant.
(3) If the premises are leased, the names of the lessor and lessee.
(4) If the application is on behalf of a partnership of an adult business, the partners' names, dates of
birth, drivers' license numbers and residence addresses shall be listed.
(5) If the application is on behalf of a corporate owner of an adult business, the name of the
corporation, the name and address of the registered agent, and the name and address, date of birth and
driver's license number of the person who is primarily responsible for the management of the adult
business.
(6) Whether or not the applicant, any partner who is an owner of an adult business, any person who
is or will be primarily responsible for the management of the adult business, or any employee has
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 312/362
ever been convicted of a crime involving sex.
(C) Any misrepresentations of the facts required by the license application shall be cause for revocation or
refusal to issue a license.
(D) Upon the filing of an application for an adult business license, the Chief of Police shall promptly
investigate the premises to determine whether or not the premises meets the requirements of the Code of
Ordinances of the City of Iowa Park concerning construction, plumbing, electricity, fire safety, sanitation, zoning
and the requirements of this article.
(E) If the Chief of Police shall determine that the application meets the requirements and that the persons
listed in (B)(6) above have not been convicted of a crime involving sex, he shall issue a license to the applicant
within eleven (11) days of filing the application. Should the Chief of Police find a deficiency in the application
or the premises, he will notify the applicant before the expiration of said eleven (11) day period, who will have
five (5) working days (of city hall), to correct the deficiency and request a reinspection. Reinspection will occur
within three (3) working days, and upon correction of the noted deficiencies having been found a license will be
issued on the following working day. The applicant will be required to pay twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per
reinspection per application.
(F) An applicant who is denied a license may appeal the denial to District Court as authorized by law.
Sec. 605.8. [Same–] Duration, Non-Assignable, Non-Transferable
(A) A license issued under the article shall terminate one (1) year from the date of issuance.
(B) No refund of any license fee paid hereunder shall be made.
(C) A license issued under this article may not be assigned or transferred to another location, and shall
terminate upon the death or bankruptcy of the licensee or transfer of ownership of the business.
Sec. 605.9. [Same–] Inspections; Violations, Revocation of License
(A) As a condition of issuance, the applicant for a license under this article shall agree to maintain the
premises in compliance with the requirements of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Iowa Park and to
authorize the agents and employees of the City of Iowa Park to inspect the premises or any portion thereof at any
time during business hours.
(B) The person in control of an adult business shall not authorize or allow any person under the age of twentyone
(21) years to enter or patronize such adult business. A single violation of this requirement shall constitute an
offense and cause for revocation of the license for the adult business.
(C) Should the Chief of Police determine that an adult business is not in compliance with the requirements of
the Code of Ordinances of the City of Iowa Park, he may at any time give notice in writing to the licensee, or the
person in control if the licensee cannot be easily located, of the violation and that the license is in jeopardy of
revocation if the violation is not corrected by the following business day. Should the violation not be corrected
by the following business day, the Chief of Police may revoke and cancel the license.
(D) The licensee may abate the revocation by filing an appeal with a district court and obtaining a temporary
restraining order.
(E) Every day of operation of an adult business after cancellation and revocation of a license shall constitute
an offense punishable by a fine of not less than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00).
(F) Any person, corporation or partnership who has had a license revoked for a violation of the license or
zoning requirements regulating adult businesses shall not be granted a license for a period of ten (10) years from
the date of revocation.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 313/362
(Ordinance 694, sec. 1, adopted 2/14/94)
Sec. 606.1. C-A/R, Automobile Commercial and Commercial Recreation District–General Description
The C-A/R, Automobile Commercial and Commercial Recreation district is established as a district in which the
principal use of land is for establishments offering accommodations, supplies of services to motorists, and for
certain specialized uses such as retail outlets, extensive commercial amusement and service establishments
which serve the entire community but do not and should not necessarily locate in the central business district or
the Convenience Commercial district. (Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 606.2. Same–Uses Permitted
Within the C-A/R, Automobile Commercial and Commercial Recreation district, the following uses are
permitted:
(A) Any use permitted in the C-C, Convenience Commercial district.
(B) Other uses, including:
Amusement enterprises
New and used automobile sales and service, new and used machinery sales and service,
and public garages
Ambulance service office or garage
Automobile service station
Billboards as permitted in section 605.4
Boat sales
Bowling alleys
Bus terminal
Dance hall
Drive-in theater or restaurant
Electric transmission station
Feed and fuel store
Funeral parlor
Garden stores
Golf course, miniature or practice range
Heating and plumbing sales and service
Hospital for small animals
Ice plant
Key shop
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 314/362
Kennel
Laundry
Motels
Music, radio and television shop and repair
Nightclub
Novelty
Pawnshop
Pet shop
Printing plant
Public uses
Recreation center, private
Roller skating rink
Sign painting shop
Tavern
Travel trailer park and sales
Wholesale distributing center
(C) Any other store or shop for retail trade or for providing personal, professional or business
service other than those provided for in section 606.2.
(D) Buildings, structures and accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses,
provided that there shall be no manufacturing of products other than such as are customarily
incidental to retail establishments.
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 606.3. Same–Area and Height Regulations
Minimum
Lot Area
Minimum
Lot
Frontage
Maximum
Percentage
Coverage
Maximum
Height
Minimum
Front Yard
Setback
Minimum
Side Yard
Setback
Minimum
Rear Yard
Setback
12,000 sq.
ft.
100' 30% 35' 50' 2'/1' adj. to
residential
district
20'
(A) The parcel of land on which any commercial use is located shall not be less than twelve thousand (12,000)
square feet.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 315/362
(B) Each lot shall have a frontage of not less than one hundred (100) feet.
(C) Not more than thirty percent (30%) of the lot area shall be covered with improvements. Paved areas are
not considered improvements within the meaning of this provision.
(D) No improvement or structure shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height above the mean elevation of the
lot.
(E) It is intended that the commercial uses and parking areas within a C-A/R district be designed to protect,
insofar as possible, adjacent residential areas. In no case shall the development have less than the following
standards:
(1) All buildings shall be set back from all street right-of-way lines not less than fifty (50) feet.
(2) On the side of a lot adjoining a residential district there shall be a side yard setback of two (2)
feet for each one (1) foot of height.
(3) All buildings shall be set back from the rear lot line no less than twenty (20) feet.
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 606.4. Same–Business Signs
Business signs, poster boards, bulletin boards, or other similar display in the C-A/R district shall conform to the
following requirements:
(A) In the C-A/R district, business signs not exceeding, in the aggregate, three (3) square feet of
display surface area per one (1) linear foot of street frontage may be erected on each street frontage
of the parcel. Signs and billboards shall have a setback requirement from adjoining property
structures equal to one hundred and ten percent (100%) of the height of said signs and/or billboards.
No sign or billboard shall be located within fifty feet (50') of a residential district if visible from such
district. Illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.
(B) A real estate sign advertising the sale, rental, or lease of the premises may be erected on each
street frontage of the development. The sign shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet in surface area nor
fifteen (15) feet in height; and illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.
(C) All signs in the C-A/R district shall be erected upon private property and shall not encroach at
ground level upon any public street or walk except as provided by the applicable codes of the City
and they shall not overhang at a height of less than twelve (12) feet and shall not have a maximum
overhang projection greater than seventy-two (72) inches.
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82; Ordinance 1098 adopted 1/11/10)
Sec. 607.1. C-G, General Commercial District–General Description
The C-G, General Commercial district is designed for the conduct of personal and business services and the
general retail trade of the community. It is designed to accommodate a wide variety of commercial uses in the
central business district or areas of mixed business enterprises. It will not normally be applied in the case of new
commercial areas. (Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 607.2. Same–Uses Permitted
Within the C-G, General Commercial district, the following uses are permitted:
(A) Any use permitted in a C-C district.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 316/362
(B) Other retail, personal service, business service, or professional use other than uses first listed in
the C-A/R district regulations.
(C) Any public or quasi-public buildings or uses.
(D) Buildings, structures, and accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses,
provided that there shall be no manufacturing of products other than such as are customarily
incidental to retail establishments.
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 607.3. Same–Uses Permitted Subject to Additional Requirements
The following uses may be permitted by the zoning commission after a public hearing, provided they meet the
requirements noted for each use in addition to all other regulations applicable to the C-G General Commercial
district:
(A) Uses first listed in the C-A/R district if located on a lot fronting on a street designated as an
arterial street in the thoroughfare plan and if the proposed use will meet all regulations applicable in
the C-A/R district and the use will not create undue traffic hazards.
(B) Wholesale businesses if no outdoor storage is located on the property in this district.
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 607.4. Same–Area and Height Regulations
Minimum
Lot Area
Minimum
Lot
Frontage
Maximum
Percentage
Coverage
Maximum
Height
Minimum
Front Yard
Setback
Minimum
Side Yard
Setback
Minimum
Rear Yard
Setback
None None None None None None None
There are no area or height regulations in the C-G district.
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 607.5. Same–Signs and Billboards
All signs and billboards in the C-G district shall conform to the requirements in section 605.4. (Ordinance 375
adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 608.1. I-L, Light Industrial District–General Description
The purpose of the I-L, Light Industrial district is to provide a location for industries which do not by their
nature create nuisances. The intent is to preserve this land for industry in a location beneficial to industries and
to prohibit non-industrial uses. Because of the traffic generated and other potentially objectionable influences
created in this district, a buffer or setback area between this district and any other zoning district except I-H is
required. (Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 608.2. Same–Standards
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 317/362
Any use constructed, established, altered, or enlarged in the I-L, Light Industrial district, after the effective date
of this ordinance shall be so operated as to comply with the following standards:
(A) No building shall be used for residential purposes, except that a watchman may reside on the
premises.
(B) No retail sales or services shall be permitted except as incidental to or accessory to a permitted
use.
(C) No operation or activity shall cause or create noise in excess of the sound levels prescribed
below:
In the I-L district, at no point on or beyond the boundary of any lot shall the sound
pressure level resulting from any use, operation, or activity exceed the maximum
permitted decibel levels for the designated octave bands as set forth in Tables I and II
below:
TABLE I. PREFERRED FREQUENCIES
Center Frequency,
Cycles per Second
Maximum Permitted
Sound Pressure
Level, Decibels
31.5 76
63 74
125 68
250 63
500 57
1,000 52
2,000 45
4,000 38
8,000 32
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 318/362
TABLE II. PRE-1960 OCTAVE BANDS
Octave Band, Cycles
per Second
Maximum Permitted
Sound Pressure
Level, Decibels
20-75 75
75-150 70
150-300 64
300-600 59
600-1,200 53
1,200-2,400 47
2,400-4,800 40
4,800-10 KC 34
Method of measurement: For the purpose of measuring the intensity and frequency of
sound, the sound level meter, the octave hand analyzer, and the impact noise analyzer
shall be employed. The flat network and the fast meter response of the sound level meter
shall be used. Sounds of short duration a [as] from forge hammers, punch presses, and
metal shears which cannot be measured accurately with the sound level meter shall be
measured with the impact noise analyzer.
Octave band analyzers calibrated in the Preferred Frequencies (American Standards
Association S1.6-1960, Preferred Frequencies for Acoustical Measurements) shall be used
with the Table I. Octave band analyzers calibrated with pre-1960 octave band (American
Standards Association Z24.10-1954, Octave Band Filter Set) shall use Table II.
For impact sounds measured with the impact noise analyzer, the sound pressure levels set
forth in Tables I and II may be increased by six (6) decibels in each octave band.
Exemptions: The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the noise level
regulations:
(1) Noises not directly under the control of the property user.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 319/362
(2) Noises emanating from construction and maintenance activities between 7:00 a.m. and
9:00 p.m.
(3) The noises of safety signals, warning devices, and emergency pressure relief valves.
(4) Transient noises of moving sources such as automobiles, trucks, airplanes and railroads.
(D) No toxic matter, noxious matter, smoke, gas, or odorous or particulate matter shall be emitted
that is detectable beyond the lot lines of the lot on which the use is located.
(E) Earth-carried vibration shall be limited so that detection by seismograph at any property line of
an industrial establishment shall not exceed a value measured and computed as follows:
Method of measurement: Measurement shall be made at the property line; vibration
displacements shall be measured with an instrument capable of measuring in three
mutually perpendicular directions.
Maximum permissible displacements: The following formula shall be used in computing
the maximum displacements permitted in the I-L district:
D = K
f
Where:
D = displacement in inches
K = .01
f = the frequency of the vibration transmitted through the ground in cycles per second.
(F) Exterior lighting fixtures, wherever necessary, shall be shaded to avoid casting direct light
upon property located in any residential district.
(G) The manufacture of flammable materials which produce explosive vapors or gases is
prohibited.
(H) No outside storage of equipment and/or material, except equipment in daily use, shall be
permitted in such a location where it can be viewed from any public street.
(I) Any operation that produces intense glare or heat shall be performed within a completely
enclosed building, and exposed sources of light shall be screened so as not to be detectable beyond
the lot lines.
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 608.3. Same–Uses Permitted
Within the I-L, Light Industrial district, the following uses are permitted:
(A) Building materials sales.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 320/362
(B) Commercial radio and television transmitting antenna towers and other electronic equipment
requiring outdoor towers, including antenna towers for the dispatching of private messages.
(C) Compounding, processing and blending of chemical products, but not including any materials
which decompose by detonation.
(D) General and administrative offices.
(E) Machine shops and metal products manufacture and tool and die shops, provided they do not
include any of the following equipment: Automatic metal turning or threading lathes, drop forges or
riveting machines.
(F) Mail-order houses.
(G) Manufacturing and assembling (or any combination of such processes) of products from wood,
cork, glass, leather, fur, plastic, felt, and other textiles, but not including as a principal operation the
processing of any raw materials.
(H) Manufacturing and assembling of electrical and electronic products and equipments.
(I) Printing and binding plants.
(J) Research laboratories.
(K) Warehouse and storage facilities.
(L) Water filtration plants, pumping stations, reservoirs, and lift stations.
(M) Accessory uses incidental to and on the same zoning lot as a principal use.
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 608.4. Same–Uses Permitted Subject to Additional Requirements
The zoning commission may permit uses other than those listed above to be located in the I-L district, after
public hearing and determination that any such use is similar to those listed above and is not listed in section
608.3. (Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 608.5. Same–Area and Height Regulations
Minimum
Lot Area
Minimum
Lot
Frontage
Maximum
Percentage
Coverage
Maximum
Height
Minimum
Front Yard
Setback
Minimum
Side Yard
Setback
Minimum
Rear Yard
Setback
None None 40% None 50' 50' (minimum
of 2' of setback
for each 1' of
height when
adjacent to
residential
district)
50'
(A) There are no area requirements in an I-L district.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 321/362
(B) There are no lot frontage requirements in an I-L district.
(C) Not more than forty (40) percent of the lot area shall be covered with improvements. Paved areas are not
considered improvements within the meaning of this provision.
(D) There are no height requirements in an I-L district.
(E) No structure shall be erected, commenced or maintained which has a front yard of less than fifty (50) feet.
(F) When adjacent to a residential district, a side yard of fifty (50) feet or two (2) feet for each one (1) foot of
height, whichever is greater, shall be provided.
(G) When adjacent to a residential district, a rear yard of fifty (50) feet or two (2) feet for each one (1) foot of
height, whichever is greater, shall be provided.
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 608.6. Same–Signs and Billboards
All signs and billboards in the I-L district shall conform to the requirements in section 605.4. (Ordinance 375
adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 609.1. I-H, Heavy Industrial District–General Description
The purpose of the I-H, Heavy Industrial district, is to provide a location for industries which may by their
nature create nuisances. The intent is to preserve this land especially for such industry in locations with access to
arterial streets as designated on the thoroughfare plan, as well as locations generally accessible to railroad
transportation. Because of the nuisances or other objectionable influences that may be created in this district, a
buffer or setback strip between this district and other zoning districts except I-L is required. (Ordinance 375
adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 609.2. Same–Standards
Any use constructed, established, altered or enlarged in the I-H, Heavy Industrial district, after the effective date
of this ordinance shall be so operated as to comply with the following standards. No use already established on
the effective date of this ordinance shall be so altered or modified as to conflict with, or further conflict with, the
applicable standards hereinafter for the I-H district.
(A) No building shall be used for residential purposes, except that a watchman may reside on the
premises.
(B) No retail sales or services shall be permitted except as incidental to or accessory to a permitted
use.
(C) No storage, manufacture, or assembly of goods shall be conducted out of a building unless the
nearest point of said activity is more than one hundred (100) feet from the boundary of any zoning
district.
(D) Exterior lighting fixtures shall be shaded wherever necessary to avoid casting direct light upon
property located in any residential district.
(E) All manufacturing, fabricating, assembly, disassembly, repairing, storing, cleaning, servicing
and testing of goods, water [wares] and merchandise shall be carried on in such a manner as not to be
injurious or offensive by reason of the emission or creation of noise, vibration, smoke, dust or other
particulate matter, toxic or noxious matter, odors, glare, heat, fire or explosive hazards.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 322/362
(F) No activities involving storage, utilization, or manufacture of materials or products which
decompose by detonation shall be permitted.
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 609.3. Same–Uses Permitted
Within the I-H, Heavy Industrial district, the following uses are permitted:
(A) Any use permitted in the I-L district.
(B) Automobile wrecking and junkyards, provided they are enclosed throughout the entire
perimeter by a solid fence not less than eight (8) feet in height.
Blacksmith, tinsmiths and sheetmetal shops
Bottling works
Bulk fuel sales and service
Canning or preserving factories
Cold storage plants
Ice cream production and distribution
Laundry and dry-cleaning plants
Machinery rental, sales and service
Machine shops
Manufacturing, fabricating, assembling, repairing, storing and cleaning, servicing, or testing of
any of the following materials, goods or merchandise:
Apparel
Beverages (nonalcoholic), processing and bottling
Building materials specialties
Clothing
Compounding and packaging of chemicals
Cosmetics and toiletries
Dairy products
Drugs and pharmaceutical products
Electrical and acoustical products and components
Food products (except fish, sauerkraut, vinegar and yeast)
Furniture
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 323/362
Glass products
Ice, dry and natural
Jewelry
Medical laboratory supplies, equipment and specialties
Metal products and utensils
Musical instruments
Optical goods
Paper products, including boxes and containers
Radios, phonographs, records and television sets and parts
Textiles
Toys and children's vehicles
Trailers and carts
Wood products, including wooden boxes and containers
Meat and vegetable products processing, including the slaughter of animals
Milk, bottling and distribution
Monumental stonecutting
Motor freight terminals
Pattern shops
Printing plants
Railroad yards and switching areas, including lodging and sleeping facilities for transient
railroad labor
Sign painting
Soldering and welding shops
Spray painting and mixing
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 609.4. Same–Area Regulations
(A) There are no requirements for minimum lot area or frontage in the I-H district.
(B) Front, rear and side yard requirements in the I-H district are the same as those set forth in section 607.4
[608.5] for the I-L district.
(C) Buildings shall not cover more than fifty (50) percent of the site on which the use is located.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 324/362
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 609.5. Same–Signs and Billboards
All signs and billboards in the I-H district shall confirm [conform] to the requirements in section 605.4.
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 610.1. P-1, Public Use District–General Description
Public Use districts are publicly owned areas intended to be used only for public purposes. (Ordinance 375
adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 610.2. Same–Use of Public Areas; Rezoning After Discontinuance of Use
Areas indicated on the zoning map, such as public parks, school sites, cemeteries, recreation area, libraries, fire
stations, waterworks, airport, hospitals or other public uses, shall not be used for any purpose other than that
designated; when this use of the area is discontinued, it shall automatically be zoned to the most restricted
adjoining district until such time as the City Council, acting on the recommendation of the zoning commission
and in accordance with procedures set out in Article IX of this ordinance, shall approve inclusion of such
property in another district or districts. (Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Secs. 610.3, 610.4. Reserved
Sec. 610.5. P-2, Special Public Use District–General Description
Special Public Use districts are intended to provide the same uses as provided in the P-1 zone as provided in
sections 610.1 and 610.2. In addition, the P-2 district allows other special uses normally prohibited in parks or
within the city limits. Such other uses might include shooting ranges, hunting activities, fireworks, camping and
similar activities usually associated with outdoor events in areas outside the incorporated city limits of a
community. Such additional uses are not permitted unless specifically listed and identified in Chapter 15 and/or
Appendix A of this Code of Ordinances [this exhibit A]. (Ordinance 594, sec. 2, adopted 2/13/89)
Sec. 611.1. PD, Planned Development District–Purpose
The PD, Planned Development district is designed to encourage a greater flexibility and the opportunity for a
higher standard of land development than is permitted under conventional regulations. As such, it makes feasible
the application of planning concepts dealing with planned unit development (PUD) of residential areas, planned
shopping centers, and planned industrial parks. Improvements in a PD district are subject to conformance with a
site plan approved by the City Council of Iowa Park, on the planning and zoning commission's recommendation,
and after public hearing thereon. (Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 611.2 Same–Effects of PD Classification
Property may be classified under the PD Planned Development district in combination with any district and so
designated by the letters “PD” affixed to the code letters of the base district. When the “PD” designation is so
affixed to another base district, development may proceed in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 611.3. Same–Special Regulation
(A) When the PD district is combined with any other district, and the property is to be used for a
nonresidential purpose, the tract shall have a gross area of at least ten (10) acres. In addition to the development
controls for nonresidential uses, special attention shall be given to the potentially adverse effects of the proposed
development on adjacent residential properties. The planning and zoning commission shall not recommend for
City Council approval, any site plan which it finds will create unnecessary traffic congestion on local streets in
such residential area, will create a potential hazard to such properties by reason of water ponding or by
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 325/362
intensifying water flows, or will otherwise be operated in such manner as to be detrimental to the health or
safety of occupants of adjacent land.
(B) When the “PD” classification is combined with any other district, and the property is to be used for a
residential purpose, the tract shall have a gross area of at least twenty (20) acres; the yard requirements for
residential uses shall apply only to the total site and to individual blocks within the site; in lieu of the minimum
lot area-lot width requirements, the bulk controls of the district in which the property, or part thereof, is located,
shall apply.
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 611.4. [Same–] Site Plan Approval Required
A site plan approved by the City Council shall be a prerequisite to issuance of building permits and certificates
of occupancy for any property in the district, other than those which are entitled to same by reason of other
provisions of this ordinance. (Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 611.5. [Same–] Information to Be Shown on Site Plan and Application
The site plan shall show all pertinent information as necessary to accompany an application for building permit
and such other information pertinent to the site and surrounding area as the planning and zoning commission
may require under its rules of procedure, including a schedule of proposed improvements, both on-site and offsite.
An application for a planned unit development shall be filed with the planning and zoning commission. The
application shall be accompanied by a free [fee] in accordance with the established fee schedule. The application
shall be in such form and content as the planning and zoning commission may be [by] resolution establish;
provided that three (3) copies of an outline development plan shall accompany the filing of the application. The
outline development shall consist of maps and text which contain:
(A) A site plan reflecting:
(1) Proposed location of uses, including off-street parking, open spaces, and public uses;
(2) Development standards for location, height, setback and size of buildings and other
structures;
(3) Public and private vehicular and pedestrian circulation;
(4) The approximate intensity of residential uses, expressed in number of dwelling units, and
the approximate intensity of nonresidential uses, expressed in floor area, allocated to each
identifiable segment of the planned unit development;
(5) Proposed screening and landscaping;
(6) Proposed location, height and size of any ground sign;
(7) Sufficient surrounding area to demonstrate the relationship of the PUD to adjoining uses,
both existing and proposed.
(B) Existing topographic character of the land, including identification of floodplain areas, treed
areas, slope analysis and soil analysis.
(C) An explanation of the character of the PUD.
(D) The expected schedule of development.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 326/362
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 611.6. Same–Public Hearing; Planning and Zoning Commission Action
A request for site plan approval shall be processed in accordance with the same review and hearing procedure as
a proposal for zoning district change. A site plan approval request may be heard concurrent with or subsequent
to a zoning change request, but not before.
The planning and zoning commission, upon the filing of an application for the supplemental district designation
PUD, shall set the matter for public hearing and give fifteen (15) days' notice thereof by publication in a
newspaper of general circulation, and ten (10) days' notice by the posting of a sign or signs on the property.
Within sixty (60) days after the filing of an application, the planning and zoning commission shall conduct the
public hearing and shall determine:
(A) Whether the PUD is consistent with the comprehensive plan;
(B) Whether the PUD harmonizes with the existing and expected development of surrounding
areas;
(C) Whether the PUD is a unified treatment of the development possibilities of the project site;
(D) Whether the PUD is consistent with the stated purposes and standards of this section (section
611.1).
The planning and zoning commission shall forward its recommendation, the application, and the outline
development plan to the City Council for further hearing, as provided in section 611.7.
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 611.7. Same–City Council Action
Upon receipt of the application, outline development plan, and planning and zoning commission
recommendation, the City Council shall hold a hearing, review the outline development plan, and approve,
disapprove, modify, or return the outline development plan to the planning and zoning commission for further
consideration. Upon approval, the zoning map shall be amended to reflect the supplemental designation PUD,
and the applicant shall be authorized to process a subdivision plat incorporating the provisions of the outline
development plan. (Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 611.8. Planned Unit Development–Subdivision Plat
A planned unit development (PUD) subdivision plat shall be filed with the planning and zoning commission and
shall be processed in accordance with the subdivision regulations, and, in addition to the requirements of the
subdivision, regulations, shall include:
(A) Details as to the location of uses and street arrangement;
(B) Provisions for the ownership and maintenance of the common open space, as will reasonably
ensure its continuity and conservation. Open space may be dedicated to a private association or to the
public; provided, that a dedication to the public shall not be accepted without the approval of the City
Council;
(C) Such covenants as will reasonably ensure the continued compliance with the approved outline
development plan. The planning and zoning commission may require covenants which provide for
detailed site plan review and approval by said commission, prior to the issuance of any building
permits within the PUD. In order that the public interest may be protected, the City of Iowa Park
shall be made beneficiary of covenants pertaining to such matters as location of uses, height of
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 327/362
structures, setbacks, screening, and access. Such covenants shall provide that the City of Iowa Park
may enforce compliance therewith; and shall further provide that amendment of such covenants shall
require the approval of the planning and zoning commission and the filing of record of a written
amendment to the covenants, endorsed by the planning and zoning commission.
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 611.9. Same–Issuance of Building Permits
After the filing of an approved PUD subdivision plat, and notice thereof to the Building Inspector, no building
permits shall be issued on lands within the PUD, except in accordance with the approved plat. A building permit
for a freestanding or separate commercial structure within a PUD containing no commercial zoning shall not be
issued unit [until] building permits have been issued for at least one-half of the number of dwelling units on
which the authorization of the commercial use is based. (Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 611.10. Same–Amendments
Minor changes in the PUD may be authorized by the planning and zoning commission, which may direct the
processing of an amended subdivision plat, incorporating such changes, so long as substantial compliance is
maintained with the outline development plan and the purposes and standards of the PUD provisions hereof.
Changes which would represent a significant departure from the outline development plat shall require
compliance with the notice and procedural requirements of an original planned unit development. (Ordinance
375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 611.11. Same–Abandonment
Abandonment of a planned unit development shall require the City Council's approval, after recommendation by
the planning and zoning commission, of an application for amendment to the zoning map, repealing the
supplemental designation of PUD. Upon final action authorizing the abandonment of the planned unit
development, no building permit shall be issued except in accordance with the restrictions and limitations of the
general zoning district or districts. (Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 612.1. FD Floodway Supplemental District
An FD Floodway Supplemental district, as set forth below, is hereby established. (Ordinance 375 adopted
4/12/82)
Sec. 612.2. Flood Hazard Area Maps Adopted
(1) In addition to the establishment of the FD Floodway Supplemental zoning district, the City Council shall
adopt by resolution, flood hazard area maps prepared by the City Engineer, or as prepared by the U.S. Corps of
Engineers, or the Federal Insurance Administration, and confirmed by the City Engineer, or as prepared by a
registered professional engineer and certified by the City Engineer, for each river, creek, or tributary within a
recognized flood hazard area. The adoption of the flood hazard area maps is essential for the protection of
health, safety, and general welfare of the public, and may occur prior to the adoption of the FD Floodway
Supplemental district boundary delineations. Such flood hazard area maps shall be made available for public
inspection in the offices of city hall. The following requirements shall be met before a zoning clearance permit
or building permit is issued within a flood hazard area, as depicted on said flood hazard area maps:
(A) Permitted uses within the flood hazard area shall be those uses permitted in the respective
general use district; provided, that after the effective date of this code, all new construction or
substantial improvements in said flood hazard areas (including prefabricated homes, prefabricated
buildings and mobile homes) must be designed (or modified) and anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement of the structures; and all such new construction or substantial
improvements of residential structures in said flood hazard areas, with the exception of mobile
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 328/362
homes, shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated one (1) foot above the level of the
one-hundred-year flood; all such new construction or substantial improvements of nonresidential
structures in said flood hazard areas, with the exception of mobile homes, shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated one (1) foot above the level of the one-hundred-year flood or, together
with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be floodproofed up to one (1) foot above the level of the
one-hundred-year flood; and the pad or ground upon which mobile homes are place [placed] or
located in said flood hazard areas shall be elevated to or above the level of the one-hundred-year
flood. Mobile homes located on lots for the purposes of sale shall be subject to the requirements of
this section. It shall be permissible to landfill in order to establish the elevation required by this
subparagraph, but not in the channel or floodway necessary to carry the one-hundred-year level
flood. Prior to any landfilling in said flood hazard area, approval shall be obtained from the City
Engineer. The City Engineer shall, prior to approving said landfill, determine that the same is not
taking place or being accomplished within the channel or floodway necessary to carry the onehundred-
year level flood, so as to constitute an obstruction to said channel. The City Engineer shall
further determine, prior to authorizing said landfill, that the same will not otherwise be detrimental to
the health, safety, or general welfare of the community;
(B) Permitted uses shall conform to the bulk and area requirements of the use district in which
located.
(2) The boundaries of the flood hazard area maps may be amended by resolution of the City Council so as to
maintain uniformity with the purposes of this code upon a finding that:
(A) A flood control project of the federal, state, county or city government, or a private person, has
substantially altered the boundaries of the flood hazard area;
(B) Flood data compiled subsequent to the adoption of the flood hazard area maps indicates that
the boundaries of the flood hazard areas should be adjusted; or
(C) Proposed improvements, such as berms, dikes, landfill, channel improvements, or flood
retention reservoirs and/or combination thereof, will substantially alter the boundaries of the
floodway, but will not increase substantially, upstream or downstream one-hundred-year flood
elevation, and the actual construction of said improvements has been assured by the submission and
acceptance of bond or other acceptable financial arrangements.
(3) Proposed amendments to the adopted flood hazard area maps that do not originate in the City Engineer's
office, but are made as a formal request to the City Council shall be transmitted in writing to the City Engineer
for review and recommendation. Upon a finding by the City Engineer that proposed amendment to flood hazard
maps meets one of the three (3) conditions listed above, he shall certify in writing and shall furnish to the City
Council four (4) copies of the amended boundaries, including the elevations of the one-hundred-year flood, for
adoption by the City Council by resolution. If the proposed amendment does not meet one of the conditions
listed above, the City Engineer shall deny the proposal, in writing, and furnish the planning and zoning
commission a copy of his findings.
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 612.3. Purposes of the FD Floodway Supplemental District
It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize those
adverse effects resulting from flooding, and the general causes of flood effects, by provisions designed to:
(A) Restrict or prohibit uses, including public uses, which are dangerous to health, safety, or
property in times of flood, or cause increases in flood heights or velocities;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 329/362
(B) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities which serve such uses, shall
be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
(C) Identify lands which are subject to flooding hazards, to inform and protect individuals from
purchasing properties which may not be suited for their intended purposes because of flood hazard;
(D) Comply with the regulations of the national flood insurance program as established by the
Federal Insurance Administration of the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development;
(E) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(F) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding, and generally
undertaken at the expense of the general public.
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 612.4. General Floodway Regulations
The following general regulations apply to the use of land located within an FD Floodway Supplemental district:
(A) New construction[,] substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall [not]
be approved if it:
(1) Adversely effects [affects] the capacity of channels or floodways of any watercourse
herein identified as in the Floodway district to convey the regulatory flood;
(2) Would measurably increase flood flows or flood heights or increase flood damage upon
off-site properties during the occurrence of the regulatory flood;
(3) Would, individually or when combined with all other existing and anticipated
developments, expose additional upstream, downstream, or adjacent properties to adverse flood
effects, that would otherwise not be exposed to such effects, due to the regulatory flood;
(4) Increases velocities or volumes of floodwaters to the extent that significant erosion of
floodplain soils would occur either on the subject property or on some other property upstream
or downstream;
(B) Encroachments in floodways, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and
other development that would result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the
regulatory flood shall be prohibited;
(C) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and
adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure;
(D) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and
practices that minimize flood damage;
(E) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and
utility equipment resistant to flood damage;
(F) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be floodproofed;
(G) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 330/362
(H) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during flooding;
(I) The placement of any mobile home shall be prohibited.
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 612.5. FD District–Permitted Uses
The following uses, having a low flood damage potential and not obstructing flood flows, shall be permitted
within the floodway district to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance; and provided, that
they do not require buildings, structures, fill or storage of materials or equipment that adversely affect or in any
way diminish the capacity of the floodway to carry the regulatory flood:
(A) Agricultural uses, such as general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries,
horticulture, viticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvestry;
(B) Open land uses, such as arboretum, flood management project, reservoir, and wildlife preserve;
(C) Private and public recreational uses, such as golf courses, tennis courts, golf driving ranges,
archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, game farms, fish
hatcheries, fishing areas, hiking and horseback riding trails;
(D) Residential uses, such as lawns, gardens, parking areas, and play areas.
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 612.6. Same–Special Exception Uses
Within the floodway district, certain uses (listed below) may be permitted by the board of adjustment, after a
public hearing, and upon the board's finding that:
(A) The use meets the requirements of section 612.4, General floodway regulations;
(B) The use will not impair the appropriate use of neighboring property; and that the use will be in
keeping with the spirit and intent of this code;
(C) No structure (temporary or permanent), fill (including fill for roads and levees), deposit,
obstruction, storage of materials or equipment or other use, acting alone or in combination with
existing or future uses, adversely affects or in any way diminishes the capacity of the floodway to
carry the regulatory flood;
(D) Structures are not designed for human habitation;
(E) Structures have a low flood damage potential;
(F) Structures are to be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters, [as follows:]
(1) Whenever possible, structures are to be constructed with the longitudinal axis parallel to
the direction of flood flow; and
(2) So far as practicable, structures are to be placed approximately on the same flood flow
lines as those adjoining structures;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 331/362
(G) The use will not include the storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding,
buoyant, flammable or explosive, or could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life.
The uses which may be permitted by the board of adjustment are:
(A) Parking;
(B) Temporary amusement enterprises;
(C) Industrial-commercial uses, such as loading areas, parking areas, airport landing strips, drivein
theaters, roadside stands, signs and billboards;
(D) Extraction of sand, gravel, and other materials;
(E) Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, wharves;
(F) Railroads, streets, bridges, utility facilities not permitted as of right, and pipelines;
(G) Storage yards for equipment, machines, or materials;
(H) Kennels and stables;
(I) Uses or structures accessory to permitted or special exception uses;
(J) Other uses similar in nature to areas described in section 612.5, which are consistent with the
purposes set out in section 612.3.
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 612.7. Same–Requirements and Procedures for Special Exception Uses
The special exception uses authorized for approval within floodway zoning districts are subject to the
requirements established by this section (612), the minimum requirements set out below, and such additional
safeguards or conditions as may be imposed by the board of adjustment.
(A) Special exception administrative procedure; required information.
(1) No application for a special exception shall be accepted for filing by the board of
adjustment, unless it is accompanied by plans in triplicate, drawn to scale, showing the nature,
location, dimensions, and elevations of the lot, existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of
materials, floodproofing measures, and the relationship of the above to the location of the
channel floodway and regulatory flood protection elevation.
(2) One copy of the plans submitted by the applicant shall be immediately forwarded, by the
board of adjustment's secretary, to the City Engineer for technical assistance in evaluating the
proposed project in relation to its potential impact on flood heights and velocities; its flood
damage potential; and the adequacy of the plans for protection. The board's transmittal shall
bear a notation advising the City Engineer concerning the date the application is scheduled for
public hearing.
(3) On or before the date scheduled for public hearing, the City Engineer shall advise the
board concerning the adequacy of the plans submitted by the applicant.
(4) If, at time of public hearing, either the board or the City Engineer deems the plans
submitted by the applicant to be inadequate for determining the suitability of the particular site
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 332/362
for the proposed use, the board shall require the applicant to furnish such of the following
additional information which may be necessary for making a proper determination:
(a) A typical valley cross-section showing the channel of the stream, elevation of land
areas adjoining each side of the channel, cross-sectional areas to be occupied by the
proposed development, and high water information;
(b) Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the ground; pertinent
structure, fill or storage elevations; size, location and spatial arrangement of all proposed
and existing structures on the site; location and elevations of street, water supply, sanitary
facilities; photographs showing existing land uses and vegetation upstream and
downstream; soil types; and other pertinent information;
(c) Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow line of the stream;
(d) Specifications for building construction and materials, floodproofing, filling,
dredging, grading, channel improvement, storage of materials, water supply, and sanitary
facilities.
(5) Subsequent to the presentation of all required information and plans by the applicant and
upon due consideration of all technical evaluations thereof, the board shall determine the
specific flood hazard at the site, and shall evaluate the suitability of the proposed use in relation
to the flood hazard and the other natural features of the site.
(B) Factors upon which the decision of the board of adjustment shall be based. In passing upon
such applications, the board shall consider all relevant factors specified in other section 612
paragraphs, and:
(1) The effects upon lands upstream, downstream, and in the immediate vicinity;
(2) The effects upon the flood stage and flood velocity;
(3) Whether a demand for additional public expenditures for flood protection or prevention
will be created;
(4) Whether a demand for additional flood relief payments will be created;
(5) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(6) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage, and the effect
of such damage on the individual owner;
(7) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
(8) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood, for ordinary and emergency
vehicles;
(10) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions,
including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such
as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems;
(11) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the
floodwaters, and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 333/362
(12) The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for
the proposed use;
(13) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area.
(C) Conditions attached to special exceptions. Upon consideration of the factors listed above, and
the purposes of this section, the board may attach such conditions to the granting of special
exceptions or variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this section. Among such
conditions without limitation because of specific enumeration may be included:
(1) Modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities;
(2) Limitations on periods of use and operation;
(3) Imposition of operational controls, sureties and deed restrictions;
(4) Requirements for construction of channel modifications, dikes, levees, and other
protective measures;
(5) Floodproofing measures, such as the following, shall be designed consistent with the
flood protection elevation for the particular areas, flood velocities, durations, rate of rise,
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces and other factors associated with the regulatory flood. The
board of adjustment shall require that the applicant submit a plan or document certified by a
registered professional engineer that the floodproofing measures are consistent with the
regulatory flood protection elevation and associated flood factors for the particular area. The
following floodproofing measures may be required without limitation because of specific
enumeration:
(a) Anchorage to resist flotation and lateral movement;
(b) Installation of watertight doors, bulkheads and shutters, or similar methods of
construction;
(c) Reinforcement of walls to resist water pressures;
(d) Use of paints, membranes or mortars to reduce seepage of water through walls;
(e) Addition of mass or weight to structures to resist flotation;
(f) Installation of pumps to lower water levels in structures;
(g) Construction of water supply and waste treatment system, so as to prevent the
entrance of floodwaters;
(h) Pumping facilities, or comparable practices for subsurface drainage systems for
building, to relieve external foundation wall and basement flood pressures;
(i) Construction to resist rupture or collapse caused by water pressure or floating debris;
(j) Installation of valves or controls on sanitary and storm drains, which will permit the
drains to be closed to prevent backup of sewage and storm waters into the buildings or
structures. Gravity draining of basements may be eliminated by mechanical devices;
(k) Location of all of the applicant's electrical equipment circuits and installed electrical
appliances in a manner which will assure they are not subject to flooding and to provide
protection from inundation by the regulatory flood;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 334/362
(l) Location of any structural storage facilities for chemicals, explosives, buoyant
materials, flammable liquids, or other toxic materials which could be hazardous to public
health, safety, and welfare in a manner which will assure that the facilities are situated at
elevations above the height associated with the regulatory flood protection elevation or
are adequately floodproofed to prevent flotation of storage containers which could result
in the escape of toxic materials into floodwaters.
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 612.8. Same–Nonconforming Uses
(A) Special regulations. The provisions of this section specifically govern nonconforming uses located in FD
zoning districts, and they shall be interpreted as supplemental to the provisions of article V of this code, which
governs nonconforming uses. In the event of any conflict between this section and the provisions of article V of
this code, such conflict shall be resolved in favor of the requirements established by this section.
(B) Conditions. A structure, or the use of a structure or premises, which was lawful before the passage of [or]
amendment of the section but which is not in conformity with the provisions of this section may be continued
subject to the following conditions:
(1) Unless first approved by the board of adjustment, no repair or reconstruction of any destroyed
structure shall exceed fifty (50) percent of its current replacement cost immediately prior to its
destruction. If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any means, including floods, to an
extent of more than fifty percent (50%), it shall not be reconstructed, except in conformity with the
provisions of this section;
(2) Uses or adjuncts thereof which are, or become, nuisances shall not be entitled to continue as
nonconforming uses;
(3) Except as provided in subsection (B)(2) above, any use which has been permitted as a special
exception use shall be considered a conforming use.
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 612.9. Amendments to floodway zoning maps.
(A) Special requirements. Amendments to FD zoning maps shall be initiated and processed in the manner
specified in section 612.2, of this code; provided, however, all such proposed amendments shall be subject to the
special requirements pertaining thereto which are established by this section.
(B) Requirement for approval. District boundaries may be amended only if the amendment meets one of the
two following requirements:
(1) A flood control project of the federal, state, county or city government, or a private person, has
substantially altered the boundaries of the district or, if proposed improvements have not been
constructed, the actual construction thereof has been assured by the submission and acceptance of
bond or other acceptable financial arrangements; or
(2) Flood data compiled subsequent to the adoption of the district maps indicates that the district
boundaries should be changed.
(C) Recommendation of city engineer. All applications shall be transmitted in writing by the planning and
zoning commission to the city engineer. Prior to any public hearing by the planning and zoning commission
upon such application, the city engineer shall review the application and thereafter transmit to the planning and
zoning commission written report as to whether or not the application meets the required standard for approval;
the city engineer shall recommend the denial of any application which fails to meet the required standard.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 335/362
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 613.1. RA-1, Single-Family Residential District–General Description
The RA-1, Single-Family Residential district, is established as a district in which the use of land is for singlefamily
dwellings and to prohibit commercial and industrial use or any other use which would substantially
interfere with the development or continuation of single-family dwellings in this district. The intent is to further
discourage any use in this district which would generate traffic or create congestion on neighborhood streets
other than the normal traffic which serves the residents in the area. This district further encourages only those
uses which, because of character of [or] size, would not create additional requirements and costs for public
services in excess of requirements and costs for single-family dwellings.
Sec. 613.2. Same–Uses Permitted
Within the RA-1, Single-Family Residential district, the following uses are permitted:
(A) Single-family detached dwelling;
(B) Elementary Schools;
(C) Public Park or playground;
(D) Carports in conformance with Section 601.2(P).
Sec. 613.3. Same–Area and Height Regulations
Minimum Lot
Area
Minimum Lot
Frontage
Maximum
Percentage
Coverage
Maximum
Height
Minimum Front
Yard Setback
Minimum Side
Yard Setback
Minimum Rear
Yard Setback
8,000 sq.
ft.
70' 40% 35' 25' 5' interior
lots
10' street
side of
corner lots
20% depth
of lot
All lots and improvements with the district shall meet the following requirements:
(A) All lots shall have not less than eight thousand (8,000) square feet of lot area, and not more
than one (1) principal building shall be placed on any one (1) lot.
(B) Each lot shall have a frontage of not less than seventy (70) feet. The frontage of any wedgeshaped
lot which meets the requirements of minimum lot size may be a minimum of thirty (30) feet;
however, the front building line on the lot shall be a minimum of fifty (50) linear feet measured at an
equal distance parallel to and from the front lot line.
(C) Not more than forty (40) percent of the lot area shall be covered with improvements. Paved
areas are not considered improvements within the meaning of this provision.
(D) No improvement or structure shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height above the mean
elevation of the lot.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 336/362
(E) All structures shall have not less than a twenty-five (25) foot front yard setback.
(F) For a single-family dwelling of one (1) story, the minimum width of the side yard shall be five
(5) feet for interior lot lines and ten (10) feet for the side yard abutting the side street on a corner lot.
For buildings of more than one (1) story, the minimum width of the side yard shall be not less than
ten (10) feet. For a principal building other than a single-family dwelling, the minimum width of the
side yard shall be not less than the height of the building, but in no case less than fifteen (15) feet.
(G) A rear yard of twenty (20) percent of the depth of the lot shall be provided for the principal
building. Detached buildings of accessory use may be located in the rear yard of a main building, in
accordance with the following conditions:
(1) Detached accessory buildings may be located on the rear lot line if a sixteen-foot-wide
alley or larger is adjacent.
(2) Detached accessory buildings may be located eight (8) feet from the centerline of the
alley if the adjacent alley is less than sixteen (16) feet wide.
(H) No principal building (as defined in Section 301) shall be constructed or placed on any lot
unless it has a minimum of one thousand, four hundred (1,400) square feet, exclusive of any garage
or carport.
Sec. 614.1. RA-2 Residential District–General Description
The RA-2 Residential district is designed specifically to provide an area for single-family housing a higher
density than permitted in the RA-1 district.
The development and continued use of this land for family dwellings is encouraged and the encroachment of
commercial and industrial use, or any other use which would substantially interfere with the development of, or
continuation of, this district as family dwellings is prohibited. This district also discourages any use which
would generate traffic or create congestion on neighborhood streets other than normal traffic which serves the
residents on the street. It also encourages only those uses which, because of character or size, would not create
additional requirements and costs for public services which are in excess of such requirements and costs if the
district were developed solely for single-family dwellings.
Sec. 614.2. Same–Permitted Uses
(A) Permitted uses in the RA-2 Residential district are the same as those in Section 613.2 for the RA-1
district.
Sec. 614.3. Same–Area and Height Regulations
Minimum
Lot Area
Minimum
Lot
Frontage
Maximum
Percentage
Coverage
Maximum
Height
Minimum
Front Yard
Setback
Minimum
Side Yard
Setback
Minimum
Rear Yard
Setback
6,500 sq.
ft.
60' 40% 35' 25' 5' interior
lots
10' street
side of
corner lots
20% depth
of lot
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 337/362
All lots and improvements within the RA-2 district shall meet the following requirements:
(A) All lots shall have an area of not less than six thousand, five hundred (6,500) square feet for a
single-family dwelling.
(B) Each lot shall have a frontage of not less than sixty (60) feet for a single-family dwelling.
(C) Not more than forty percent (40%) of the lot area shall be covered with improvements.
(D) No improvement or structure shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height above the mean
elevation of the lot.
(E) A minimum front yard setback of twenty-five (25) feet shall be provided on all single-family
dwellings.
(F) For dwellings and accessory buildings located on corner lots, there shall be a side yard setback
from the intersecting street of not less than ten (10) feet.
(G) A rear yard of twenty percent (20%) of the depth of the lot shall be provided for the principal
building. Detached buildings of accessory use may be located in the rear yard of a main building, in
accordance with the following conditions:
(1) Detached accessory buildings may be located on the rear lot line if a sixteen-foot (16')
wide alley or larger is adjacent.
(2) Detached accessory buildings may be located eight (8) feet from the centerline of the
alley if the adjacent alley is less than sixteen (16) feet wide.
(H) No principal building (as defined in Section 301) shall be constructed or placed on any lot
unless it has a minimum of one thousand, one hundred (1,100) square feet, exclusive of any garage or
carport.
Sec. 614.4. Same–Off-Street Parking
Except as provided for elsewhere in this article, all permitted uses in the RA-2 Residence district shall comply
with the minimum requirements for off-street parking, of Article IV.
(Ordinance 821 adopted 2/8/99)
ARTICLE VII. BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT*
Sec. 701.1. Board of adjustment–Established.
(a) There is hereby created a board of adjustment.
(b) The board of adjustment shall consist of five (5) members and four (4) alternate members to serve in the
absence of one (1) or more of the regular members when requested to do so by the mayor or city manager. All
board members shall serve for terms of two (2) years. A vacancy on the board shall be filled for the unexpired
term.
(c) All board members, including alternate members, shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the
city council.
(d) The city council may remove a board member for cause on written charge after a public hearing.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 338/362
(Ordinance 452 adopted 5/20/85; Ordinance 628, sec. 1, adopted 4/9/90)
State law reference–Establishment and authority of zoning board of adjustment, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 211.008 et
seq.
Sec. 701.2. Same–Organization and procedures.
The board of adjustment shall elect one (1) of its members as chairman. The board shall adopt rules in
accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman
and at such other times as the board may determine. The chairman, or, in his absence, the acting chairman, may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena. The board shall keep the minutes of its
proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating
such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately
filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public.
Sec. 701.3. Same–Duties and powers.
The board of adjustment shall have the powers and exercise the duties of a board in accordance with V.T.C.A.,
Local Government Code, Chapter 211, Subchapter A (§ 211.001 et seq.). Board members are representatives of
the City of Iowa Park, and shall have the right to inspect premises, where required in the discharge of their
responsibilities under the laws of the State of Texas and the ordinances of this city. The board's jurisdiction shall
extend to and include the hearing and deciding of the following types of appeals and applications, and to that
end the [board] shall have the necessary authority to ensure continuing compliance with its decision:
(A) Interpretation. To render an interpretation of the zoning regulations or the manner of their
application, where it is alleged that there is error in any order, requirement, or determination made by
the enforcing officer in the administration of such provisions. In reaching its decision, the board shall
establish firm guidelines for future administrative actions on like matters.
(B) Special exception. To decide upon those applications for special exception to use or develop
property, when the same is authorized under these regulations subject to board approval. In reaching
its decision, the board shall not grant the application if it finds:
(1) That the use is not specifically permitted under the regulation; or
(2) That the locations of proposed activities and improvements are not clearly defined on the
site plan filed by the applicant; or
(3) That the exception will not be wholly compatible with the use and permitted development
of adjacent properties.
(C) Variance. To authorize, upon appeal in specific cases, such variance from the requirements set
forth in these regulations as will not be contrary to public interest. In reaching its decision, the board
may grant the variance appeal if it finds:
(1) That literal enforcement of the controls will create an unnecessary hardship or practical
difficulty in the development of the affected property; or
(2) That the situation causing the hardship or difficulty is neither self-imposed nor generally
affecting all or most properties in the same zoning district; or
(3) That the relief sought will not injure the permitted use of adjacent conforming property;
or
(4) That the granting of the variance will be in harmony with the spirit and purposes of these
regulations.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 339/362
Any variance granted by the board shall terminate automatically: (1) when the specified
period of use has expired; or (2) when the use ceases to be in full compliance with any
condition imposed by the board; or (3) when the use has been abandoned.
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82; Ordinance 628, sec. 3, adopted 4/9/90)
Sec. 701.4. Same–Procedure
(A) Interpretation request; variance appeal. A request for interpretation of regulations, or an appeal for
variance from development controls may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, or
board of the City affected by a decision of the enforcing officer. Such appeal shall be taken within fifteen (15)
days time after the decision has been rendered, by filing with both the enforcing officer and the board of
adjustment a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. The enforcing officer shall forthwith transmit to
the board of adjustment all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
(B) Stay of Proceedings. An appeal shall stay all proceedings of the action appealed from unless the enforcing
officer, after the notice of appeal has been filed with him, certifies to the board that, by reason of facts stated in
his certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings
shall not be stayed, except by a restraining order which may be granted by the board of adjustment, or by a court
of record, on application and notice to the enforcing officer from whom the appeal is taken.
(C) Special exception application. An application for a special exception to use or develop property, as
specifically authorized in district use regulations or in this section, many [may] be filed by any person owning
the affected property, or by any tenant, upon written authorization of the owner. Such application shall be filed
with the board of adjustment, and a copy thereof with the enforcing officer.
(D) Form of appeal or application. The appeal or application shall be in such form and shall contain such
information as the board may require under its rules or procedure. It shall be accompanied by a two hundred
dollar ($200.00) fee. In the event the City's enforcing officer determines any improvements for which the
appeals is being requested have/are partially or totally constructed, the fee for said appeals hearing will be
doubled. An incomplete appeal or application shall be deemed only to give notice to appeal or apply to the board
and shall not be reviewed or scheduled for hearings until brought to completion.
(E) Notice of hearing. Official written notice of public hearing on every application for a variance or special
exception, or for an interpretation of regulations applying solely to an individual property, shall be sent to all
owners of property, or the person rendering the same for taxes, affected by such application, located within two
hundred (200) feet of any property affected thereby, within not less than ten (10) days before such hearing is
held. Such notice shall be served by using the last known address as listed on the City tax roll, and depositing the
notice, postage paid, in the United States mail. Notice of hearings on request for interpretation of regulations
applying to more than one property and ownership shall be given by means of a general notice, as provided
below.
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82; Ordinance 612 adopted 8/14/89; Ordinance 894 adopted 1/14/02; Ordinance
1121 adopted 5/9/11)
Sec. 701.5. Same–Hearing and Decision
(A) General.
(1) The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an appeal, give public
notice thereof, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear
in person or by attorney or agent. Evidence supporting the grant or denial of an appeal shall be
submitted only through the enforcing officer or to the board of adjustment, in public meeting.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 340/362
(2) Any appeal or application may be withdrawn upon written notice to the enforcing officer, but
no appeal shall be withdrawn after posting of hearing notice and prior to board of adjustment action
thereon, without formal consent of the board.
(B) Decision and voting.
(1) Every decision of the board of adjustment shall be based upon findings of fact, and every
finding of fact shall be supported in the record of proceeding. The enumerated conditions required to
exist on any matter upon which the board is authorized to pass under these regulations, shall be
construed as limitations on the power of the board to act.
(2) Nothing herein contained shall be construed to empower the board of adjustment to change the
terms of these regulations, or to effect changes in the zoning districts. The powers of the board shall
be so applied that the terms of these regulations will be strictly enforced.
(3) In exercising its powers, the board of adjustment, in conformity with the provisions of
V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Chapter 21, Subchapter A (211.001 et seq.), may modify in
whole or in part any order, requirements, decision, or determination, as ought to be made, and shall
have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken.
(4) [Disqualification of board member.]
(a) A member shall disqualify himself from voting whenever he has a personal or monetary
interest in the property under appeal, or when he will be directly affected by the decision of the
board of adjustment.
(b) A member may disqualify himself from voting whenever any applicant, or his agent has
sought to influence the member's vote on the appeal, other than in the public hearing.
(C) Approval of request.
(1) In approving any request, the board of adjustment may designate such conditions in connection
therewith, in order to secure substantially the objectives of the regulation or provision to which such
variance is granted and to provide adequately for the maintenance of the integrity and character of the
zone in which such permit is granted.
(2) When necessary, the board of adjustment may require guarantees, in such form as it deems
proper, to insure that conditions designated in connection therewith are being, or will be, complied
with. Where any condition under which a request has been granted appears to have been violated, the
board may hold a public hearing thereon to determine whether or not the permit shall be terminated.
(3) Upon approval of an application for special exception or of a variance appeal, the applicant
shall apply for occupancy or construction permits within sixty (60) days after the board's decision,
unless a greater time is requested in the application and is authorized by the board. Any approval may
be granted one emergency extension of sixty (60) days, on written request filed with the board of
adjustment before expiration of the original approval. Failure of the applicant to apply for occupancy
or construction permits within the authorized time period shall void the right to secure such permits,
except upon the filing of a new application or appeal.
(D) Denial of request. No appeal or application that has been denied shall be further considered by the board
of adjustment under a subsequent request obtained by filing new plans, and obtaining of a new decision from the
enforcing officer unless:
(1) The new plans materially change the nature of the request; or
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 341/362
(2) The permitted development of other nearby property in the same zone has been substantially
altered or changed by a ruling of the board of adjustment so as to support an allegation of changed
conditions.
(E) Appeal of board of adjustment action. Any person or persons, jointly or separately, aggrieved by any
decision of the board of adjustment, or any taxpayer, or any officer, department, or board of the City of Iowa
Park, may present to a court of record, a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in
whole or in part, specifying the grounds of such illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court within ten
(10) days after the filing of the decision complained of, in the offices of the board, and not thereafter.
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82; Ordinance 628, sec. 5, adopted 4/9/90)
ARTICLE VIII. ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 801.1. Responsibility for Enforcement; Duty of City Secretary
It shall be the duty of the City Secretary to enforce this ordinance. If the City Secretary shall find that any of the
provisions of this ordinance are being violated, he shall notify in writing the persons responsible for such
violations, indicating the nature of the violations and ordering the action necessary to correct it, and shall take
such other action as is authorized by law to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions.
Sec. 802.1. Zoning Clearance Permit Required–Purpose
The zoning clearance permit is a permit issued by the City Secretary which states that a particular development
meets all of the requirements of the zoning ordinance. It is not a building permit and does not authorize
construction; it certifies that the land and/or structure is in conformance with the terms of this zoning ordinance.
Sec. 802.2. Same–New Construction
No building or other structure shall be erected, constructed, enlarged, altered or repaired in such a manner as to
prolong the life of the building, nor shall the use of any land or building or other structure by [be] changed
without a zoning clearance permit being issued authorizing such construction, alteration, repair or use changes as
being in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance. No building permit shall be issued for any
construction not conforming to a valid zoning clearance permit.
Sec. 802.3. Same–Change in Use of Land or Building
No change shall be made in the use of any land or building or structure after the passage of this ordinance until a
zoning clearance permit has been obtained, certifying that all the provisions of this ordinance have been
complied with.
Sec. 802.4. Same–Application
An application for a zoning clearance permit shall be made to the City Secretary by the owner or proposed
occupant of the building or land to be occupied or used, and said application shall state the location and legal
description of said property and set out in detail the character and nature of the use to be conducted thereon.
Within three (3) days, the City Secretary shall issue or deny said zoning clearance permit in accordance with the
terms of this ordinance.
Sec. 802.5. Same–Accompanying Material
All applications for zoning clearance permits shall be accompanied by a plot plan, drawn to scale on suitable
paper, showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size and location of the building to be
erected, and such other information as may be necessary to satisfy the requirements of those regulations.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 342/362
Sec. 802.6. Same–Fees
Zoning clearance permits shall not be issued until a fee of one dollar ($1.00) shall have been paid.
Sec. 802.7. Same–Exclusions
All other provisions of this article (Article VIII, Enforcement) notwithstanding, the following building permits
are exempted from the requirement of obtaining a zoning clearance permit:
(A) Re-roofing an existing structure, provided that the surface dimensions of the area being reroofed
do not increase nor decrease from the original dimensions.
(B) Remodeling the interior of an existing structure in such a way that it neither alters any exterior
wall or protrusion nor alters in any way the permitted use of the structure, for example: Remodeling a
residential structure to allow all or any part of it or any accessory building to be used for any
nonresidential purpose shall require a zoning clearance permit and is not exempted. Remodeling any
nonresidential structure to allow all or any part of it or any accessory building to be used for
residential purposes shall require a zoning clearance permit and shall not be exempt. Remodeling a
kitchen in a single-family residence to replace the cabinets with new cabinets would not require a
zoning clearance permit and shall be exempt.
(C) Adding to the exterior of a building such features as siding, shutters that fit flat against the
building and similar cosmetic or insulating improvements, unless such improvement increases or
decreases the square footage of the structure.
(Ordinance 589 adopted 11/28/88)
Sec. 803.1. Violations and Penalties; Fines
A violation of this ordinance shall be deemed a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by fine. Any person, firm
or corporation who violates or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be fined not
less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense. Each day
that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. (Ordinance 935, sec. 2, adopted 3/8/04;
Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE IX. CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS
Sec. 900.1. Declaration of Policy
The City Council of Iowa Park declares the enactment of these regulations governing the use and development
of land, buildings and structures as a measure necessary to the orderly development of the community.
Therefore, no change shall be made in these regulations or in the boundaries of the zoning districts except:
(A) To correct a manifest error in the regulations or map; or
(B) To recognize changed or changing conditions or circumstances in a particular locality; or
(C) To recognize changes in technology, the style of living, or manner of doing business. Every
proposal to amend these regulations shall be considered in light of the above declaration of policy
and by the purposes enumerated in section 102.1 of the ordinance.
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 900.2. Authority to Amend Ordinance
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 343/362
The City Council may from time to time, after receiving a final report thereon by the planning and zoning
commission and after public hearings required by law, amend, supplement or change the regulations herein
provided or the boundaries of the zoning districts. Any amendment, supplement or change may be ordered for
consideration by the City Council, be initiated by the planning and zoning commission, or be requested by
proposal of the owner of the property or by a person holding a lease on the property with the consent of its
owner. The planning and zoning commission, on its own motion or on request of the City Council, may initiate
consideration of a change in any district boundary or zoning regulation whenever it finds that public benefit will
derive from consideration of such matter. (Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
Sec. 901.1. Procedure
(A) Proposal required. Every proposal to amend these regulations shall be considered in light of the above
declaration of policy and by the purposes enumerated in section 102.1.
(B) Public hearing and notice.
(1) For zoning/rezoning requests involving real property, the planning and zoning commission
shall hold at least one public hearing on each zoning application, as per applicable state law (Chapter
211 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended). For proposed changes to zoning district
boundaries (including rezoning requests), written notice of the public hearing to occur before the
planning and zoning commission shall be sent to all owners of property, as indicated by the most
recently approved city tax roll, that is located within two hundred feet (200') of the property on which
the change in classification is proposed; said written notice to be sent not less than ten (10) days
before such hearing is held. Such notice may be served by using the last known address as listed on
the most recently approved tax roll and depositing the notice, postage paid, in the United States mail.
(2) For requests involving proposed changes to the text of this ordinance, notice of the planning
and zoning commission hearing shall be accomplished by publishing the purpose, time and place of
the public hearing in the official newspaper of the City not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the date
of the public hearing. Changes in the text of this ordinance, which do not change zoning district
boundaries (i.e., which do not involve specific real property), do not require written notification to
individual property owners.
(3) The City may, at its option, establish additional rules and procedures for public notification of
proposed zoning changes and/or development proposals (e.g., site plans, plats, etc.) which may
include, but not be limited to, the posting of a sign(s) on any property that is proposed for a zoning
change an/or development by the applicant or its agents(s). Adherence to such rules and procedures,
if so established by the City, shall be the responsibility of the applicant and shall be required as a part
of a zoning change and/or development application.
(4) The City Council and the planning and zoning commission may conduct a joint hearing on any
change or amendment to this ordinance. Such joint hearing shall be preceded by notice as required by
state law (Section 211.006(a), Texas Local Government Code, as amended) and the City Council may
not take final action on any proposed change or amendment until it receives the final report of the
planning and zoning commission[.]
(C) Planning and zoning commission report. The Planning and Zoning Commission, after the public hearing is
closed, shall prepare its report and recommendations on the proposed change, stating its findings, its evaluation
of the request and of the relationship of the request to the comprehensive plan at such time as the plan has been
adopted by the City Council. The planning and zoning commission may defer its report for not more than ninety
(90) days, until it has had opportunity to consider other proposed changes which may have a direct bearing
thereon. In making its determination, the planning and zoning commission shall consider the following factors:
(1) Whether the uses permitted by the proposed change would be appropriate in the area
concerned;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 344/362
(2) Whether adequate public school facilities and other public services exist or can be provided to
serve the needs of additional residences likely to be constructed as a result of such change, and the
consequences of such change;
(3) Whether the proposed change is in accord with any existing or proposed plans for providing
public water supply and sanitary sewers to the area;
(4) The amount of vacant land currently classified for similar development in the vicinity and
elsewhere in the City, and any special circumstances which may make a substantial part of such
vacant land unavailable for development;
(5) The recent rate at which land is being developed in the proposed zoning district, particularly in
the vicinity of the proposed change;
(6) How other areas designated for similar development will be, or are likely to be, affected if the
proposed amendment is approved, and whether such designation for other areas should be modified
also.
(D) City council consideration.
(1) Proposal recommended for approval. Every proposal which is recommended favorably by the
planning and zoning commission shall be forwarded to the City Council for setting and holding of
public hearing thereon. No change, however, shall become effective until after the adoption of an
ordinance for same, and its publication as required by law.
(2) Proposal recommended for denial. When the planning and zoning commission determines that
a proposal should be denied, it shall so report and recommend to the City Council. No hearing shall
be set on the proposal until and unless the City Council has reviewed the recommendations of the
planning and zoning commission, has considered any appeal, as provided below, and has adopted a
motion setting the matter for hearing.
(3) Appeal procedure. An appeal from the decision of the planning and zoning commission may be
taken whenever any party in interest is aggrieved by the action of the planning and zoning
commission on a specific proposal. Such appeal shall show that the planning and zoning commission
either (1) has been prejudiced in its deliberation; or (2) has not been given the opportunity to consider
certain information because it could not have been made available to the commission at the time of
its public hearing. The following procedure shall be required:
(a) The aggrieved party shall reduce his appeal to writing, stating specifically how, in his
opinion, the commission committed error. He shall file his appeal with the City Secretary and
the planning and zoning commission within thirty (30) days following the commission action.
The City Secretary shall forward the appeal to the City Council with the regular report of
planning and zoning commission action on the subject proposal;
(b) Upon receipt of written appeal, the City Council shall determine whether or not the
planning and zoning commission committed error. If the council concludes that certain
previously unavailable information should be considered by the commission, it may refer the
original proposal and the appeal for a new hearing, new report and recommendation. If the
council concludes that commission prejudice prevents a fail [fair] hearing or recommendation,
the council may schedule its own hearing on the original proposal and recommendation.
(E) City Council hearing and notice. The City Council may from time to time amend, supplement, or change
by ordinance, the boundaries of the district or the regulations herein established. A public hearing on such
amendment, supplement, or change shall be held by the City Council. Notice of council hearing shall be given
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 345/362
by publication one time in the official paper of the city, stating the time and place of such hearing, which time
shall not be earlier than fifteen (15) days from the date of publication.
(F) Negative recommendation; written protest. If a proposed change to regulation or boundary is protested in
accordance with this Code, the proposed change must receive, in order to take effect, the affirmative vote of at
least three fourths (3/4) of all members of the City Council. The protest must be written and signed by the
owners of at least twenty (20) percent of either:
(1) The area of the lots or land covered by the proposed change; or
(2) The area of the lots or land immediately joining the area covered by the proposed change and
extending two hundred (200) feet from that area.
(G) Delivery of protest. Protests signed by property owners may be filed prior to or at one of the public
hearings conducted by either the commission or the council. Written protests filed with the planning and zoning
commission shall be forwarded to the City Council, with the commission's recommendation on the request.
(Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82; Ordinance 628, sec. 6, adopted 4/9/90; Ordinance 935, sec. 3, adopted 3/8/04)
Sec. 901.2. Limitation on Reapplications
When the City Council has denied a proposal, or when the applicant has withdrawn his proposal at the planning
and zoning commission meeting thereon, no new applications of like nature shall be accepted by the City or
scheduled for hearing by the planning and zoning commission within a period of twelve (12) months of the date
of council denial or applicant's withdrawal. Provided, however, on receipt of written request by the original
applicant stating how conditions have changed substantially in the community since prior consideration of this
proposal, so as to justify an earlier review of this matter, the City Council may waive the mandatory delay period
and authorize the acceptance of a new application. (Ordinance 375 adopted 4/12/82)
ADOPTION
It being necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety, this ordinance shall be in full force
and effect from and after its adoption by the council and the date of its approval by the Mayor.
Passed and adopted by the City Council of Iowa Park, Texas, on the 22nd day of June, 1970, and approved by
me this 13th day of July, 1970.
(Ordinance 155 adopted 6/22/70)
APPENDIX A
FEE SCHEDULE
ARTICLE A1.000 GENERAL PROVISIONS
(Reserved)
ARTICLE A2.000 ANIMAL CONTROL RELATED FEES
Sec. A2.001 Impoundment fees
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 346/362
(a) Redemption of dog or cat impounded by animal control officer: $50.00 and an additional $10.00 for each
day held in the city animal control center upon redemption.
(b) Voluntary impoundment by owner of dog or cat: $50.00.
Sec. A2.002 Rabies examination of animal that has attacked person
Fee to cover expenses for preparation to submit an animal's head for examination if an animal bites, scratches or
otherwise attacks a person: $45.00.
Sec. A2.003 Permit to keep animals, fowl or pigeons
(a) Annual permit/inspection fee: $25.00.
(b) Reinspection fee: $15.00.
Sec. A2.004 Animal registration
(a) Animal registration: $5.00.
(b) Renewal: $3.00.
(c) Replacement of lost tag: $3.00.
(Ordinance 1208, sec. 2, adopted 4/11/16)
Sec. A2.005 Pet adoption
Adoption fee: $75.00. (Ordinance 1271 adopted 6/10/19)
ARTICLE A3.000 BUILDING RELATED FEES
Sec. A3.001 Building permits and inspection fees
(a) Residential:
(1) Primary use - new/additions: $0.150 per square foot.
(2) Secondary use - new/additions: $0.100 per square foot.
(3) Alterations (siding, roofing, enclosures): $35.00.
(Ordinance 1270 adopted 6/10/19)
(b) Commercial:
(1) Primary use - new/additions: $0.100 per square foot.
(2) Secondary use - new/additions: $0.075 per square foot.
(Ordinance 1129 adopted 9/12/11)
(c) Residential/commercial alterations (siding, roofing, enclosures):
(1) $0.00 to $3,000.00: $30.00 minimum.
(Ordinance 1219 adopted 9/19/16)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 347/362
(2) $3,001.00 to $15,000.00: $4.25 per thousand.
(3) $15,001.00 to $100,000.00: $3.00 per thousand.
(4) Over $100,000.00: $1.80 per thousand.
(Ordinance 1129 adopted 9/12/11)
(d) Reinspection fee: $25.00 per inspection.
(e) Minimum permit fee: $30.00 per permit.
(Ordinance 1219 adopted 9/19/16)
Sec. A3.002 Electrical permit and inspection fees
Permit and inspection charges required under article 3.02, division 5, are as specified below:
(1) General fees:
All inspections, minimum fee $30.00
Reinspection fee $25.00
General inspection fee $30.00
(Ordinance 1220 adopted 9/19/16)
(2) New construction:
First 3,000 square feet, per 100 square feet $2.50
Over 3,000 square feet, per 100 square feet $1.50
(3) Additions:
Lighting, each $0.40
Plugs, each $0.40
Switches, each $0.40
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 348/362
Range $2.00
Cook top $2.00
Oven $2.00
Disposal $0.75
Dryer $2.00
Dishwasher $0.75
Vent-a-hood $0.75
Room/ceiling heater $1.10
Water heater $2.00
Exhaust fan $0.75
Meter/loop/temp. $15.00
Panels/1–10 circuits $3.00
Panels/10+ circuits $4.50
0 to 5 kw $4.50
5 to 10 kw $6.00
Above 10 kw $8.00
Solar generation systems $25.00
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 349/362
Wind generation systems $25.00
(Ordinance 1130 adopted 9/12/11)
Sec. A3.003 Mechanical permit and inspection fees
Permit and inspection fees required under article 3.02, division 6, are specified below:
Permit fee $30.00
Reinspection fee $25.00
(Ordinance 1221 adopted 9/19/16)
Supplement $4.50
Suspended/wall heater $9.00
Furnace/burner force air or gravity < 100 M $9.00
Furnace/burner force air or gravity > 100 M $10.50
Nonportable evaporative cooler $6.60
Air handling unit > 10,000 CFM $10.50
Ventilation system $6.60
Ventilation fan $4.50
Domestic incinerator $10.50
Industrial/commercial incinerator $44.00
Repair/addition/alter heating or cooling appliance $9.00
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 350/362
Install/relocate appliance vent $4.50
Mechanical exhaust hood/ducts $6.60
Air handling unit < 10,000 CFM $6.60
Other appliances $6.60
Gas piping system 1–4 outlets $3.00
Each additional outlet $0.75
Boiler or compressor:
Up to 3 HP $9.00
3.5–15 HP $16.50
16–30 HP $22.50
31–50 HP $32.50
Over 50 HP $54.00
(Ordinance 1131 adopted 9/12/11)
Sec. A3.004 Plumbing permit and inspection fees
Permit and inspection fees required under article 3.02, division 7, are specified below:
Permit fee $30.00
Reinspection fee $25.00
(Ordinance 1222 adopted 9/19/16)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 351/362
General inspection $3.00
Water heater $3.00
Gas line inspection $3.00
Gas line new/replaced $10.00
Gas line repaired (replacement of <20') $3.00
Water line new/replaced $10.00
Water line repaired (replacement of <20") $3.00
Sewer line new/replaced $10.00
Sewer line repaired (replacement of <20') $3.00
Water treatment equipment $3.00
New/replacement gas outlets 1–4 $3.00
Each additional outlet $0.75
Plumbing fixture or trap or set $1.25
Lawn sprinkler system 1–5 heads $3.00
Each additional head $0.35
Water conditioner $3.00
Backflow preventer test $1.50
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 352/362
Install backflow device $3.00
(Ordinance 1175 adopted 2/24/14)
Sec. A3.005 Mobile home or trailer park permit
Fees for permit for trailer or mobile home park:
(1) Initial fee: $50.00 per designated space.
(2) Annual fee after payment of initial fee: $25.00 per designated space.
(3) Transfer of permit: $50.00 per designated space.
(Ordinance 1207, sec. 5, adopted 4/11/16)
Sec. A3.006 Permit for signs adjacent to highways
Minimum fee for building permits for signs: $25.00. (Ordinance 1133 adopted 9/12/11)
Sec. A3.007 Contractor licensing
Annual license fee: $50.00. (2004 Code, sec. 3.01.013)
Sec. A3.008 Floodplain development
Each floodplain development permit: $100.00. (Ordinance 1081, sec. 2, adopted 5/11/09)
Sec. A3.009 Permits for utility construction
(a) Permit fees required under section 3.07.005 are specified below:
(1) Permit fee, first 500 linear feet: $50.00.
(2) Over 500 linear feet, per 300 linear feet: $5.00.
(3) Reissuance fee: $20.00.
(b) The city reserves the right to waive the fee for utility construction permits for public works and/or public
utility projects funded by local, state or federal tax dollars.
(Ordinance 1169, sec. 2, adopted 10/14/13)
ARTICLE A4.000 BUSINESS RELATED FEES
Sec. A4.001 Permit for peddler or solicitor
All peddlers and solicitors not exempted by section 4.02.036 of the Code of Ordinances shall pay a permit fee to
the city of twenty dollars ($20.00) for one (1) individual or thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for any group of two or
more up to seven (7) individuals and then an additional five dollars ($5.00) fee will be collected for each
individual in the group thereafter. (Ordinance 1120 adopted 5/9/11)
Sec. A4.002 Permit for short-term or seasonal business
(a) Permit fee for short-term or seasonal business, per six months: $30.00.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 353/362
(b) Farm produce permit, per six months: $5.00.
(2004 Code, app. A, sec. 4.04.003)
Sec. A4.003 Junkyard license
Annual fee for license to operate junkyard: $5.00. (2004 Code, app. A, sec. 6.03.002)
ARTICLE A5.000 ALARM SYSTEM FEES
Sec. A5.001 Permit fees
Permit fees:
(1) Commercial permit: $25.00.
(2) Residential permit: $10.00.
(2004 Code, app. A, sec. 8.07.002)
Sec. A5.002 Permit renewal
Annual fee for renewal of permit: $5.00. (2004 Code, app. A, sec. 8.07.003)
Sec. A5.003 Service fee
Service fee for each police alarm notification in excess of six and for each fire alarm notification in excess of
three emitted from an alarm site within a permit period: $40.00. (2004 Code, app. A, sec. 8.07.011)
Sec. A5.004 Protection of financial institutions
Monthly fee for each alarm system indicator: $50.00. (2004 Code, app. A, sec. 8.07.014)
Sec. A5.005 Controlled burn permit fee
(a) Permit application fee (per controlled burn): $50.00.
(b) Minimum fee for emergency response: $250.00.
(Ordinance 1263 adopted 3/11/19)
ARTICLE A6.000 HEALTH AND SANITATION RELATED FEES
Sec. A6.001 Food establishment permit
There shall be charged the following fees for permits, certifications, and inspections by the Wichita
Falls/Wichita County Local Public Health District under chapter 26, article IV, Food and Food Vendors and
Establishments:
(1) Permits:
(A) Process 1 (low to moderate risk): $125.00.
(B) Process 2 (high risk): $150.00.
(C) Process 3 (very high risk): $175.00.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 354/362
(D) Temporary events: $30.00.
(E) An additional permitting fee of $60.00 will be charged to a food establishment for each of
the following activities at the establishment:
(i) Meat market.
(ii) Catering.
(iii) Bakery.
(iv) Snack bar.
(v) Fish market.
(vi) Commissary.
(F) Nonprofit organizations which are exempt from federal tax liability under 26 U.S.C.
501(c)(3) are exempt from permit fees.
(G) Temporary events sponsored or co-sponsored by the city are exempt from permit fees.
(2) Certifications:
(A) Frozen dessert establishment certification, including training for one employee: $100.00.
(B) Frozen dessert operator certification for additional employees: $20.00 for each employee.
(C) Nonprofit organizations which are exempt from federal tax liability under 26 U.S.C.
501(c)(3) are exempt from certification fees.
(D) Temporary events sponsored or co-sponsored by the city are exempt from certification
fees.
(3) Food handler's training certificate:
(A) Food handler's training certificate: $20.00.
(B) Replacement food handler's training certificates (lost card): $4.00.
(4) Reinspection or resample fee: $25.00 per sample or reinspection.
(5) Late charge for renewal of permits which have already expired: $25.00 per month expired.
(Ordinance 1099, sec. 2, adopted 1/25/10)
ARTICLE A7.000 MUNICIPAL COURT FEES
Sec. A7.001 Technology fee
Municipal court technology fee: $4.00. (2004 Code, app. A, sec. 7.02.001)
Sec. A7.002 Building security fee
Municipal court building security fee: $3.00. (2004 Code, app. A, sec. 7.03.002)
Sec. A7.003 Juvenile case manager fee
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 355/362
Juvenile case manager fee: $5.00 per case. (2004 Code, art. 7.04)
ARTICLE A8.000 SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
Sec. A8.001 Rental of city truck to haul heavy or bulky accumulations
The rental fee for use of city dump trucks to haul heavy or bulky accumulations, per day, night or weekend, is
fifty dollars ($50.00) minimum per event. (Ordinance 1258 adopted 1/28/19)
Sec. A8.002 Collection from single-family units inside city
(a) The monthly charge for solid waste collection, disposal and bulky waste services from each single-family
residential unit within the city limits will be sixteen dollars and twenty-five cents ($16.25) for the first polycart
and seven dollars and twenty-five cents ($7.25) for each additional polycart. (Ordinance 1254 adopted 9/24/18)
(b) The additional monthly charge for each additional rollout container placed at the residence of each singlefamily
unit within the city limits will be seven dollars even ($7.00). (Ordinance 1152 adopted 12/10/12)
Sec. A8.003 Collection from premises other than single-family residential
Fees to be generally charged, assessed and collected from each business, industry, multifamily living complex,
school, church, civic organization and other nonprofit organizations based on the number of weekly pickups will
be as follows:
(1) One pickup per week, per container: $46.00.
(2) Two pickups per week, per container: $69.00.
(3) Five pickups per week, per container: $200.00.
(2004 Code, app. A, sec. 6.07.004)
Sec. A8.004 Collection of large dead animals
Fee for the collection and disposal of each dead large animal within the city: $15.00. (2004 Code, app. A, sec.
6.07.005)
Sec. A8.005 Collection outside city
The garbage and rubbish collection rates for residences and businesses outside the city will be three and twotenths
(3.2) times the rates inside the city. (2004 Code, app. A, sec. 6.07.006)
ARTICLE A9.000 WATER AND SEWER SERVICE
Sec. A9.001 Water taps
For connection to the city water line, there shall be a charge for water taps as follows:
Tap Within City Outside City
3/4 inch water tap $550.00 $900.00
1 inch water tap $700.00 $1,200.00
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 356/362
1-1/2 inch water tap $900.00 $1,500.00
2 inch water tap $1,200.00 $1,800.00
3 inch water tap $2,000.00 $3,500.00
4 inch water tap $4,000.00 $7,000.00
> 4 inch water tap Determined on individual basis.
Sec. A9.002 Sewer taps
Charges for a tap on the city sewer line:
(1) Within city limits: $250.00.
(2) Outside city limits: $450.00.
(Ordinance 1185 adopted 8/25/14)
Sec. A9.003 Meter deposits and connection fees
(a) Meter deposit fee schedule:
Type of Service Amount of Deposit
Inside city $150.00
Outside city $200.00
(Ordinance 1187 adopted 11/24/14)
(b) Connection fee, in addition to the required meter deposit: $15.00. (Ordinance 1198 adopted 8/10/14)
(c) Meter deposit for customers moving into a service address who have left an outstanding utility bill:
(1) Inside the city: $300.00.
(2) Outside the city: $400.00.
(Ordinance 1187 adopted 11/24/14)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 357/362
Sec. A9.004 Monthly water rates inside city
The monthly water rates or charges for services furnished by the waterworks system to a customer within the
city shall be as follows:
(1) Generally:
(A) First 1,000 gallons, minimum: $21.25.
(B) 1,100 to 3,000 gallons, per thousand: $6.85.
(C) All over 3,100 gallons per thousand: $10.85.
(2) Multifamily dwelling units:
(A) Where the water is metered to each unit, the charge will be the same as in subsection (1),
as applicable.
(B) Where the water is metered by the complex, a charge of twenty-four dollars ($24.00) per
complex and twenty-eight dollars ($28.00) per dwelling unit will be charged. The charge for the
number of gallons used will be ten dollars and eighty-five cents ($10.85) per thousand.
(3) Individual sprinkler systems: Where the water to a sprinkler system is metered separate from
the dwelling or business unit, the monthly rates or charges for service shall be as follows:
(A) First 2,000 gallons, minimum: $31.00.
(B) All over 2,100 gallons, per thousand: $12.60.
(4) Commercial units:
(A) First 1,000 gallons, minimum: $21.25.
(B) 1,100 to 3,000 gallons, per thousand: $6.85.
(C) All over 3,100 gallons per thousand: $10.85.
(5) Water-based commercial units:
(A) First 2,000 gallons, minimum: $28.50.
(B) All over 2,100 gallons, per thousand: $6.90.
(6) Industrial units:
(A) First 2,000 gallons, minimum: $28.50.
(B) All over 2,100 gallons, per thousand: $10.85
Sec. A9.005 Monthly water rates outside city
The monthly water rates or charges for services furnished by the waterworks system to a customer outside the
city shall be as follows:
(1) Generally:
(A) First 1,000 gallons, minimum: $42.50.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 358/362
(B) 1,100 to 3,000 gallons, per thousand: $13.70.
(C) All over 3,100 gallons per thousand: $21.70.
(2) Multifamily dwelling units:
(A) Where the water is metered to each unit, the charge will be the same as in subsection (1),
as applicable.
(B) Where the water is metered by the complex, a charge of forty-eight dollars and twenty
cents ($48.20) per complex and fifty-seven dollars ($57.00) per dwelling unit will be charged.
The charge for the number of gallons used will be twenty-one dollars and seventy cents
($21.70) per thousand gallons.
(3) Individual sprinkler systems: Where the water to a sprinkler system is metered separate from
the dwelling or business unit, the monthly rates or charges for service shall be as follows:
(A) First 2,000 gallons, minimum: $62.00.
(B) All over 2,100 gallons, per thousand: $25.20.
(4) Commercial units:
(A) First 1,000 gallons, minimum: $42.50.
(B) 1,100 to 3,000 gallons, per thousand: $13.70.
(C) All over 3,100 gallons per thousand: $21.70.
(5) Water-based commercial units:
(A) First 2,000 gallons, minimum: $57.00.
(B) All over 2,100 gallons, per thousand: $13.80.
(6) Industrial units:
(A) First 2,000 gallons, minimum: $57.00.
(B) All over 2,100 gallons, per thousand: $21.70.
(Ordinance 1275 adopted 9/9/19)
Sec. A9.006 Monthly sewer rates inside city
(a) Generally:
Type of User Water Use Sewer Charge
Residential 1st 1,000 gallons $11.00
1,100–over $1.60 per thousand
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 359/362
Commercial
1st 2,000 gallons $17.50
2,100–10,000 gallons $2.10 per thousand
10,100–over $1.60 per thousand
Garage, service stations, etc.
1st 2,000 gallons $17.50
2,100–10,000 gallons $2.10 per thousand
10,100–over $1.60 per thousand
Industrial
1st 2,000 gallons $17.50
2,100–10,000 gallons $2.10 per thousand
10,100–over $1.60 per thousand
Churches
1st 10,000 gallons $17.50 per month
10,100–over $2.10 per thousand
Schools Unlimited $70.00 per month
(b) Multifamily dwelling units:
(1) If billing is by the dwelling unit, the charge will be the same as in subsection (a).
(2) If the billing is by the metered complex, the minimum charge will be eleven dollars and no
cents ($11.00) per dwelling. The charge for the number of gallons of sewage generated will be based
on one dollar and sixty cents ($1.60) per thousand gallons of water used.
Sec. A9.007 Monthly sewer rates outside city
Monthly sewer rates outside city:
Type of User Water Use Sewer Charge
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 360/362
Residential
1st 1,000 gallons $22.00
1,100–over $3.20 per thousand
Commercial
1st 2,000 gallons $35.00
2,100–10,000 gallons $4.20 per thousand
10,001–over $3.20 per thousand
Garage, service stations,
etc.
1st 2,000 gallons $35.00
2,100–10,000 gallons $4.20 per thousand
10,100–over $3.20 per thousand
Industrial
1st 2,000 gallons $35.00
2,100–10,000 gallons $4.20 per thousand
10,100–over $3.20 per thousand
Churches
1st 10,000 gallons $35.00 per month
10,100–over $4.20 per thousand
Schools Unlimited $140.00 per month
(Ordinance 1276 adopted 9/9/19)
Sec. A9.008 Contact fee for delinquent accounts
Contact fee for delinquent accounts: $11.00.
Sec. A9.009 Charges for resumption of service
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 361/362
Resumption of service after disconnection:
(1) Reconnection charge if reconnected between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.: $22.00.
(2) Reconnection charge if reconnected between the hours of 5:01 p.m. and 8:29 a.m.: $44.00.
(3) Charge if the party turns the water back on without paying the bill and the meter has been
turned off: $44.00.
(4) Charge if the party turns the water back on without paying the bill and the meter has been
removed: $85.00.
(Ordinance 1278 adopted 9/9/19)
Sec. A9.010 Bulk water rates for sales from dock at water plant
Charges for water picked up at the dock at the water plant:
(1) 1 to 500 gallon container: $9.75.
(2) 501 to 1,000 gallon container: $12.60.
(3) 1,001 to 1,500 gallon container: $18.90.
(4) 1,501 to 2,000 gallon container: $25.20.
(5) 2,001 to 5,000 gallon container: $44.20.
(6) Tank truck holding over 5,000 gallons: $50.00.
(Ordinance 1277 adopted 9/9/19)
Sec. A9.011 Transfer of service
Transfer fee for residential or commercial customer wishing to relocate the residence or business from an
existing account to another address within the system that is already prepared for delivery of service, each
transfer: $20.00. (2004 Code, app. A, sec. 13.02.015)
Sec. A9.012 Meter verification and accuracy test
(a) Fee for meter verification inspection if no discrepancy is found and it is the customer's second or more
inspection in a six-month period, per inspection: $5.00.
(b) Fee for each accuracy test performed on a water meter providing the test does not result in a finding that
the meter overregistered in excess of 2%: $15.00.
(2004 Code, app. A, sec. 13.02.016)
Sec. A9.013 Industrial waste contractual agreement surcharge
Charges based on the linearly proportional cost of the maintenance and operating cost that is attributed to the
industrial wastes treated for each industry. Under contractual agreements, surcharge applied to loads in excess of
the loads agreed upon:
Volume $0.074/1,000 gal.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 362/362
BOD $0.05/lb.
Suspended solids $0.04/lb.
(2004 Code, app. A, sec. 13.03.006)
Sec. A9.014 Drought contingency plan fees
(a) Reconnection charge for services discontinued for three or more distinct violations of the plan: $50.00.
(b) Waiver of landscape irrigation restrictions for new lawns:
(1) Nonrefundable fee for waiver of landscape irrigation restrictions for irrigation of new lawns:
$25.00.
(2) Water rate per thousand gallons for consumption over 12,000 gallons as registered by water
meter: $10.00.
(2004 Code, app. A, secs. 13.04.010, 13.04.012)
Sec. A9.015 Charges for temporary service
Temporary connects and/or disconnects and inspection of residential or commercial customers: $10.00.
(Ordinance 1134, sec. 3, adopted 9/12/11)